{#Letters - Volume 1}
{2}
FOREWORD <br>The letters of our beloved brother that have been collected with other pertinent papers will be of special interest now that the Lord has taken His devoted servant to Himself. The account of his last days amongst us and a brief history appear at the end of these volumes.
We think it well to call attention to Mr. Taylor's letter of December 3rd, 1938, an extract of which we give here as follows: --
'In J.N.D.¬s writings there are modifications in the later ones of what earlier works contain. This is inevitable in all ministry save what is inspired of God. No one would insist on it more than Mr. Darby himself, as is well known'.
Names in general have been included, @2 Timothy 4 and other scriptures providing justification for this, but where they have been left out, they have either not been known, or it was thought wise to omit them. The Index, which appears at the end of Volume 2, is not an exhaustive one, but reference is given to important subjects. <br>1955
{3}
New York.
December 1890
Dear Brethren, -- With mingled feelings of thankfulness and sorrow, we write you as to the result of the recent troubles through which this assembly has passed.
With the sense of the Lord's presence, support and comfort, we are still seeking to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace (@Ephesians 4: 3). We believe the Lord has permitted the sifting to take place that His assembly in this city might be a brighter witness to Himself than ever before, and whilst many with whom we long walked in happy fellowship, have been overthrown by the wile of the enemy, we are deeply thankful there yet remain two or three who can count on the Lord's presence in the midst according to His faithful word (@Matthew 18: 20).
This assembly had been troubled of late by certain brothers who from the first were favourable to the schismatic action of Messrs. Lowe and McCarthy which has brought such wide-spread dishonour upon the Lord's name and testimony.
Opportunity was given them on several occasions to substantiate the charges they had adopted against our brother, Mr. F. E. Raven, and the Greenwich assembly, but this they utterly failed to do. At the close of the last assembly meeting called for this purpose, a brother arose and stated (in substance) that, as the charges against our brother had not been proven, and as Bexhill had departed from the ground of gathering, this meeting would break bread as usual in fellowship with Greenwich, on the following Lord's day.
On the Lord's day morning, a number of these brothers came into the room where the assembly was gathered, and soon retired again for consultation. They re-entered the room and removed the bread which had been placed there by the brother who habitually supplied it. They then produced another loaf that they might break bread on *neutral ground*. This, however, they did not then do, but left the place after putting away the bread and cup to prevent the assembly breaking bread in their absence. On the following Lord's day the seceders were in possession of the room and made known their intention of breaking bread in fellowship with Bexhill. Some who were
{4}
present protested and left the room, and on the succeeding Lord's day the assembly met in another place to remember the Lord's death.
We desire to state briefly the grounds on which we reject the action of Bexhill.
When that meeting refused a letter of commendation from Greenwich, they gave as one reason for so doing that there was division amongst them. This was untrue, and besides was based upon the testimony of *one witness* who had left the meeting in a disorderly manner and was subsequently put away as a wicked person. There could not be a plainer violation of the word of God than this (see @2 Corinthians 13: 1) "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established".
Their second reason was that the Greenwich assembly sheltered a teacher of evil doctrine.
When asked to furnish proof for this charge, they refused to give any particulars, as is proved by the following extract from a letter from Greenwich: 'We have to say that no charge against our brother, Mr. R. has been preferred before the assembly here by any person whatever within or without the meeting'.
If there were charges against Mr. Raven why were they not brought before the assembly whose responsibility it was to clear itself from evil if such existed, according to @1 Corinthians 5: 13 "Therefore put away from among *yourselves* that wicked person"? So far from any charge being preferred before the Greenwich assembly, its righteous demand for particulars was termed evasion, and then was consummated the ecclesiastical assumption of Bexhill by cutting off Greenwich Assembly and all in fellowship with it. We therefore reject the action of Bexhill which has placed them outside the ground of God's assembly, and we refuse to follow them there, as many of our beloved brethren have done, preferring to follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart (@2 Timothy 2: 22).
The seceders are not unanimous as to their reasons for going out from us -- some basing their action upon the Bexhill judgment, others upon what Mr. Raven teaches, and we desire to add a few words as to the latter. We have carefully examined the printed statements issued by Mr. Raven, and can discern nothing contrary to sound doctrine. We see that his accusers have themselves overstepped the bounds of Scripture in their
{5}
zeal to prove him a heretic and are bitterly opposing blessed truth of the last importance for the saints to hold fast. We enumerate a few of the errors into which they have fallen:
1st. Confounding Eternal Life with Deity.
2nd. Affirming that Eternal Life was manifested *to* the world.
3rd. Affirming that responsibility attaches to our position as in Christ before God.
As to the first error, @1 John 5: 20, is explicit: "This is the true God, and eternal life".
As to the second, it is never said in Scripture that eternal life was manifested *to* the world; so that in maintaining this they go beyond the limits of revelation. We find in @1 John 1: 2, a clear statement of the scope of its manifestation: "That eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto *us*".
The word of God abounds with precious distinctions between our path of pilgrimage on earth, and our being seated in heavenly places in Christ, but always connects the thought of responsibility with the path of pilgrimage and not with our position in the heavenly places (see @Hebrews 3: 14; @Hebrews 4: 11).
Strengthening our own judgment of Mr. Raven's writings, we have the united testimony of forty brothers from various parts who visited him with reference to the doctrines in question, and who state that he holds nothing contrary to the word of God.
We have thus, dear brethren, stated briefly our judgment of the sorrowful action of our brethren who have gone into division so dishonouring to the Lord, and our earnest prayer to God is that many of them may be brought back again to the Lord's Table with a deeper sense than ever of His love and faithfulness.
Andrew Wood. Jas. Taylor.
C. R. Longstreet. Henry R. Forrest.
Ernest Pfingst. Eug. Zellweger.
Wm. Magowan. C.H. Kramer (Brooklyn).
Communications may be addressed to:
Andrew Wood, 17 Warren Street, West Hoboken, New Jersey,
or to James Taylor, 1393 5th Avenue, New York City.
{6}
Brooklyn N.Y.
September 14th, 1903
Dear Brother, -- Your letter of August 31st was duly received, and nothing but sheer want of time has prevented an earlier reply.
Being so far from Minneapolis and not knowing the brethren I am somewhat at a disadvantage in having to say to the difficulty amongst you. My belief is that when matters of *local* difficulty arise the wisest course is to confine them as much as possible. It is impossible for people at long distances, who are not acquainted with the people nor the conditions, to judge fairly in such matters. I believe those most locally connected are the most likely to have the Lord's mind; and it usually happens that there are those more or less qualified to judge righteous judgment. In this case it seems to me Chicago is the meeting best fitted, and the matter has really been *brought* to them. This is how I take it and I constantly look to the Lord that He may guide them to a just decision. The conduct of the brethren at Minneapolis (I refer to your own confession; although I do not think brethren regard what you admit as *all*) has brought them, so to say, to the bar: hence *they* are not the judges.
As regards the difficulty itself: where there has been a breakdown such as your letter indicates it is evident there must be a fresh start. I do not think there is such a thing as *collective* confession and restoration. Where there is departure I think the true way of recovery is for each individual to seek the Lord for himself (see @Exodus 33: 7). It is only under these conditions there can be a fresh start according to God. Of course I do not know why Johanson and Cowles refuse to meet you -- I should like very much to hear what they have to say. It is likely that their judgment is that you have not yet left the "camp". If this be so I am not at all surprised; for as far as I can see you have not *moved* at all. You have *said* a good deal, and have more or less complied with the expressed wishes of the brethren, but of what avail is this when there is no *moral* movement? Your point (and also that of the printed paper of the 3rd inst. just received) is that you have come up to the letter of the law -- what was required: 'We have done all we can;' but your brethren at Minneapolis may not be thinking of what you have done, but of what *you are;* and it may be on this account they hesitate to meet with you on 'common
{7}
ground'. There is no common ground for the Christian except the ground of righteousness: and if this does not exist how can there be a meeting together? I am not saying it does not exist, but at the same time I am far from censuring those at Minneapolis, who may think it does not, for thinking so. Indeed, I may say, I think they have good reason for thinking it does not exist. Your own letter and the printed paper alluded to give no encouragement that it does.
Not knowing the brethren at Minneapolis I cannot say much as to *their* attitude towards the truth. I am only acquainted with yourself and Mr. Barnaby. From the first time I met you I felt you dissented from the truth, and I think you know I felt thus. I assure you your attitude has pained me much, and it has pained many others of your brethren as well. You challenge your brethren to prove from Scripture wherein you have opposed the truth. What I say to this is, that my difficulty would be to find wherein you have *not* opposed it. I have been at many meetings with you and I may say frankly that I do not remember that you were *ever* at one with your brethren, i.e. speaking in a general way. I could easily furnish details, but this is hardly necessary. I do not think you can candidly deny what I say. Of course you will understand I am not charging this on any other person in Minneapolis. I only speak from personal knowledge of yourself and I think there are hundreds of brethren in this country who would (if asked) substantiate what I have affirmed.
I have written freely to you, dear brother, and I trust you will take it in the spirit in which it is penned -- that of love only.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
November 9th, 1903.
Mr. J. Boyd.
My Dear Brother, -- As to Toronto: It is true that some meetings have taken sides with those whom Rochester refused. Some of them however had done this long before Rochester acted. Those who have done so since have acted, I think, largely on the strength of their knowledge that some brethren of weight take their view of the matter.
I must say I am somewhat discouraged to find that you are one of these. I hardly thought you would see any good in calling the Rochester action in question at this late date. As
{8}
far as I know the brethren on this side *generally* accept the Rochester decision; and of course views *now* expressed to the contrary can but increase the spirit of division and unrest. But it seems doubtful that you have the facts of the case before you; otherwise I cannot see how you can say you fancy you could break bread with either side. Certainly I could not. A thoroughly lawless spirit has characterised those meeting at Ossington Hall. They had been entreated by their brethren all over this country to cease breaking bread; Mr. Raven, even, and those who came over with him, joining in this. But they steadily refused and after some eight months issued a circular to the effect that they had decided to continue breaking bread as always, etc., etc. The consciences of their brethren in other meetings were entirely disregarded: they were right: they were those gathered to the Lord's name in Toronto, and ought to be so recognised by all. This was the ground they took and one or two meetings nearby acknowledged them. Now whatever one might feel about the others there can be but one judgment about such a course as the above. They had put themselves out of court entirely. What was there to encourage further waiting on them? Instead of a tendency to brokenness and subjection they proved themselves unbroken and independent. For several of them I, personally, had the highest regard, such as Hearn and Brodie, but when I met them at Rochester last year I could see they were entirely under a party influence. I think Blakely and Minto are the strongest factors.
As to Cleghorn and the others, of course, there is nothing very special about them. But it was simply a question as to whether they should be prevented from breaking bread indefinitely, seeing he and others had disqualified themselves for any further consideration. I do not see how fellowship could be rightly withheld. Hence when Rochester acted I was thankful, although I was not aware they were going to act. The matter was purely local and when a meeting like Rochester acted on that ground the simplest and wisest course for all was to accept it. I doubt whether any good could have accrued from leaving both parties alone indefinitely. The possible end would be that they would *agree to differ* and thus patch up an external reconciliation. I feel sure that the most potent elements in the Ossington Hall party are hostile to the truth, and have been for many years. And I think it cruel to pursue a
{9}
course which would tend to force those who wish to go on with the truth into a nominal fellowship with such people. I think it better by far to have a few in Toronto going on more or less happily than a larger company biting and devouring one another; as has been the case for many years, as everyone knows. If Hearn, Brodie and the others more or less commendable humble themselves and submit to the judgment of their brethren generally it is an easy matter for them to find a place with the few now recognised.
I thought it well to send you the circular sent out by those with Dr. Hearn, to which I have referred. I also enclose Dr. Hearn's letter embodying the views of those at Ossington Hall with reference to the Rochester decision. I think you should have the facts before you if you are to judge in the case. When there I think you told me you did not read any of the papers sent you.
Of course such brethren as yourself and Mr. J. S. Allen are, to a certain extent, qualified to judge of American matters, knowing the brethren so well. Still it is very awkward when your view of a local matter runs counter to that of the brethren here. This may not have occurred to you, but I think if you consider it you will not fail to see how trying it must be to those who have done the best they could believing they had His support to have adverse views coming from long distances. *Before* the action was taken counsel would have been opportune but now that action has been taken it is but crying over spilt milk (to use a homely phrase) to deplore it.
Some have it in their minds that the Rochester brethren should withdraw their decision. But this is out of the question. It would not only be making nothing of the Lord's guidance and support among those who seek to act for Him (and I think this very serious) but besides it would but add to the confusion. It is altogether unlikely that those now recognised in Toronto would accept the reversal, and it is also unlikely that those around Toronto who have happily received them would now abandon them.
There are five or six meetings in Ontario, numbering probably forty brethren in all, who refuse the Rochester decision; and I have no doubt if most of these knew that they were not supported by more prominent brethren they would see their way to accept that decision. The only brother of any weight on this side that I know of, who rejects the Rochester decision,
{10}
is Mr. Magowan, and he has been 2,500 miles away from the scene for ten months. I doubt whether he has followed the developments. If he has he certainly ignores them. It seems to me if there was confidence in the Lord *and the brethren* the matter would be treated *as local* and the decision of those most locally connected would be accepted. The brethren in Rochester could have no selfish motive in what they did, and there is no reason in the world why they should not have the Lord's mind -- if they sought it. I do not doubt they sought it.
I am sure if you understood matters rightly you would seek to strengthen the hands of the brethren in Rochester and in that way you would strengthen things generally on this side But if brethren in England continue to advance opposite views in regard to Toronto and Minneapolis there is no telling how things may end. There can be but one result -- disintegration.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 29th, 1903.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 9th inst. reached me in due course. I was very pleased to hear from you. I should have replied sooner, but I was about to visit Chicago and I knew I would be in a better position to comply with your request after returning, so I waited.
The history of the Minneapolis affair is but the recurrence of what has happened before, not only on this, but on your own side of the Atlantic. It is the case of a company of Christians not being able to hold together as the outcome of a low carnal state among them. The crisis was forced through the introduction of a man named McL------. Mr. McL------ had been a long time with those called independents in this country and had acquired a reputation for his ability to break up meetings even among them. He was received into fellowship in Chicago some 2 and a half years ago, and after some time went to Minneapolis. During May of last year a meeting was arranged there to consider the advisability of moving into a new room. As the meeting proceeded McL------ attacked a brother named
{11}
Gotberg, charging him (without previous notice) with being under the influence of Satan, and that he was a liar, party-maker, railer, etc., etc., and further that he could not break bread with him. Mr. A------ and one or two others endorsed Mr. McL------. As might be expected, an uproar ensued. Gotberg assumed that McL------ and his party were seceding and so announced that he would be at the room on the coming Lord's day to go on as usual. About 12 (out of a meeting of about 30) met with Gotberg; when they arrived at the room however they found the furniture gone, McL------ and those with him had taken it to another place. The division was thus complete. Gotberg and those with him however did not break bread and have not done so to this day. They issued an appeal to their brethren in this country and also in Great Britain, they sent copies, however, only to a few leading brethren. McL------ and those with him went on with the routine of meetings in the new quarters laying claim, of course, to recognition by their brethren outside. They summoned Gotberg to an investigation meeting, stating that there were grave charges against him, and *that if he could prove they were untrue* the matter would be dropped. Gotberg, refusing to own them in any sense, disobeyed the summons and never afterwards attended their meetings. The trial, however, proceeded and Gotberg was found guilty. I saw one of the brothers present at this meeting two days ago at Chicago and he solemnly declares that not one of the charges was established. I may insert here as corroborative of this brother's testimony that McL------ and those with him revoked all the doings of this meeting later in the year, in November. But to proceed with the course of events: Gotberg was formally declared a wicked person and excommunicated. He was accordingly notified that he was now outside the assembly of God on earth; printed notices of this action were sent to the different meetings in the country. Gotberg disregarded all this and remained apart with the others awaiting the verdict of the saints outside. This was how matters stood for several months. The saints generally knew little or nothing of the facts, and as Mr. A------ was well known all were disposed to regard the matter settled by acknowledging those with him. Mr. Mace was then passing through Chicago and some of those with Mr. A------ came to see him, and from what he heard he judged A------¬s (and those with him) position could be maintained.
{12}
This is what he told me in N.Y. when he arrived and I accepted it. I went to Chicago, however, the next month and during a conversation with Mr. Sinclair and Mr. O'B------ about the matter, the situation became much clearer to me, and I then became convinced that the consciences of Gotberg and those with him could not be ignored. This conviction became pretty general amongst those who were exercised about the Lord's things, as the facts became more widely known. Brethren however, did not know what to do, and Mr. McL------ and Mr. A------, etc., were in the meantime regarded as in fellowship. When Mr. Raven was here last year Mr. A------ and Mr. McL------ were present at the Conference at Indianapolis. At their request a special meeting was held to look into matters with the view to having them elucidated and to give counsel accordingly to A------ and McL------. Some of the other party were also at the Conference, but were excluded from the meeting. It was then shown that Minneapolis was in a state of division, and further that there was no evidence that Gotberg was a wicked person. A------ and McL ------ and Co. acted on these findings and withdrew their action against Gotberg. This, however, did not satisfy Gotberg and those with him; they felt that the others had departed from the truth of the assembly, and they could not recognise these in any collective sense. This is how matters stood up until April last. At that date A------ and those with him wrote to Chicago meeting, asking for counsel, as to what they should do. Simultaneously with this letter McL------ came to reside in Chicago. Thus the matter was brought squarely to them. The brethren in Chicago allowed McL------ to break bread but under conditions that this in no way committed them to those breaking bread at Minneapolis. At the same time they replied to the latter's letter, saying that in their judgment they should cease to break bread and further that they were not free to commend to nor receive from them. The Minneapolis people on receipt of this letter wrote to different ones throughout the country and finding all agreed with Chicago, they acted on the advice of the latter. In this way they accepted *common ground* (as they put it themselves) with the other party. Overtures were then made to the others, and these latter, believing that the others were not broken at all and that they gave up breaking bread simply as the result of pressure, found themselves still unable to meet with them or go on with them. From this, bitterness
{13}
arose and Mr. A------ and others with him sent out a circular to discredit the others as much as possible, especially charging that one of their number was dishonest, and had been so for 10 years. All this tended to confirm the conviction that Mr. A------ and those with him were not truly broken and humbled, and hence brethren shrank from pressing the others to join with them. It was felt that if they did, it could be but an agreement-to-differ-arrangement; an arrangement without any moral basis. This was the view taken at Chicago, and hence fellowship was still held back from both parties. At first the brethren in Chicago were unanimous. During the summer, however, letters began to arrive from some well-known brethren in England charging that the brethren in Chicago had cut off a meeting presumptuously, and that in doing this they were governed by a party spirit. These letters, of course, suited Mr. A------ and Mr. McL------ entirely, and as the latter was in Chicago, he was not slow to take advantage of them. There had been a disgruntled party in Chicago and these now began to stir themselves. They claimed that Mr. A------ and those with him should be recognised, while the bulk of the brethren could not see this. Several protracted meetings ensued, during which, some unseemly things occurred. A------ again wrote to Chicago, and an answer was again drafted and sent by the brethren that they were still unable to recognise them. Before this letter reached them, however, A------ and those with him issued a circular to the effect that they had decided to take the matter into their own hands and resume breaking bread. *They began to break bread without the fellowship of a meeting:* several brethren on the North side meeting in Chicago resolved to acknowledge those, which they did. This led to a rupture then, as the other brethren could not go with them in this, regarding it as independency. Thus the matter stands. The three largest meetings in the vicinity of Minneapolis, Chicago, Indianapolis and Vesta, have written within the last two months, to A------ and those with him, that they cannot recognise them, and the meetings *generally* throughout the continent are in accord with these. This is not saying, however, that there are not individuals who are in sympathy with Mr. A------. There are such, and possibly there are meetings too, who would take sides with him, and those with him, if tested; but it is folly to make this matter a test of fellowship. If the brethren in England cease to interfere it is possible that further division
{14}
may be averted. If you are at all in touch with Mr. Reynolds, I shall be thankful if you will let him see this letter. I should like Mr. Henderson to see it also.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
August, 1905.
Mr R.S. Sinclair.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for sending Mr. Boyd's criticism of my paper on Canaan. It is such as I might have looked for from *him;* at least in this sense, that if he undertook to say anything he would endeavour to support his remarks by Scripture, and not lean on the importance of his personal judgment, as was the case with Mr. Allen and Mr. Henderson.
Mr. Boyd is, of course, better acquainted with the scripture than I, and can write at length on the subject of heaven; and there is much of interest, and with which I quite agree, in what he says. I have endeavoured in my own measure (although, I am very sorry to say, I have not much time for study) to seize the idea of heaven as presented in Scripture, and according to my understanding of it I recognise the importance of it, I think, as much as anyone. In all that I have said publicly in regard to it I have had in my mind God's purpose as seen in the epistle to the Ephesians; I have not been occupied with details. I do not, of course, despise these, but I have not felt it needful to go into them, nor had I the time. In Ephesians the church's place in the divine scheme is clearly set forth, and there it is taught that its place is in the heavenlies. This is, in brief, my belief on the subject, and I am certain that no one can make out from what I have said that I hold anything else. I simply follow scriptures and say that the assembly goes into heaven; but to come out. It *does* come out, and is seen eternally in connection with the earth (@Revelation 21), and no number of pages on the heavens (their number, location, etc.) can set this aside.
But although there is much in what Mr. Boyd says about heaven that I do not object to, yet there are some things which do not appear right to me. On page 2 he makes the paradise to which the thief went our distinctive place, and that had been there from the creation. That is, our place was *always* there hence the force of @John 14: 2 "I go to prepare a place for you"
{15}
is lost. In keeping with this he identifies the place to which the Lord and the thief went with "heaven itself". That is to say (Scripture says "paradise") he makes the Lord go into *heaven before resurrection*. Is all this right? I think it is confusion. It is true that the thief went to paradise with Christ, and that Paul was caught up into paradise, which he identifies with the third heaven, but are we justified in assuming that the same *place* is referred to in both cases? In @Revelation 2: 7 the "paradise of God" is spoken of; the tree of life was there. In @Revelation 22 the tree of life is seen in the holy city. Will Mr. Boyd say that the city is not paradise, or that the tree of life is in some other sphere as in the city?
Then on page 3, he makes our eternal abode to be *above* even the new heavens! @Revelation 21: 2, 3 reads: "I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God *out* of heaven ... Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men". Is "the tabernacle of God" not the church? Surely it is. Where then, is our eternal abode? Is it above or below the new heaven? I think it is below. Mr. Boyd says 'This new heaven, cannot I judge include more than the lower or created where God is, and which is His abode'. Scripture says: "new heavens", why should any of them be omitted? It is true Mr. Boyd says 'created heavens', but where does Scripture speak of uncreated heavens? It is not scriptural to speak of God's abode in this way. In His essential Being, God dwells in "*light* unapproachable; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see", "the heavens and the heaven of heavens cannot contain him". He inhabits eternity, surely then, it is not right to restrict Him in heaven. Further the Lord is said to have gone "above *all* the heavens" (@Ephesians 4), how can we exempt from these 'the heaven where God is, and which is His abode?' *It* is a heaven; it may be the third, or highest, but it is nevertheless a heaven. To my mind all this is the outcome of the activity of Mr. Boyd's mind! He is endeavouring to fix the abode of God in His infinite Being, as if it were a *locality*, and to make out that this locality is our abode also. This is not how Scripture presents things. The abode of God in His infinite Being is beyond our ken, and Scripture does not disclose it; but God reveals Himself in Christ -- in Man -- and consequent on redemption He dwells with man. From @Exodus 15 onward this, I may say, is the leading feature of the Old Testament, and it is taken up in the reality of it in the New. Here it is the great end reached;
{16}
Scripture closes with it. In Revelation the dwelling place, or tabernacle of God, is not said to be the third or highest heaven (although this is there), it is the holy city -- the church. This Scripture gives an account, and it does not, that I can discover define any abode of God.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
August 11th, 1905.
Mr. J. S. Allen.
My Dear Brother, -- I am in receipt of your letter of July 18th and I now send a reply.
Your comments on the 'Chicago Notes' [See Volume 1, New Series J.T. -- Editor] did not reach me through any one on this side: they were inserted in a letter from Mr. J. Henderson of Clapham. Mr. Henderson, however, did not say they were yours, and up until the time I replied to his letter I did not know whose they were. Subsequently I learned you had written them.
In saying two of your statements were untrue I did not, of course, mean to say you were untruthful; I was simply dealing with the statements. I felt the writer of the criticism had either read the Notes very cursorily, or else his memory had failed him. As to your letter just received: Although the expressions are strong, I cheerfully accept the *admonitory* element in it. I accept fully that you mean nothing but good, and I feel a warning of this kind has its own voice and cannot injure me; on the contrary, it can but be of help. But your letter is not only admonitory: it is also condemnatory. In the following statement you adjudge me as very decidedly reprehensible in regard of the truth: 'These Notes indicate ... a systematised teaching, and it is my distinct conviction that some of it is not only unbalanced but dangerous in its tendencies'. Nor am *I* alone involved in this: the brethren who were present at the Chicago meetings, all of whom, I may say, professed to enjoy what came out; and also those in different parts of this country, and Canada, who have read and received the Notes without adverse criticism are also responsible. This may not have occurred to you, but it is nevertheless a very glaring fact. It is true indeed that most of the saints on this side are much
{17}
younger than yourself, and have not had the advantages you have had of acquiring a knowledge of the truth, but they have had this advantage in this case, that many of them *know* me and have *heard* what I have had to say, and can thus judge as to what I *intended* to convey and its object. Of course, you will understand that I am not endeavouring to shelter myself behind my brethren on this side, for I am not; but as your letter is almost wholly on the ground of personal judgment, I have to make it clear to you that I feel bound to respect them equally with you. Some points have been questioned by certain ones on this side, but no one that I am aware, has condemned the Notes. And even on your own side, while I accept that there are those who share your view, yet yours is the only condemnatory criticism I have heard of. I mention all this only to call your attention to the fact that, while I respect your judgment, yet it manifestly does not comport with the judgment of my brethren as a whole. And you will allow that the pre-ponderating verdict of the saints (*all* the "judges") is bound to command the respect of my conscience.
But I am not attempting to settle the matter in this way: the Scriptures alone are to be the test, and I am prepared to reject everything that is not in accord with them. What I said to Mr. Henderson I say to you now: that if any brother will go over the Notes and point out the errors, I shall gladly remove them. This I consider would be a service not only to me but also to the saints and to the truth itself. I am utterly unconscious of any 'systematised teaching;' indeed, this involves such *natural* (for it could not be of the Spirit) ability as I am not possessed of. There are those who have mental ability and education sufficient to formulate a system of teaching, which I have not. As opportunity offers, I give expression to my thoughts as to any side of the truth that may be under consideration, *according to the circumstances existing at the moment*. When any question arises I always look to the Lord, and my mind turns to the Scriptures I may call to mind that bear on it, and answer accordingly. That I have given expression to thoughts on certain points somewhat different to what is held currently, I am aware, but I have felt that these were not only scriptural, but that the Lord encouraged me to present them. Still I am open to correction, and if you will show from the Notes and from Scripture where the error lies I shall be glad, as I said, to remove it. But where error cannot be
{18}
proven you cannot blame me for holding to what I believe Scripture teaches.
You say, 'By the grace of God I am not going to give up what I was greatly helped in by dear Mr. Raven, and what I believe Scripture teaches'. If Mr. Raven stood for anything, he stood for the authority of Scripture and the right of every brother to appeal to it in regard to what he may have said. As this is the point I am makings, I trust you will bear with me in what I have said. Mr. Raven was a man of sterling fairness and would not write and brand a brother as a teacher of error without first pointing out from Scripture to the brother *himself* where the error lay. Now I hope you will bear with me in this: I do not intend it as vindicatory of myself, nor as striking, back at you, but I have in mind how serious the effect might have been of the course you have pursued. You have written different persons in this country, and if these had acquiesced in your view, a most serious state of things might have ensued. I do not mean to say that you *meant* to cause discord for I do not think you did, but I am dealing with the facts.
I will now refer to certain objections which you advance in detail. You say, 'Christ's *present* position and action either in reference to the individual or the assembly, seems lacking'. In answer to this I quote from the Notes on @1 Timothy 2, page 8: of course Christ is the subject of the gospel, but Christ according to what He can do. What has He done? The gospel explains what He has done. Peter tells what has been brought to pass through Christ in the 2nd of Acts. He tells them that God has made both Lord and Christ, that same Jesus whom they had crucified; and He, having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the promise of the Holy Spirit, He has poured out this which ye behold and hear. And so in the 4th chapter Peter tells them salvation is in none other than Christ. Every Christian can tell how salvation came to him -- Christ has effected it for him, but through what He has established down here. Now, I think the above speaks very decidedly about Christ's present position and action. If Scripture teaches something different, I shall be glad to know it.
Then you say, 'The believer's *heavenly* blessings and hopes are almost ignored'. I do not know what you may define as 'the believer's heavenly blessings and hopes', but suppose you would turn to Ephesians for an account of them. If so,
{19}
I appeal to you, or any candid person who reads the 'Notes' on chapter 2 to say whether the place of the church in the divine counsels, as seen in that epistle is ignored. I believe the church's place in the world to come is distinctively heavenly; but then we must not overlook that she "comes down from God out of heaven:" and that *finally* she is seen as the tabernacle of God *with men*.
I hardly know what to say as to your remark: 'Scripture never gives it (the assembly) the place of Christ, even for us'. I cannot but think that you believe that the church takes the place of Christ down here in many respects. Take for instance, the "temple of God". Christ was this when here; now the church is it. When the Lord was here it could be said, "God had visited His people". Now God is here in the church; (I need not quote the Scriptures supporting this). When Christ was here the kingdom was here: "The kingdom of God is among you;" now it is here in the church. Christ had "authority" to forgive sins: He committed this authority to the church. Finally, according to @Acts 9 and @1 Corinthians 12, the church is Himself. To my mind the statement I am referring to tends to weaken the whole truth of Christianity. I regard it as fundamental that there was a revival in the church of the power that came out in Christ personally when here in the flesh; and in an excessive way. "Greater works shall ye do, because I go to the Father". I cannot understand how anyone can read the early chapters of the Acts without seeing this. The power of God was here for good as it had been seen in Christ, only in a more extensive manner, as I said. Of course, it was still exercised by Christ, but He accredits them with it. "Greater works shall ye do". You say, 'Even for us', the 'even' of course means that if not for us, certainly for no one else. The weakness of this strikes me greatly. I feel how that which the Lord intended to represent Him, and which was to be the expression of Himself down here (that which He calls "MY assembly;" this body: that which had walls great and high, and bulwarks and towers of strength, etc.) is slighted. Did not the man at the gate of the temple (@Acts 3) find those who took the place of Christ down here? If the Lord had been there He would have healed him; but Peter says "Look on *us* ... such as *I have* give I thee". And so later, the shadow of Peter. The power was in the name of Jesus but it was identified with the saints. Of course, this
{20}
refers to the apostles; but they are included in the church. But the power by which they were in this way a blessing to man is the same by which greater things (the oracles of God, salvation, eternal life, etc.) were available in the church.
I note your remarks as to a spirit existing here of looking down on those (especially English brethren) who have not been able to endorse what has been done. I am not aware of any such spirit, but many do very decidedly resent the almost dictatorial attitude on the part of several in England in regard to matters in this country and Canada during the last three years. It has been fruitful of much sorrow and scattering the Lord's people, and those responsible should feel this before the Lord.
With love in Christ, I am
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
August 26th, 1905.
Mr. J. Boyd.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of the 16th inst. reached me two days ago. The letter from Mr. Reynolds to the saints in America had come a few days before. Mr. Reynolds¬ letter is a painful affair: it is not only that it indicates unfairness in that it attacks certain notes of meetings which were not revised for publication and were of a private character, without first seeking to find out from the persons responsible whether their thoughts were accurately represented; but also that it shows grave departure from the truth on the part of the writer. Had the 'Notes' been intended for the press several of the things Mr. Reynolds objects to would not appear at all, and others would be greatly modified and guarded by the insertion of other truths which might seem weakened or denied. I had to go over them under very severe pressure, as the time was during the 'busy season' at my place of business, and I revised them only very superficially. Mr. Pellatt was in California and went over only one of them. It was believed they would be read with interest and profit by many (especially in this country, for whom, indeed, they were intended), and there was no anticipation that they would become the subject
{21}
of *public* criticism. To make them (or what is contained in them) responsible for the Minneapolis trouble, is ridiculous. That trouble, as everybody knows, occurred before Mr. Raven's last visit to America, and the facts of it were minutely enquired into during his stay here. When he (Mr. Raven) heard afterwards of the stand the brethren at Chicago had taken, his remark was: 'It is a mercy Chicago has been so firm'. Both A------ and O'B------ knew me, and I never heard of either of them charging me with bad doctrine. So that Mr. Reynolds¬ letter in this respect is valueless and proves him unqualified (because of ignorance of the facts) to pronounce on this matter at all.
As to your own letter, dear brother, I cannot say that it encourages me any more than does that of T.H.R. You know I am charged with error, and yet although you have had the means of proving whether the charge is just or the contrary within your reach (indeed you *had* the Notes some weeks) you have not availed yourself of them. You say: 'I do not know of any one who justifies them' (the 'Notes' ). I should have thought *you* would at least have *desired* (@Job 33: 32) to do so; for you profess interest in me. I do not see any evidence of this desire in your letter; you do not look up the Notes, nor do you even *ask* me if these things are so. You enumerate some blessings that are said to be in Christ, and that man has to do with Him to have them, and then say, 'I doubt very much if you object to all this; but it almost seems from what is quoted from you that you do'. 'Almost seems:' this is poor ground, dear Mr. Boyd, on which to base such a letter as you have written me. But I fear that 'Almost seems' means certainty for you; for you say lower down, 'I am almost taking for granted that what has been said of them is what is in them'. Indeed, so far as your letter goes it is difficult to decide definitely what your mind is: First: 'I doubt very much if you object to all this;' secondly, 'It seems ... you do;' thirdly, 'I am taking for granted that what is said of them' (and 'what is said of them' means that I do deny it) 'is true'. Then you say: 'You must modify your thoughts'. What thoughts? I will gladly change my thoughts if you will show where they are contrary to Scripture; but, from your letter, you do not seem to be sure that my thoughts are wrong. You say, 'I doubt ... that you object'. Now, I do *not* object: I accept fully that these blessings are in Christ and
{22}
that men have to do with Him to get them. These things (forgiveness, salvation, life) have all been brought to pass by Christ, and are in Him; and they are available to man on the principle of faith. I do not weaken this at all; but if we stop here we have not *found* anything -- I mean in a practical way. So that although salvation and life are presented as in Christ, yet the realisation of them depends on certain conditions established down here. This refers also to forgiveness; for this, too, is known by the Spirit. The conditions I allude to (I mean what was found in the assembly) were there before the gospel went out, and indeed without them we should not have the gospel. Now I shall be deeply grieved if it is shown that I have made defective statements, and that these are an occasion of sorrow, to my brethren. I shall withdraw them and own my wrong; but I cannot weaken nor modify what I have said above as to the gospel.
When I said the gospel did not arrest the attention of men I was commenting on @Acts 2, and what I said was a simple statement of the facts presented in the chapter. I added, that the house of God arrested people's attention. This is undeniable: it was the presence of the Holy Spirit (and the manner in which *He*, as dwelling in the house, is slighted in the different communications from your side strikes me greatly) in the saints that attracted the attention of the multitude. It is true that it was by "tongues", but the point is not the effect, but the power that produced the effect. Peter says "This is that", and "Hath poured out this which ye see and hear". What produced the tongues on that occasion produces other things which are greater and which were to continue, such as righteousness, peace, joy, love, etc. By "the gospel" I meant, of course, Peter's address: this was one thing: it was what *Peter said* by the Spirit, but the tongues *represented* the effect of the Spirit in the *company*. The speaking with tongues is not connected in the passage with the apostles: "sat upon *each* of them, and they were *all* filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with other tongues". You say 'Fitted by Himself to work ... apart from the church'. This is not true. The gifts were in the church (@1 Corinthians 12). In all I have had to say about the church in this connection I have had before me what was at the beginning -- as divinely formed and set up in the power of the Spirit. I cannot understand how speaking of it in this light as the receptacle of the different testimonies of God is
{23}
belittling Christ, or placing these outside of Christ. The church is in Christ. To place the responsibility of the care of a man's house in his wife when he is away from home is not belittling him, or in a sense placing the responsibility in another than himself; for if he has his proper place in her heart she is himself. It is remarkable that the Lord does not say, 'The gates of hell shall not prevail against Me', but, 'against it'.
In conclusion, I would express the earnest hope that you will go into this matter fully and contend for the truth which the Lord has recovered for us. I do not pretend to have said anything on this point different from what others who have gone before have said; and I should have expected that you had been saying it all along. A letter of yours to ------ commenting on my paper on Canaan was a sorrow to me; not only because it rejects what I believe to be true, but because it contains unscriptural statements in regard to the abode of God and our eternal abode. I do not, however, go into this now.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 6th, 1905.
Mr. J. Boyd.
My Dear Brother, -- I am in receipt of your letter of the 21st ult. I am glad you have expressed yourself so fully and freely, and I feel it is due to the truth, to you, and to me that I should answer as well as I can as to the different points in question.
As you consider the points of difficulty in the address on @Matthew 11 of minor importance I shall refer to them only briefly. In alluding to the Lord's standing in relation to Judaism and the empire I wished only to emphasise the necessity of an entirely new system being introduced. Although what I said was quite scriptural I was making no special point of it: the Lord owned what was there (the temple, Moses¬ seat, etc.) and He also recognised the empire. The power the Romans had was from God (@John 18: 11). I did not say that He *intended* to use them: I said, 'The Lord took up what He found in Israel, and if possible would have used it'. The
{24}
whole thought in the passage is *negative*. In saying He could not take command of an army, etc., I did not have *ability* (you say 'able', which word I did not use), in my mind at all. 'Could not' is moral; morally, He could not be connected with that system. You say, 'You bring in the invitation, "Come unto me" as having reference to the kingdom'. I do not. I was speaking on @Matthew 11, and it was natural that I should refer to this. I did not connect it with the kingdom. I connected it with Christ (see pages 6, 7). Again, you say, 'Jonah and Solomon had no reference to the kingdom'. *I did not say they had*. I said chapter 12 spoke of great men, Jonah and Solomon, but there was a Greater. I did not say any more about them. I spoke about the Greater. You assume that the kingdom was my *subject*, which was not the case. What was on my mind was Christ as seen in chapter 11. The title of the address is 'Christ as Turning-Point and Model'. You remark, 'You seem to have gone crazy on the kingdom'. I do not mind being regarded as crazy, but the thought should not be connected with the kingdom of God: we should respect *it*. You quote, 'The Lord Jesus has His forces here to enforce His rights'. This is not correct. I used an illustration as to the king of England, and 'enforce his rights' is used only in connection with *him*. What I said as to the Lord was that His forces (transferring the *figure* to the Holy Spirit) were here. You object to this and say, 'He speaks of coming with them the angels of His might'. I do not accept that angels are designated as His forces in a *specific* way. They are mighty agents of the divine will, but the power of subjugation in the future is the Spirit (compare @Philippians 3: 21 and @Romans 8: 11). Divine force, or power, if spoken of in any *distinctive* way, is the Holy Spirit.
As to the Reading on Romans 4, the subject proposed was the kingdom. I think the opening paragraphs might have indicated this to you. Had you so understood it you would have felt that to advance the specific teaching of Romans as an objection would be irrelevant. But you say, 'You would never learn from Romans that God had a dwelling-place upon earth'. This is extraordinary. Is the Holy Spirit not spoken of in Romans as dwelling here? "If indeed God's Spirit *dwell* in you;" "But if the Spirit ... *dwell* in you;" "His Spirit which *dwells* in you" (@Romans 8: 9 - 11). The Spirit of God dwelling here means that God is here; the 'dwelling-place'
{25}
is also indicated -- 'you'. I quite agree that the dwelling place of God is not the subject of the epistle, but to say that you could never learn from Romans that God had a dwelling place upon earth is the opposite of the truth.
Your next objection is to the kingdom having a collective sense. You say, 'The kingdom is *much more* individual than the body or the house' and, 'I am not *so closely* linked with others'. What do 'much more' and 'so closely' mean? As I understand their meaning it is that they admit the collective sense, only in a reduced degree; so that you practically affirm what you object to. Your contention that isolated ones are at no disadvantage is very weak and would become injurious if souls were to act upon it; besides, it is not in keeping with the admission which I have pointed out you make. The spirit of Scripture tends to unity, and the further away from the saints you are the greater the disadvantage.
You quote, 'Our hope is that the Lord will soon remove the tares', and proceed to cite the different scriptures that treat of the *Christian's* hope. I should have thought anyone could have seen from the context that I used the word 'hope' in regard of the *state of the kingdom*. I was not speaking of the Christian's distinctive hope at all.
We come next to something 'dreadful'. 'The gospel refers more to what is down here than to what is in heaven'. If this stood unguarded there would be cause for complaint, but it is followed by, 'It is true that *Christ is the theme*, but it is Christ according to what He can do for man; and this involves what He has established down here, etc'. You say '*It does not refer to what is down here at all*, and you know it does not'. If I knew it did not I should not have made the above statement. You further say, 'It is the report of a glorified Christ and of all that is established in Him *which shall not be down here till He appears*'. I have read the above two statements several times over to make sure that my eyes did not deceive me. Sure enough they did not: there are the statements in plain English: 'It does not refer to what is down here at all;' 'All that is established in Him which shall not be down here till He appears'. I cannot believe that you really mean what the words express, but, as they stand, they are to my mind a subversion of Christianity. The Holy Spirit is referred to in the gospel: He is down here (@Acts 2). The kingdom is referred to in the gospel (@Acts 20: 25), and it is down here (compare @Romans 14: 17;
{26}
@Matthew 13, and @Colossians 1: 13). God's house is alluded to in the gospel (@Luke 14, 15) it is down here (@Ephesians 2). I could mention other things referred to in the gospel which are available down here, but I need not; the above suffice to show the error of the statements in question. I hope you will withdraw these statements, dear Mr. Boyd; you certainly should do so; for whatever you may have had in your mind (I do not charge you with an evil *thought*), the statements as they stand are not only erroneous, but, as I said, subversive of Christianity. As to my own statement, I am willing to make it read, 'The things referred to in the gospel are here rather than in heaven'. This, or any other form of expression that would convey the thought of their being practically available to men, rather than abstractly in heaven. This latter is the notion of the gospel that pervades your letter and it does not comport with the teaching of Scripture, nor with the fact as to its introduction into this world presented there.
You object to 'It is Christ according to what He can do for men'. You tear this away from 'Christ is the theme' and then say, 'No, it is what God has wrought on man's behalf in and by Christ'. This is what Romans presents, but why object to Christ's doing something for man? Scripture speaks of His doing something. He died; He annulled death, and brought life and incorruptibility to light by the gospel: He gave the Spirit. Your objection is to Scripture and not to my words.
You quote, 'In virtue of the establishment of these (the kingdom and the house), salvation and the blessing of Abraham are brought close to men' and say, 'Not at all. Salvation and the blessing of Abraham are brought close to men in a risen Christ ... and the Holy Spirit has come down with a report'. 'A report:' Is this all that can be said of the Holy Spirit in reference to salvation and the blessing of Abraham? Look at the passage in @Galatians 3. 14; "That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ: that we might *receive the promise of the Spirit* through faith". The *Spirit Himself* was promised (see also @Acts 2: 39); and indeed He is subjectively the blessing. "The Spirit is life". You may say the blessing of Abraham is not said in the passage to be in the Spirit: that it is said to have arrived at the nations *in Christ*. But this would be putting one side of the truth against the other. I admit fully (as, also, do the Notes), that
{27}
Christ is the Vessel of the blessing of Abraham, and that everything that God has for man comes through Him; but my object was to show how it arrives in a practical way at the Gentiles. It was through the church. It is puerile to ask me for a text (I intend to furnish scriptures): what I say is simply the statement of a fact presented in the Acts. What was ministered to the Gentiles (@Galatians 3: 5) was in the church before its being ministered to them. Now, I do not mean that the church ministered it: all I mean to convey is that *what was ministered* was in the church prior to its reaching the Gentiles. As to a scripture, @Acts 2 is what I should quote: the Spirit *was* there in the church, and the announcement was that those who repented, etc., would receive forgiveness and the Spirit. The Samaritans also received the Spirit; not *directly* from the Lord, but through the administration of the apostles. The same holds good as to Saul (@Acts 9). Although the Lord spoke to him outside Damascus, He did not preach the gospel to him *there*, nor give him the Spirit. Ananias *laid his hands* on him, and in this *way* he received the Holy Spirit (from Christ, of course). Cornelius also is further evidence as to how particular God was that the testimony of the gospel and what was consequent on it were to stand connected with the church. It is true it was Peter and his "words" that were in question (the church does not teach or preach); but the apostles must always stand connected with the church (1 Corinthians 12: 28; @Ephesians 4: 11, 12). There is doubtless some significance in the fact that Peter did not lay his hands on Cornelius and his company, but at any rate the Holy Spirit who fell upon them had been before in the church. In every case, of course, it was Christ, or God, who gave the Spirit: I do not call this in question at all; the point is, *where* the Spirit was who was given and the *mode* God used in giving Him. I am not discontented with the way Scripture puts the truth. "Acts" is scripture. It presents the *facts* connected with the establishment of the church and the promulgation of the gospel, and if we are to be intelligent as to these we must pay attention to that book.
I do not say that the Spirit is exactly the blessing of Abraham, but the gift of the Holy Spirit involves the blessing of Abraham. I was helped through the ministry of Mr. Raven to see that the blessing of Abraham is eternal life. 'Life for evermore' is the characteristic term for 'blessing' according to @Psalm 133.
{28}
I have had this in view in speaking of the blessing of Abraham. The psalm begins with unity: then both the ointment and the dew are seen *descending* -- all pointing to the gift of the Spirit from Christ on high. The dew descends on Zion, and *there* the blessing is commanded. Now *all* Scripture is profitable for *doctrine*, and, whatever question may be under consideration, the Scriptures which treat of it should be considered. What then may we understand from @Psalm 133? It is clear to me that while it speaks, *strictly*, of what is future, it has also application to the church. The conditions (Scripture supposes that we should *compare* things), were all there on the day of Pentecost, and the coming of the Holy Spirit involved the blessing being "commanded" -- at least in the sense in which we have eternal life in the present time. Zion was God's "desired" dwelling-place. The church is this now, and where God dwells the blessing is. @Psalm 134: 3 says, "The Lord ... *bless thee out of Zion*". What follows chapter 2 in Acts corresponds with this. We should also own the force of *all* Scripture as to salvation. The New Testament says it is in Christ, but @Isaiah 46: 13 says, "I will place salvation in Zion for Israel my glory". You may say that Zion is a risen Christ: it does not always mean just this (see @Psalm 48).
I cannot understand how you expect me to speak in the *language* of Scripture. You do not yourself. My exercise is that my thoughts and words may be *according* to Scripture.
You quote, 'Living water is still here' (in the house), and then proceed to quote the Scripture "Thou wouldst have asked of him", etc. This is not to the point. The quotation you give does not speak (nor do the Notes anywhere) of the believer *giving* the living water -- it was there; that was the point. Of course Christ *gives* the living water, but, what He gives is *now here*. @Revelation 22: 17 says, "Whosoever will, let him *take* the water of life freely".
You speak of those who have the truth being in hot conflict with Satan. I shall be deeply pained if it be shown that erroneous statements of mine are the occasion of this conflict, but I would say this: If any are contending (I do not believe anyone is), 'that all that is established in Christ ... shall not be down here till He appears' they will not encounter any opposition *from Satan*.
Affectionately yours in the Lord,
James Taylor.
{29}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 25th, 1905.
Mr. T. H. Reynolds.
My Dear Mr. Reynolds, -- Your letter dated November 1st was duly received. Its kindly tone was much appreciated, and now I take pleasure in sending a line in reply.
I do not think you rightly understood what I intended Miss Elwood to do in helping to revise the 'Notes:' it was never my thought that she should be *responsible* for anything that might appear in them. I had heard that she had considerable experience in this kind of work and was very efficient; and, knowing that she had been in close touch with both Mr. Stoney and Mr. Raven, I judged she would have a good idea of the form in which the truth has been currently expressed in England. Hence my freedom in soliciting her aid. All she has done is simply to make suggestions on a separate sheet as to where she believes changes should be made. This is great service to me, and I do not at all see that what she has done is outside the latitude of what is proper to sisters. It is my belief that to your knowledge both she and others have done as much, or more, heretofore without being challenged. It seems to me that while we should recognise @1 Timothy 2: 12 we should not overlook that at the beginning women partook of the gifts of the Spirit and helped in the truth (compare @Acts 21; @1 Corinthians 11:5; @Acts 18: 26).
I regret that you did not see your way to withdraw your two printed letters. I did not wish you to unsay all you had said, but the letters themselves were admittedly not based on fair grounds (the information you had was of a private nature and did not profess to be authentic: you admit the latter on page 1 of your first letter) and on this account should be withdrawn *as they stand*.
In them you criminate others and myself with whom you are nominally in fellowship as being guilty of doing 'dishonour to Christ', and of 'giving up the testimony recovered to the saints;' and this without making the least effort to discover whether you rightly understood the views of those responsible! To my mind it is but common fairness that a public expression of judgment on a matter of this kind should be withheld until the persons in question have opportunity to explain themselves. Your justification is that 'the letter has, I judge, done that for which I wrote and printed it. The Lord has, I am sure, used it in recalling our souls to the truth confided to us'. If
{30}
this was the end you had in view, you certainly took a most extraordinary way to reach it -- a way that involves charges against some of your brethren which if true constitute these brethren unfit for Christian fellowship. I hope you will bear with me, dear Mr. Reynolds, if I ask you to consider this matter. I do ask you to do so. As I say, I do not ask you to unsay all you have said, for I am sure a warning against the obscuring of the heavenly side of the truth can but do good; but the preferring of charges against those with whom we are breaking the same loaf contrary to the principles laid down in Scripture cannot have the Lord's approval;, besides, being unfair, an injustice is done to the persons in question. As for myself, I feel certain I could satisfy almost any of my brethren that I do not hold any thing contrary to Scripture, hence you can understand my feelings in being branded as a party to doing dishonour to Christ, and giving up the testimony recovered to the saints.
Of course it is natural for you to counsel me to withdraw what you regard as so erroneous. My belief is, however, that in view of all that has been said the 'Notes' should appear as properly revised.
As to the Notes of the New York meetings, I do not know how you make out that I make the church an 'earth-dweller'. Certainly it is foreign to my mind. I do not believe the church will ever be *on* earth again after the rapture, and I am sure I have said nothing to the *contrary*. What I have intended to convey is that she will be *connected* with the earth -- she will be in relation to the earth in the millennium, but her place is distinctively in heaven. From @Revelation 21 it would appear that she will *ultimately* be more immediately connected with the earth ("with men"), but even from that passage I would not say that she will be on earth.
I would call your attention to a remark you make in your letter condemnatory of me. 'You connect Christ also *with the earth* through the church'. I believe Christ *is* to be *connected* with the earth in the world to come, and if anyone denied this I would consider that he denied the leading point in prophecy. "His feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives". This is not only connection, but *contact*. I am sure you will admit what I am saying -- that Christ is coming to reign; if He reigns over the earth He must be connected with it. I only call your attention to the error
{31}
involved in your *statement* -- I do not think you meant anything wrong: you are alluding, I suppose, to my making the church an earth-dweller, and that consequently Christ is made such also. I assure you I have no such notion.
With love in the Lord, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 15th, 1906.
Mr. John Henderson.
My Dear Brother, -- When writing last I did not have time to refer to the agitation which the Notes (Chicago) of the meetings for which I am mainly responsible have occasioned. While from the outset I had the assurance that the Notes did not contain error, I was aware of inaccurate and unguarded expressions, which were well understood when given out orally, but which might easily be misconstrued by a reader who did not attend the meetings, especially if such an one was not acquainted with the speaker. _ All this (although quite unforeseen) is what has actually happened and as my brethren have been caused anxiety and sorrow I feel I am blameworthy. I hope it will be understood that I am deeply pained that any of the Lord's people should have had conflict which forethought and caution on my part might have averted. But it should be borne in mind that the Notes were primarily intended for brethren on this Continent, and as most of them are acquainted with Mr. Pellatt and myself and do not suspect either of us of bad doctrine, it was never anticipated that there would be serious criticism, indeed as a matter of fact there had been none that I am aware of until the objections from your side began to appear and even since, with one or two exceptions, there has not been anything serious. I mention this specially because my belief is that the difficulty has arisen largely from the form of expression employed and want of apprehension on the part of those objecting as to the point of view taken. The fact that those who are acquainted with the manner of giving out the truth of the speakers represented in the Notes, have little or no difficulty is, I think, a proof of this. I would mention further (as I did in a previous letter) that the Notes came to me to look over at a time when I was under the greatest pressure from stress of business, and hence I was
{32}
hindered in giving them proper attention. I went over them very superficially and I see now that I should have held them back until I had more time, but as I said, I had no anticipation of criticisms; I regarded the Notes as semi-private, and quite believed that they would be read in a charitable spirit by those into whose hands they might come -- that they would be taken as intended for edification, and as calling attention in a pointed way to what the Lord had revived through the ministry of others. There is nothing further from my mind than that anything in the Notes should be dogmatic, but at the same time I believe that what they contain is substantially the truth which the Lord has been calling our attention to for some years, and I am convinced that where it is refused an irreparable loss will be sustained. I am very far from expecting that my elder brethren should pay especial attention to anything one so young as I might have to say, but I think that to which the ministry of those now at rest called attention should be considered and contended for. The church's heavenly calling as united to Christ was pressed, also the great fact of its existence down here at the present time in the power of the Holy Spirit. The former is now being pushed forward, but the latter as a *practical sphere* of protection and blessing for souls is being largely ignored. This explains the point of view in the Chicago Notes. There was not the intention to belittle the heavenly side, but the need of insisting on it did not exist. *Now* I see that much should have been added in the way of guarding and explanation, and would have been, had criticism been anticipated. Many things have been alleged as taught in the Notes which are entirely foreign to my mind and I am certain I never gave expression to them. The more important of these are:
1st. That the church is an 'earth-dweller' and that through her Christ is also made such. His session at the right hand of God being ignored, beclouded and hidden.
2nd. That the church is presented as an object of faith in the gospel, and that instead of Christ, she is the giver of living water.
3rd. That living water is located in the saints, instead of in Christ.
I refuse all this as contrary to Scripture. It never had a place in my mind. As to the first, I believe the church's distinctive place is in heaven, or the heavenlies, and that she
{33}
will never be seen actually on earth again after the rapture; that even now she is the body of Christ and united to Him in heaven.
But she is actually here on earth in testimony and, as Christ's body she is Himself morally (@Acts 9: 14). But although here the earth is not her place; heaven is her place although in the future she is ever seen *in relation* to the earth, at the present time the church forms the sphere in which Christ is known and enjoyed, but the associations are all heavenly having Him at the right hand of God as the centre.
As to the second, I believe Christ alone is presented as the Object of faith in the gospel and that He is the giver of living water.
The third allegation may have an apparent support in the Notes, but this can only be by inference that because living water is located in the saints it is denied that it is in Christ. It *is* in Christ, and to say that it is in the saints down here does not weaken this in the least degree while it presents the living water as *practically* available for man at the present time. The living water is in the assembly, but it is not in the assembly *instead* of in Christ. It seems to be forgotten that the assembly itself is in Christ. In what appears in the Notes on this point my thought was not that the locating of the living water *in the saints* was by the *preaching*, but rather that the preachers should do this (I did not say *how*) for souls. In preaching, *Christ* should be presented as the One through whom every blessing comes. The locating of things in detail comes in afterward.
In conclusion I would say that with the aid of some on this side and in England, I have made a revision of the Notes, and I hope they will soon appear in print. Had they been properly revised at the outset I should have thought it best to print them in the form in which they had been criticised, with needed marginal explanations, but as they stood they were, from a literary point of view, entirely unfit for publication. Besides as they are being printed chiefly with the hope that they may be found helpful to the saints, it is but proper they should be as accurate as possible, and that all extraneous matter should be removed.
Affectionately in the Lord,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- You may be quite free to make whatever use you may think proper of this letter. -- J.T.
{34}
MEETING, January 19th, 1906 -- PLAINFIELD.
Present: James Boyd, James Taylor, B. T. Fawcett, A. R. Steven, W. L. Perrin, Frank Lock. Notes made subsequently within the next few days by B.T.F., A.R.S., W.L.P., F.L., and initialled by them.
J.B. was asked if his mind had changed since the matters were inquired into in the house of J.T. in Brooklyn. He replied that certain explanations had been given there regarding the meaning of statements which had been made and that it was then claimed the meaning was not that which the words had been taken to convey but that he found on going over the country that the meaning charged had been accepted by saints in some parts and that the acceptance of them amounted to a system of heresy. He was asked had he any proof to furnish that what he had just stated was correct? He admitted that he had no proof and in the absence of proof J.T. claimed that the charge should be set aside and not considered. J.T. then enquired if J.B. still admitted that the gospel referred not only to Christ but to things down here? After considerable discussion and questioning it was eventually made clear that there was a distinction made between the term 'gospel' as ordinarily used for the proclamation to the heathen or the unconverted and the gospel as embracing all that was in the mind of God as blessing for man. J.T claimed that this was in his mind from the outset as evidenced in his first letter to J.B. when he had made the point of the kingdom, the church, the house and the Holy Spirit being down here and this in itself was proof that the full scope of the gospel was in J.T.¬s mind from the outset.
The Notes themselves were referred to, to substantiate that this was so. As to the actual question itself, Does the gospel not only refer to Christ as the Subject but also to things down here; this was again discussed, J.B. affirming that the kingdom referred to what was established *in heaven*. J.T. pointed out that the kingdom of heaven signified authority in heaven that the kingdom of God was potency or power, that the power was on earth in the Person of the Holy Spirit. As to the Holy Spirit mentioned in connection with the gospel, J.B. claimed that the Holy Spirit was only mentioned once, in @Acts 2. J.T replied that Scripture did not require to repeat itself, that one allusion was perfectly sufficient, that it was again mentioned
{35}
in verse 38 "repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost". The Lord Himself furthermore spoke of the Spirit to the woman of Samaria who was not a Christian and in @Revelation 22: 17 it is said "And whosoever will let him take of the water of life freely". It was conceded by J.B. that the gospel in its full scope did allude to things down here.
J.B. had objected to J.T.¬s statement that the gospel referred to things down here and insisted that it referred to Christ. J.T. did not deny it referred to Christ, but held it to be a vital point in Christianity that it referred to things down here, such as the presence of the Holy Spirit, the kingdom of God, etc. After much discussion it became apparent as before said that J.B. divided the gospel into two parts, viz. the proclamation and the teaching while J.T. in using the term gospel included both. J.T. said if he were putting the gospel before a sinner he would point them to Christ, but if to a converted man he would refer to the presence of the Holy Spirit, the kingdom of God, etc.
Objection was made to the Woodstock Notes that the Lord had His forces down here, but the point was explained as having reference to the divine power of the Holy Spirit.
The statement that salvation is found in the church was next alluded to. J.B. objected to this because no actual text of Scripture could be cited in support. J.T. claimed that he did not place his faith on an isolated text of Scripture but rather on the whole testimony of God -- that the house was dependent on the presence of the Holy Spirit here -- doctrine should not be limited to the New Testament. All Scripture was given for doctrine, etc. Zion did not strictly refer to the church, yet the elements found in Zion were found in the church. In the Old Testament, salvation was found in Zion -- her walls were salvation. The main features of the church as dwelling-place of God are in Zion. In @Acts 2 are the features of the assembly "and the Lord added to the church those that should be saved". J.B. would not go with this, because no actual texts of Scripture were produced and insisted on the contrary quoting, "Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved".
J.B. objected to the statement of J.T. that salvation was in
{36}
the church. J.T. fully agreed that salvation is in Christ. J.B. asked for one scripture that would support that salvation was in the church and discussion must cease if he could not support his statement with direct Scripture. J.T. supported his view from the standpoint of the city of refuge, salvation being in Zion and the Lord added to the church such as should be saved.
The subject of building was considered. J.B. affirmed that J.T. had stated in Brooklyn that there was nothing to preach about until the Holy Spirit came. J.T. on the other hand claimed the form of expression used by him was in the shape of a question, viz. 'What was there to preach about before the Holy Spirit came?' He contended that there was nothing of practical help for man until the building was formed. It was here conceded by both J.B. and J.T. that the preaching alluded to was not the preaching of the Lord Himself while He was on earth, but apostolic preaching. J.B.¬s thought regarding the building was that it was formed before the Holy Spirit came; to this J.T. objected because there was no 'cement', the material was there, the stones were there but it required the Holy Spirit to cement them together. In the Old Testament David had to do with the preparation of the material but Solomon as the type of a risen and glorified Christ constructed the edifice.
J.T. laid special stress on the presence of the Holy Spirit and cited Peter in @Acts 2 to prove his point where Peter referred to the outpouring of the Holy Spirit. J.B. held he only alluded to the outpouring of the Holy Spirit in answer to the accusation of the onlookers "these men are full of new wine" and that the exaltation of Christ was the point. J.T. fully went with the exaltation of Christ and pointed out that it was the exalted Christ who had sent down the Holy Spirit and that the house was formed by His coming down. J.B. held the house was there before He came. They both agreed that after the house was formed and indwelt by the Holy Spirit that in Him the power was given which enabled the servants to go out from Jerusalem. Between the ascension of Christ and the coming of the Holy Spirit no one could be saved.
A considerable time was taken to unfold the main features of @Acts 1 and 2 for the clearing of other questioners than J.B. One noticeable fact was pressed by J.T. that the Lord, a divine Person, had left the earth and there was no preaching until
{37}
another divine Person the Holy Spirit took up His abode here.
J.B. referred to brethren at different places refusing him and taking the ground that they would receive no teacher who was not in line with J.T. Such a thing he could not go on with and he characterised it as evil and this was the fault of J.T.¬s teaching. J.T. objected to this and said it was individuals who were at fault and that he, J.B., should try and get them right. J.T. asked him if he thought assemblies throughout the country would take this ground and J.B. replied that he did not think so. Thus it was a question of getting the individuals right.
F.L. after a considerable pause said, 'Where shall we next meet again? as likely as not in the Lord's presence'. J.T. then said to J.B. that he was willing to walk with him, that when statements of his were made that had caused difficulties he was willing to modify them as far as in his power. Seeing that J.B. admitted that the full scope of the gospel referred not only to Christ but to things down here, he could go on with J.B. and although their residence was too far apart to bring them in actual contact he would have sympathy with him in the ministry. He then asked J.B., 'Can you go on with me?' to which J.B. replied, 'Yes I can'. He, J.B., wound up by saying that it was not a question of disfellowshipping brethren here when he said he could not go on with them, but that the whole would have to be left to await development.
The letter written from Woodstock to J.B. was taken up. J.T. pointed out that the brethren there having seen J.B.¬s reply to the Woodstock Notes in which it was said 'the gospel did not refer to things down here', felt that unless the criticism were modified it would be happier that J.B. would not be present at the conference.
As to what had occurred at Chicago and Minneapolis the circumstances were gone into in detail. The request that J.B. should not visit these places was simply a precautionary one to avoid trouble -- teaching and doctrine was not the point. It was simply feared that the effect of J.B.¬s presence might cause difficulty among the saints.
It was evident from the statements made by both J.B. and J.T. that there had been much misunderstanding of facts on both sides as to the attitude of each in advising others, etc., and that had the facts been known to them much which caused difficulty would have been avoided. All parted in a kindly spirit individually.
{38}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 22nd, 1906.
Mr. T. H. Reynolds.
My Dear Mr. Reynolds -- Your letter of the 25th ult. was duly received.
I see that you quite misunderstand the trend of thought in the Notes of the New York meetings regarding the church's relation to the earth. It was entirely a question of *testimony*. The Son of God was said to have come into the sphere of testimony, and that having come He did not leave it *morally;* the earth was said to be the scene of the testimony at the *present time* and the church is here in this connection. But (although it was not expressed at that reading) my thought as to the entire sphere of testimony is that it includes the heavens as well, hence when I spoke of the church being removed for a time, but that morally it was not removed at all I meant simply that it would come into view again: it would appear in the scene of testimony again, but in the heavenly part of it. In a subsequent reading (on @Ephesians 2) you might have seen that this was what was held. The statement you give from the Notes is misquoted in the essential part of it. You underline the words 'from earth' as proving your point, and these words do not appear in the passage at all in this connection. It is true you say you had not the Notes by you to refer to, but this misquotation of an essential passage only proves your misapprehension of what they contain.
I can scarcely understand your remarks that your objection to Christ being connected with the earth through the church, did not refer to the world to come, but to the present time. I could never have divined that you referred to the present time, for it did not occur to me that any Christian would deny that the church is not only *connected* with the earth now, but actually *on* it -- which latter will not be true in the coming age. The church *is* on the earth; it was formed primarily at Jerusalem, and is spoken of at Corinth, Ephesus, etc. These cities were on earth. The assembly at Corinth was said to be Christ's body. It was not Christ's body in heaven; it was His body in that city; and if His body He was in it, and in it to be expressed morally *there*. "Know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you". Further, Saul was not persecuting Christ in heaven, but here on earth. Christ was here on earth morally in the saints, and was expressed in testimony before the world. In the Revelation He is seen in the midst of the
{39}
candlesticks, which were the seven assemblies in *Asia*. As all this is unquestionable (indeed you admit it in your letter), and as it involves *connection* with the earth, your statement is quite unintelligible.
But your charge that I make the church an earth-*dweller* I utterly refuse, and you have not proved it from any statement I have made. I have said many times (and you must know this, seeing you have read the Notes of the different meetings) that the church's distinctive place is in heaven; I said this in my last letter to you indeed, and also that I did not believe she would ever be actually on earth again after the rapture. At the present time she is on earth, as I have been showing, although ever essentially heavenly; and her position morally is in heaven (@Ephesians 2) -- in the world to come she will be actually there.
As to what you have printed on the Chicago Notes, I do not think I misunderstood you, as you say, and your not accounting me alone responsible does not bear on the point. In my letter I said you had criminated *others* and myself with 'doing dishonour to Christ, and giving up the testimony' without endeavouring to find out whether the testimony you had was authentic. You did not need to write to every brother in America for this information, even if each was responsible: the persons whose names appeared could easily be communicated with. Indeed in the note you sent me with the copy of your letter you said I was *mainly* responsible. This was the truth, hence your failure in not communicating with me. I have not heretofore dealt with the contents of your 'Letter to Brethren in America', having confined myself to pointing out the unfair and unscriptural basis on which it rests. I would now refer briefly to one or two points in order that you may see more clearly my ground for asking you to withdraw it.
To my mind the most objectionable part is the *insinuation* on page 4 that the spirit of antichrist could be traced in the 'Notes'. How you can allow this to remain in circulation among your brethren, and still assume to be in fellowship with those responsible, even offering to be 'a fellow-helper in the truth' (your last letter) with the one 'mainly' so, is beyond me entirely. In order to make this insinuation you were compelled to force the passage you allude to in @1 John 4. You say 'The Spirit of God confesses Jesus to be Lord, that is, exalted'. The confession in that passage is not the Lordship
{40}
of Christ at all, as any one reading it can see: it is "Jesus Christ *come in flesh"*. The title "Lord" does not once occur in 1 John. Your insinuation would apply to *it*, if the confession of Christ being Lord is the test, more justly than to the 'Notes'. In the latter the word "Lord" is constantly used, and the exaltation of Christ to the right hand of God formally affirmed. The confession of the Lordship of Christ is found in @1 Corinthians 12, but it is not the point in John's epistle. But it is utterly unfair to assume that because any given truth is *omitted* in an address or reading, it is thereby denied, and this I may say is the leading feature of your letter. As I have pointed out above as to John's epistle, such an assumption places us in a very serious position in regard of Scripture itself. See, for instance, the book of Esther: the word "God" does not occur. How dreadful it would be to assume that His existence was denied! On page 2 of your letter you say, 'Much is made in these Notes of the house of God, and little of the body of Christ'. The same thing a plies here. The first two readings were on 1 Timothy and 1 Peter, in *neither of which* epistles is the body of Christ mentioned. Why not? Because it is not the subject. This applies exactly to our Readings at Chicago. The *body was not the subject at any of them*. It is true that it appears in some of the scriptures read, and indeed it is alluded to in the Notes, but as it was not the subject on our minds at the time it was not made prominent. I may say the *house* was the leading thought all through. This accounts for a great deal that has occasioned difficulty. The house being viewed as here on earth the consideration of it did not demand the bringing into prominence of the exaltation of Christ (this, although stated, being assumed to be a universally accepted fact among Christians) and the heavenly calling of the church.
On page 8 you say the attention of the multitude in @Acts 2 was arrested by '*the apostles* speaking with other tongues'. The passage does not say this. It says "They were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with other tongues" (@Acts 2: 4). What arrested the attention of the multitude was the effect of the Holy Spirit in the 120 -- the house. The apostles as such are not mentioned till verse 14. All you say on this and the following page as to the sovereign right of Christ to send out His servants is entirely irrelevant, for it is not at all denied in the 'Notes'. The church was viewed in the very broadest sense, as it was primarily formed and as it
{41}
appeared in the presence of men. In this sense it include the apostles (indeed it always did) and their testimony was connected with it. It was the centre practically from which the light of God went out. It was in this sense I said 'The whole of Asia heard the word through Ephesus'. The preaching and teaching were by the apostle, but he stood connected with the assembly.
When I said (page 10) 'If you have not the building you have nothing to preach about ... I mean you have nothing to present that is of *practical help to men*', I *obviously* referred to what is connected with the Holy Spirit down here. You quote, "We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord", as if I were denying it. I was simply emphasising that the preaching depended not only on Christ being exalted, but on the effect of it, the kingdom and the house as formed by the Holy Spirit down here. There was no preaching in @Acts 1, although Christ had gone into heaven, but in @Acts 2 there was preaching. If Paul preached Christ Jesus *Lord* he preached the *kingdom*. I do not go into further details in your letter, but I hope what I have said may be received in a kindly spirit -- that in which you evidently received my previous letters -- and that you may be thereby led to reconsider the whole matter and withdraw your letters.
I may add that I have little or no difficulty with what you say toward the end of your letter as to Christ's position in heavenly glory and the church's peculiar place in Him there: I have anticipated this earlier in my letter. You say, 'If you only saw this place of Christ and its consequences, your hand would be the first to burn those Notes'. I have always seen it in my measure since I have known the truth, and do see it now, and yet I have not burnt the 'Notes', and do not intend to. The 'Notes' affirm this truth themselves, they affirm that the distinctive place of Christ and the church is in heaven, and your imputation to the contrary is simply not true. In revising the 'Notes' I am only availing myself of a right that belongs to every one going into print, viz: to present his thoughts at the time of publication as accurately and clearly as possible. Many things are clearer in my mind now than they were a year ago, and it is natural that this should appear in the revision I have made. No right-minded person would wish it otherwise. It is an easy matter for you to ask me to withdraw the Notes, and for Mr. Allen to say (as you report) that it is
{42}
undesirable that they should be in circulation, but your judgment does not cover my responsibility to the Lord, nor does it counter-balance the fact that many unbiased people both in this country and on your side have read them with interest and profit.
With love in the Lord, I am
Yours in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 26th, 1906.
Mr. Joseph Boyt.
My Dear Mr. Boyt, -- I am in receipt of your letter of the 23rd instant.
I note what you say as to a party existing in Chicago, but you do not make clear (even if this be true) that I am responsible for it, although you seem to imply that I am. I feel responsible for what *I have said*, and I am prepared to answer for this at any time, but I disclaim being responsible for the use made by others of what I have said. Neither do I admit responsibility for the esteem in which I may be held by any of my brethren, whether this be favourable or adverse. Christendom is divided into sects, and many of these are formed by special adherence to some chosen doctrine of scripture, but this does not prove the doctrine wrong nor involve in any responsibility those through whom the doctrines in question may have come. I say this so that you may understand my point of view even if I admit the presence of a party, but at the same time you must not conclude that I am without the very greatest exercise as to the state of matters at Chicago. But although I hear a good deal of what has transpired in Chicago during the past few months I cannot say that anything has come under my notice which would lead me to treat as a *party* those whom you so stigmatise. I had been in contact with the saints there for some time and had found help from the Lord in seeking to minister the truth to them, they bearing witness of help received; but on arriving there last December I found a change had taken place with many of them: I found distrust and coldness where there had been hearty confidence and appreciation. Now, in saying this I hope you will understand that I was not occupied with myself or what I had sought to minister; I say it only to show that the divergence (if there was
{43}
any) was rather with those who objected to the so-called party than with the party themselves, for I found the latter hearty and sympathetic with the truth. Of course if what they all (more or less) had enjoyed during the past year or two was not the truth it would be a different matter: if it was false and someone came along and exposed it, and then some adhering to it: this would constitute them offenders and unfit for fellowship. But the *facts* of the cases before us are very different: on going to Chicago Mr. Boyd was known to have said that the gospel did not refer to what is down here, and further that he had vehemently attacked what many in Chicago had enjoyed as the truth. It is true that the meeting here had (as was thought) adjusted all this but some at Chicago were doubtful of this, and the sequel proved that they were right. It is not wonderful therefore that they were fearful of Mr. Boyd. There is abundant evidence that the line he pursued in Chicago (as elsewhere) tended to discredit that which is connected with the Holy Spirit down here, and it should not be a matter of surprise that ardent young saints (such as those in question are) should resent it. At a meeting with Mr. Boyd *since*, in the presence of some brothers, he threatened to break with me for having said at Chicago that salvation was to be found primarily in the house, and only with great reluctance would he admit that the gospel made any reference to the Spirit, saying there was *only* one scripture to support it. You can understand therefore how difficult it is for me to condemn saints for refusing the teaching of such an one. The fact that I may have handled the truth does not make it *my* truth or doctrine. The question is: Is it the truth? If it is, then saints should not be condemned for clinging to it and refusing to countenance what discredits it. You will remember that the matter was gone over while we were together, and it did not seem to strike you then that those brothers were contending for what was wrong. Of course I can understand that tendency to a party under such circumstances; it is very difficult to avoid the *appearance* of it, especially when there is great pressure, but I think great allowance should be made for saints when it cannot be shown that they are contending for what is in itself wrong. As to my being a prophet, etc., I regard it as absurd: it pains me dreadfully to hear these things. I am sure that if the saints only knew what I think of myself they would be ashamed to entertain such thoughts. I am no prophet, nor
{44}
successor to Mr. Darby (I feel ashamed to have to mention it). My joy is that my privilege is to share his place with Christ before the Father.
I may add in closing that I regard this difficulty at Chicago as *local*, and I believe it would be much happier if it were left in local hands. For a good while there have been two elements in that meeting; the one in the main supporting what is of God, and the other to some extent refusing it. The bulk of the meeting I fear has drifted with the latter. But I feel sure the Lord will come in, and I feel fully prepared to recognise local responsibility in the matter. I can only judge according to what I have seen and heard, but I have not seen all, I am sure.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 16th, 1906.
Mr. J. Henderson.
Beloved Brother, -- You need not have any fear of wearying me with any questions that you may feel necessary to ask. I have some idea of the exercises many of you must be going through at the present time; and as I fear I am far from considering myself as exempt from responsibility in the matter, I feel bound to do all I can to relieve the situation. As to my thought of the Christian circle (I hardly ever use the expression; I usually use 'church' or 'assembly' ) being the meeting at Brooklyn, I would say that this is not so, and if Mr. Boyd asserts that I hold such a miserable thought, he should produce evidence of it; but the necessity of substantiating reports by adequate proofs does not appear to be felt by Mr. Boyd ... [J.T. here quotes proof from the 'Notes' Ans. J.T. 'Yes, I think it is our privilege to be in the light of it but you can never be it'. -- Ed] ... . In the Woodstock Readings there is an expression like this, 'You hear the expression' assembly 'here and there, but God never intended to restore any church position', so that the charge that I reduce the church to a visible company now is unfounded and absolutely false. What I see is that the incoming of the Holy Spirit formed an entirely new order of things, a sphere was formed in which the blessed activities of the Spirit were known. This was the assembly which for a time appeared intact in the world, but the ruin has intervened and now the church cannot be seen in any concrete
{45}
form. Its existence, however, continues, but it must always include every person who has the Holy Spirit; hence it would be ignorance and presumption for any company of believers (as manifestly not including all) to assume to be the church. But notwithstanding the prevailing condition of things saints may more or less enjoy the privilege of the assembly even now: but this will depend on their being separate from evil and following righteousness, etc. If any given company of believers are walking in the light of the assembly, the Spirit being thus ungrieved, they realise in some measure the blessings peculiar to it, and the effect of this in them will be apparent, and such persons will be a means of blessing to those around them. This is undeniable. Whatever I may have said of visible companies, this is what I had in my mind. But I never said nor meant to say that any visible company now could be regarded as the assembly. Indeed, as I have said before, the opposite is what I have said and insisted upon. Mr. Boyd is pursuing an extraordinary course, a course which will not bear the light of day. The reports and insinuations as to Mr. Pellatt are cruel. I should think those responsible for them will reap the bitter but certain results. No man walking in the fear of God would circulate such things unless he had absolute certainty that they were true, neither would any man walking in the fear of God believe them unless sure of their truthfulness.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
June 4th, 1906.
Mr. J. Henderson.
Beloved Brother, -- Since writing my last I have had time to weigh the question of the withdrawal of the unrevised notes of meetings held in New York last year. I had partly decided to do this three months ago, but hesitated then because I did not wish that those who appreciated the line of thought contained in them (and I had abundant evidence that there were many such), should be deprived of what they valued as the truth. I cherished the hope that I should be enabled to furnish satisfactory explanations of the points objected to; and indeed I may say, that as far as difficulties have been presented to me directly, I have succeeded in this.
Notwithstanding, however, I feel that as the Notes were not
{46}
properly revised, and as they do not *accurately* represent the thought of some of the speakers, and of myself in particular, and as they contain expressions which, being unguarded, are capable of misconstruction, and more especially as they have become in this form the subject of public controversy, fairness to all concerned, demands that they should be withdrawn, *as they stand*. It is not that they contain anything wrong, but some of the expressions alluded to above, have been torn away from their context and grouped together in such fashion as to lead some to conclude that a system of error is being taught; hence godly care for souls would lead to the removal of what in this way is being used to harass and distress the Lord's people. Had it not been that much they contain as truth, and which I believe the Lord would call special attention to at the present time, is *now* in print and before the saints, I should have felt it needful to revise carefully the Notes in question and publish them, so that all might be in a position to judge as to what is really held, but this is not necessary on account of the publication of the Notes of the Chicago meetings.
I would ask you, dear brother, kindly to make known to those with whom you may be in communication that these Notes are withdrawn for the reasons stated above, and in doing so, I feel it is but seemly for me to say that while I am acting with a view to peace and the restoration of confidence among the saints, yet the admissions made above involve a measure of failure on my part, for had proper care been exercised at the beginning, this act might not now be necessary. Hence, as on a former occasion, I would again express my very great regret for any sorrow occasioned my brethren which more care on my part might have averted.
I can understand it being said that such an acknowledgment as I now make is not enough; that I should confess that error exists, but I am utterly unconscious that it does, and, until its existence is proved, it is impossible for me to admit it. It is not that I claim unconsciousness of error vindicates me, I do not; but while I am unconscious of it, it is, as I said, impossible for me to admit its existence; and until the presence of evil in the Notes is attested, I can say no more than I have said above. It is true that we are to be justified or condemned by our words, but if statements are made which although said to be one-sided or unbalanced, are at the same time supported by Scripture, they cannot be called error. This is especially
{47}
the case if the balancing truths are found elsewhere from the same speaker, and the different Notes which have been criticised abound with this very thing. For instance, the Son of God is said to have come, and come to stay, and 'The church is here to stay'. What was the thought behind those expressions? By reference to other statements in the Notes it can be seen that it is held that Christ is literally in heaven, and that the church's place is there also; hence, 'here' *cannot* be intended to mean the earth alone, but the heavens as well, as included in the sphere of testimony.
I will not say more, only to add that in withdrawing the Notes as they stand, it is as reserving the right to use them in part or as a whole, if this be deemed necessary in the future, as properly revised Notes of two of the meetings have been already revised and published under the titles respectively of 'Christ in Authority', and 'Christ crowned by the Father and by the saints'. These, of course, are not withdrawn.
Mr. Pellatt quite agrees to the withdrawal of the unrevised Notes.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
July, 1906.
Mr. J. S. Allen.
My Dear Mr. Allen, -- I am in receipt of your letter of the 20th ult. I thank you for it.
I regret to hear of dear Mr. Broomhead's illness, but I am thankful to know that he is recovering. I met Mr. Broomhead once and feel very much interested in him; and all the more so because of his past close relations with dear Mr. Raven.
As to the Chicago matter, I would say that if the action you mention was taken (and I hope for the sake of those who would be responsible for it that it was not), we have not been notified of it. After the special meetings we heard accidentally that a letter had been sent, but afterwards that it was cancelled. What the contents of this letter were, I do not know. The state of things at Chicago at present is most deplorable, for the leaders are acting like so many children -- applying @Romans 16: 17, 18 to a good proportion of the godliest souls in the meeting, without any proof that the conditions referred to in that scripture exist. Although the situation in Chicago is the
{48}
*direct* outcome of Mr. Boyd's visit, yet there is no issue raised which calls for interference from outside, as the matter is purely local. I feel that a great deal of working material would be kept from the enemy if local matters were left in local hands. Of course, where a manifestly wrong course is being pursued, it is of God to seek in a sober, humble way to check it, but on general principles it is safest to leave things with the Lord, who is Son over the house of God.
As to the body of your letter, I am somewhat at a loss to know what to say, for I do not see that I can add anything, as to the points you raise, to what I have said in the revised Notes, especially in the preface -- a copy of which I had sent you.
You say: 'If ... the Spirit is never dissociated from Christ who gives it, then it must be to Christ you turn, and to Him where He actually is in Person, and not to the saints or the assembly'. This is exactly what *I* say substantially, as the following extracts show: 'In order to drink, each one must come to Christ, the Source and Giver'. 'It would be wrong to imply that the church is the giver of living water. Christ is the Giver of living water'. Your remarks, therefore, are a sorrow to me, for you do not seem to accredit what I say. You may reply that other statements of mine are different. I certainly do not know of any such.
Then you say: 'This, as I see it, is the root error, which vitiates what might otherwise be good'. That is, you charge me with something as root error which is the exact opposite of what I affirm in the plainest English! But I have never thought or said that the saints give living water (although I have made full allowance for certain instances in the Acts, of the Spirit being communicated through the administration of men); my point all through being to emphasise that the living water was here, *and this in order that saints should become exercised as to it*. I have *always* (of course) held that Christ is the Giver of living water, as of every blessing; but what I have felt is that the *administrative* position of the assembly, as set up by the Lord at the beginning, is not understood; hence if anyone were to say in a limited way that the Holy Spirit was given *through* men at the beginning I could not deny it. But I only say this as guarding the side of the truth which I have mentioned, and as making full allowance for the authority of all Scripture; and I would always feel it needful in making such a remark to emphasise that Christ is the real Source and Giver. I have in
{49}
mind such a scripture as: "Give *ye*" (the "ye" is emphatic) "them to eat". The Lord supplied what they gave, but in *detail* the disciples gave the food to the multitude. The phase of the truth indicated in this should be upheld, otherwise we are bound to suffer loss. It can easily be maintained without trenching on the Lord's personal glory and prerogatives. It may be said that this line of things occupies the saints with themselves, but of what value is this remark when, as I have shown, the Scriptures present it as part of the truth? How can we have the ministry of the church without referring to the church? And the church *always* means the saints, no matter what be the view taken.
As to the living water, I am surprised that you should think that it is limited to the 'effects' of the Spirit, but I am glad that you are not dogmatic about it, for in the light of John 4 and 7 I cannot see that the thought is scriptural; indeed I am sure it is *not* scriptural. John 7 does not say, 'This spake He of the *effects* of the Spirit', but "This spake He of *the Spirit*". Then in John 4 the Lord said that the water that He would give would become in the recipient a fountain of water springing up. How are we to understand that the Lord would give to the woman the 'effects' of the Spirit? or that the spring in the believer is the effects of the Spirit? The Lord alluded to the Spirit Himself, and to say the contrary would, to my mind, weaken the whole passage, and indeed tend to rob us of Christianity in the real power of it. I fully own that the effects of the Spirit are *included* in the living water, especially as flowing out of the believer, but the living water as given to the disciples by Christ, was the Holy Spirit personally, and this should be insisted on.
Your remark as to the Holy Spirit not entirely leaving heaven is, I must say, very peculiar, and I beg you to excuse me if I say that it will jar on any mind conversant with the teaching of Scripture; and that any views based on it will only tend to confusion, if not to error. For myself, I may say that I have always believed that the Holy Spirit is a Divine Person, equal with the Father and the Son, and *ever* in the Godhead; so I would not restrict Him, as thus viewed, to any sphere, but I want to be governed by Scripture, and there I find that Christ being glorified the Spirit is here -- "sent down from heaven". Till Jesus was glorified the Spirit "was not yet", but now He is here *Personally* as that other Comforter who abides with
{50}
us forever, and it is as here in the church that He is spoken of in the New Testament, and not as in heaven. Of course, the Spirit is in Christ as Man in heaven, but until it is shown from Scripture that souls have received Him *from heaven* since Pentecost I shall hold that all persons who have received the Spirit since He came to the 120 as seen in @Acts 2, have received Him as thus already here. In @Acts 10, indeed He was "poured out" on the Gentiles, but it does not say that He was poured out from heaven. In @Acts 2 the sound of "a rushing, mighty wind" is out of heaven. But He is never disassociated from Christ. He is in Christ in heaven, but at the same time He is acting as a distinct Divine Person here on earth (we cannot undertake to explain this), and it is in the latter position, as I have said, that He is spoken of in connection with Christianity.
I do not know why you refer to the writings of brethren, as if I had been basing my views on these. I have learnt much through the ministry of others, but I make a point to rest everything that I believe or say, on Scripture. I am not in the habit of appealing to the writings of others.
As to the withdrawal of certain things, you may by this time be aware that I have withdrawn the unrevised notes of the New York meetings of last year. I send under separate cover copies of my letter of withdrawal.
I have written at some length to you, dear Mr. Allen, because I am desirous of making my meaning as clear to you as possible, and if any statements I have made appear too strong or in any way unbecoming, I beg you to pardon them, for I desire to respect fully your age and experience.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
August 22nd, 1906.
My Dear Brother, -- I duly received your letter of the 25th ult. and was interested in its contents. I can quite understand the exercise you and others who are concerned as to the Lord's things must have on account of current events, and I am very desirous of helping in whatever I may be able in the relief of the minds and consciences of the saints. There can be no doubt that the Lord is acting in the assertion of His rights as Son over the house of God, and for the maintenance of the
{51}
truth among His people, and if each one turns with purpose of heart to *Him*, the path in which He wishes us to walk will be made plain and simple to all -- "the *Lord* will give thee understanding in *all things*" (@2 Timothy 2: 7).
Being near Him our souls are sustained, so that we do not need to lean on man as such on the one hand, and on the other we are able to form a true judgment as to what is passing around us, being under His influence. Hence as knowing the Lord for ourselves we are not dependent on any servants however gifted or divinely fitted to help the saints. As to myself, I may say that I have never been free to regard myself even as a *servant* in any special way, although, of course, accepting the obligation to serve, and seeking to fulfil it. Hence you can understand that I would feel very awkward in attempting to prove to my brethren that I have a special ministry from the Lord.
As opportunity offers I do what I can to help the Lord's people in the way of giving out the truth, and if those who hear say that what I say bears a distinctive character, I would be slow to object, for they -- the saints -- are the 'judges'.
But I do not take this ground. I prefer to pursue a simple path, and if there are those who regard me as a servant of the Lord, they shall have to be guided by my "doctrine and manner of life".
What I gave out at the different meetings of which reports were made was the outcome of lengthened exercise as to the popular mode of presenting the gospel. I had observed that to a very large extent the necessity for a witness to it was entirely ignored, and it was because of this that the line of thought turned so much on what was down here. There was not the faintest notion of disregarding or beclouding the heavenly side of the truth, but it was not felt that the need for pressing it existed at that time, nor was there the least intention to detract from the glory of Christ as the blessed One through whom alone every blessing comes, the general thought being to set forth (if possible) the conditions under which the gospel was announced at the beginning. And I had much exercise as to the current view of heaven, feeling that human imagination had a good deal to do in the formation of it. I have never had the least doubt that the church's calling is heavenly, that its place is in heaven, but my exercise has been to make it clear that it is ever seen in relation to the earth in the future, though not on it. It is not spoken of in Scripture as being in some
{52}
other sphere different from that designated as "the heavens and the earth". As to a personal link with Christ, this is the initial step in the believer's history, and I never questioned, either in thought or word, the necessity of it. The gospel enlightens a man as to Christ in heaven, and man believes on Him; this is the link of faith which is ever to be maintained while we are down here. I would say in conclusion that I am convinced that it is of the Lord that the side of the truth that has been brought into prominence should be before the saints, and I believe if we turn to Him as to it, surrendering selfish interests, and recognising the truth of the church in a practical way, great blessing will result to us.
Affectionately yours in the Lord,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- You may use this as you deem needful.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 28th, 1906.
Mr. H. H. Harman.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter dated August 17th was duly received, and I should have replied to it sooner were it not that I have been greatly pressed for time.
Judging by certain statements and quotations which you make, I am disposed to think that, in the main, you hold pretty much what I do on the subjects you are dealing with; save that I lay stress on certain features which you would tend to minimise or ignore entirely. Speaking of the kingdom, you say: 'It means direction and guidance from the hand of the Lord as well as the support of the Spirit of God for the believer'. Then you quote from some one: 'The kingdom involves two things: *the preaching* of a sphere of power and blessing ... . The power and blessing were brought in by Jesus when here; power delivers from evil, Satan and death'. These statements convey substantially what I understand as to the kingdom, and what they contain forms the basis of all I have said in the Notes to which you so strongly object. But you add to the first remark: 'The truth of it (the kingdom) is essentially individual'. Here I cannot say that I concur, for the statement is scarcely intelligible. In the quotation you give the kingdom is said to be 'a sphere of power and blessing'.
{53}
A sphere is not an individual. The realisation of it, as of every truth, is individual, but the 'sphere of power and blessing' must be there before it can be realised or entered into. This sphere existed when the Lord was here by the fact of His presence, and now that He has gone to heaven it is maintained here by the Holy Spirit. It is remarkable that the Lord explains (@Matthew 12) that the *proof* that the kingdom had come was that He cast out devils by the Spirit of God. This passage helps greatly to a true understanding of the import of the kingdom of God: it stands connected with a divine Person here on earth, while the kingdom of heaven involves more authority vested in Christ in heaven. It was the former that was in view mainly in the Notes, and this is the reason why the church is referred to so much, as being the vessel in which the Spirit has been active, since the Lord went on high. During the Woodstock meetings, @Matthew 13 was a good deal on my mind, and the kingdom there is presented as a sphere here on earth, *out* of which, at the end, the "tares" are taken. It did not occur to me that anyone would suspect that the heavenly side was doubted, otherwise it would have been made *more* prominent, although it *is* maintained throughout.
But I must refer to some of your remarks in detail.
You say (page 1), 'What struck me, in going through this reading of yours on the kingdom, was the entire absence of any reference to its having been established in the Lord Jesus Christ at God's right hand *in heaven*'. You could not have read very carefully or you would have seen that the kingdom is said to be established in Christ, and that Christ is said to have ascended above all heavens. If you look at page 8 you will find this statement: 'It is a question of what is established in Jesus our Lord as risen from the dead;' and on page 11 the kingdom is said to involve 'His ascension far above all heavens'. Hence you were struck with the absence of something that was really present! I have wondered whether you have been struck with the fact that the apostle in writing to the Romans about the kingdom (chapter 5, which was the chapter under consideration at the reading in question), does not say that it was established in Christ in heaven. The word 'heaven' occurs but twice in the whole epistle, and in neither instance is it connected with the kingdom. But in saying this I only wish to call attention to the manner in which things are presented in Scripture; I do not mean to weaken the truth that
{54}
the kingdom is established in Christ in heaven -- which is taught in the 'Notes', as I have pointed out.
On page 2 of your letter you labour energetically to make out that I put the saints in the place of Christ in the proclamation of the gospel, quoting: 'The gospel refers much more to what is down here than to what is in heaven'. Now, in saying this I did not have the proclamation in my mind at all; I was referring simply to the *things* alluded to in the gospel, such as the kingdom, house, salvation, etc., all of which I hold to be here in connection with the presence of the Holy Spirit. If the thought of the proclamation did enter my mind it was expressed in the remark which immediately follows the one mentioned above so as to guard it: 'It is true that Christ is the Theme'. Did you attach its proper value to this remark, and to another which appears on the same page ( 'The great theme of the apostles was that these wonderful things had come to pass through the humble Nazarene, whom the Jews had crucified, but whom God had raised up and exalted to His right hand' ), you could never have asked me such a question as 'Have the saints died for me?' Neither could you treat as you do my remark: 'God's intervention is in the saints'. You deal with this statement as if it were the only one I had made: you attach a meaning to it which is utterly at variance with its context. How could I *mean* by 'intervention' anything absolute or primary, when I say in 'the same breath' that Christ is the Theme of the gospel and that all these wonderful things for men had been brought to pass by Him? I was simply stating the historical fact presented in the Acts: the Lord Jesus Christ had gone to the right hand of God, having accomplished the work of redemption; but humanity (save the few in the upper room at Jerusalem) was still in darkness, and captive to Satan. How did God meet this condition of things? By the light and power consequent on the incoming of the Holy Spirit to the 120. Who dares to deny this? He who does speaks injuriously against the Holy Spirit. But all this light and power in the Spirit down here is consequent on the precious atoning work of our Lord Jesus Christ, and His exaltation to the right hand of God; and in the proclamation of the gospel I should present Him, and Him alone, as the One in whom God has intervened for the deliverance and blessing of men. But although I said I did not have the proclamation in my mind in speaking of the things referred
{55}
to in the gospel, yet I do not admit that any restrictions can be placed on the preacher as to what he may present in testimony. In writing to the Romans Paul presents the gospel: he presents the righteousness and power of God, which are seen respectively in the death and resurrection of Christ; and consequent on these, things are seen as administered *through* our Lord Jesus Christ, which involves the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, which is given to us, ending in eternal life -- the field covered is large. Then in writing to the Ephesians the apostle says, "To me ... has this grace been given, to announce among the *nations* the glad tidings of the unsearchable *riches* of the Christ, and to enlighten all (with the knowledge of) what is the administration of the mystery" (@Ephesians 3: 8, 9). Here the glad tidings "announced" are of "riches" of Christ, of which the church surely forms a part, indeed it is what is immediately before the apostle here. He had said to the Corinthians that *Christ* was the wisdom of God, but here the all-various wisdom is to be seen by beings in the heavenlies in the *assembly*. Hence we see that although Christ was ever the theme of Paul's preaching, yet he 'referred' to *things* which are actually down here in what he announced.
But the relation of the church to salvation is what more particularly demands attention. What I would say at the outset is, that we must be prepared to admit the force of all Scripture in regard to any subject under consideration if we are to get the mind of God as to it. Every scripture is "profitable for *doctrine*". Hence the instruction in the Old Testament relative to Jerusalem, or Zion, has to be taken into account in connection with the question of salvation. It is not that they typify the assembly exactly, but we have to 'compare' things, and every one instructed by the Spirit would recognise that nothing in the way of power or blessing is predicted of Jerusalem or Zion that is not applicable also to the assembly. Glorious things were spoken of Jerusalem, and the Songs of Degrees show that it was the great objective of the exercised remnant of Israel. @Psalm 133 is the climax -- there the blessing is commanded; and in @Psalm 134 we get "The Lord ... bless thee out of Zion". Then, as to salvation we read in @Isaiah 46: 13, "I will place salvation in Zion;" and @Isaiah 60: 18, "Thou shalt call thy walls Salvation" (see also @Psalm 48). Now, if we compare all this with @Acts 2 we readily see that what marked Jerusalem in an external way was realised in a
{56}
spiritual sense in the assembly. *God was dwelling in it*, hence security against evil and blessing were to be found there. Instead of finding salvation in Jerusalem, as they will be in a future day, the remnant of Israel found it in the assembly: "The Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved" (@Acts 2: 47). But, of course, before being added each one had to have faith in the Lord as presented to him in the gospel; as Peter says, "Repent, and be baptized *every one* of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost" (@Acts 2: 38). I would add that in speaking of salvation from this point of view, I do not, of course, include deliverance from coming wrath, or the lake of fire. I am speaking of it as it is to be realised at the present time, and the believer always has the knowledge that on account of his faith in Christ he will not come into judgment.
The contradiction which you think you have discovered in my statements as to living water, disappears when the statements are carefully examined. The first, 'the believer was to be the source of supply', is simply the Lord's own remark, as recorded in @John 7: 38, "Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water", only in other words, for no thoughtful person would deny for a moment that *rivers* may be a source of supply to those who need water. But although rivers may be a source of supply to those who need water, they are not their own source: a city may get its supply of water from a river, but the source of the river may be hundreds of miles away in some lake or mountain-spring. This latter is what I had in my mind when I said that Christ is the Source and Giver of living water. The water comes from Christ in glory to the believer, and from him it flows out as rivers. But it must be remembered that John 7 contemplates the coming of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost ("the Holy Spirit was not yet given; because that Jesus was not yet glorified"), and that consequently all who have received Him since have received Him as thus here. In @Acts 10, indeed, it says that He was poured out on the Gentiles, but it does not say that He was poured out *from heaven*. Whatever may be said as to the effects of the Spirit in the believer being living water (which I admit fully), John 7 is conclusive that it is the Holy Spirit Himself. "This spake he *of the Spirit*, which they that believe on Him should receive". It is, however, the Spirit in a certain character, i.e. as in man, and so adaptable to the need of the human heart. But the living
{57}
water as given by Christ to the believer according to @John 4 and 7 *is the Holy Spirit*.
Your comments on my expression, 'Sinners come in afterwards', have no force at all, as the context shows that I only used the word 'sinners' as covering a class of persons who had stood in need of the gospel, and, being affected by it, come into the house of God. The apostle Paul referred to himself as a sinner long after he had been converted -- "sinners; of whom I *am* chief" (@1 Timothy 1: 15).
I do not proceed further, save to say that in seeking to make my meaning clear I am not assuming that my expressions are faultless, which I am not, as you may know, from acknowledgments which I have elsewhere made.
Affectionately yours in the Lord,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- As to my remark that a man after being enlightened by the presentation of Christ glorified to him has an aching heart, what I had in mind was a certain state of soul that is apparent in every part of 'evangelical' Christendom -- souls enlightened by a certain kind of preaching and then allowed to go adrift. As you must be aware of this state of things as having to do with souls, I am surprised that you object so strongly to what I said. Besides, Scripture supposes that a man may have light as to Christ and yet not have the Holy Spirit. I need not cite the passages. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 3rd, 1906.
Mr. J. Henderson.
Beloved Brother, -- Mr. Lock sent you earlier in the week a statement signed by four brothers present at the meeting with Mr. Boyd denying his report as to Mr. Pellatt, and also a synopsis of what passed at the meeting. I think the information therein contained should satisfy brethren that Mr. Boyd's statements and doctrine are not to be accepted without question. From the facts which have come from your side it is clear that he has made false statements, and the notes sent you by Mr. Lock prove Mr. Boyd unsound both as to the gospel and the kingdom. I need not say that I am most deeply concerned as to all that is transpiring, and feel most keenly the extreme
{58}
gravity of being in this way made the occasion of so much contention. I am much encouraged to hear of your prayer on my behalf, and I think I can say that I feel the effect of this in my soul. I am seeking to go on in a quiet and obscure way, being compelled to devote most of my time to secular business. I find constant encouragement from the Lord, I am thankful to say, in seeking to go on with the few here who are seeking to go on with the truth. We have had a good deal of sorrow here owing to a few brothers carrying certain views to such a length as to be at plain issue with the Scripture, having also formed themselves into a distinct party. We have had to deal with them, and since doing so there has been much relief and edification in the truth. These brethren had been primarily very favourable to me, and some held me responsible for their extreme views (responsibility which I entirely repudiated) which as I have said were utterly unscriptural. They, on the other hand, had become quite opposed to me. But the remarkable thing was that Mr. Boyd, knowing all this and what sorrow these brothers were causing the saints, identified himself with them and stayed with them, and reported to others that they were all right; notwithstanding that he knows that they had said worse things than he imputed to me. In other words Mr. Boyd commended the only ones on this side that could be called heretical. Their heresy arose too, I believe, from their pushing to the extreme, things that they heard me say. The difficulties as to this are now past, I am thankful to say. But matters at Chicago are very unsettled, this being the direct outcome of Mr. Boyd's visit there. Outside Chicago things are comparatively quiet on this side. There are, of course, those who agree with Mr. Boyd and Mr. T. H. Reynolds, but this is not the case generally, the leading ones being quite clear that there is no error being taught, and they have an understanding as to where the Lord is in the matter. Of course, the saints here have the advantage of knowing the persons in question, and many have heard what has been said from time to time, which is not the case with brethren in England. This constitutes the matter rather serious on your side, but clearly the Lord is acting, and there can be no doubt as to the issue, the truth is in question and He will support it. I can scarcely understand how Mr. Bookless can use such strong language to prove from his quotations from my letter anything derogatory to Christ or that another Christ is presented therein different
{59}
to the one for whom millions of souls had 'lived and suffered'. He wants to know what I mean; I should like to know what he means. His letter is extraordinary, and leads one to very serious reflections as to what may be the effect on saints on your side of the present agitation -- for from what I have heard of Mr. Bookless I should have thought of him as a sober and intelligent brother. I submit to you or any candid brother as to whether the simple meaning of the two passages Mr. Bookless quotes, is not that Christ is to be presented in the gospel as the One through whom alone every blessing comes -- in whom every blessing is -- and that the blessings are made available practically in virtue of the presence of the Holy Spirit down here; and that the preacher should not only instruct souls as to the former but also as to the latter. Reduced to a smaller compass, it is Christ in glory and the Holy Spirit down here; and these wondrous and blessed facts being announced to men. I cannot understand where some are in complaining so much in regard to what has been said about living water. No one objects that the living water refers to the Spirit, nor that the Spirit is actually here. Why should it be wrong to speak of locating Him? He has His own sphere ('the region of the Spirit', as you might rightly call it) and why should it be regarded as wrong to seek to make this known to men? How can you preach from @Luke 14 or 15 without alluding to it? In chapter 14 the Supper was in the house and in chapter 15 the music and dancing were there. The house refers to what is 'down here', for the music and dancing were within the hearing of the "elder brother". The present ruin does not affect the matter at all. I have been speaking of the gospel as normally presented, i.e. as at the beginning. Further, you cannot preach the kingdom without referring to what is actually down here -- for it is down here -- "the kingdom of God is ... righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost" (@Romans 14: 17). Mr. Boyd evaded this by saying that the kingdom referred to what is established in heaven -- in the face of Romans 14 (as I have just quoted) which connects it with the Holy Spirit who is now down here. As to what J.B. says that I have in my mind the little company in Brooklyn, etc., when I speak of the Christian circle, that is not true: when I speak of the Christian circle I speak of the church normally. This has been my point all along. I have been exercised because of the great pretension to gospel preaching without any concern as to the absence of a
{60}
witness to it; and hence I have sought to call attention to the conditions under which the apostles primarily announced the glad tidings. I have but little difficulty with what you say as to teaching and preaching; this is of minor importance. If the saints are willing to maintain what is fundamental -- Christ in glory and the Holy Spirit here, and that present salvation and blessings depend not only on the former but on the latter, I am content and shall only be too glad to confer with my brethren and receive what help I may from them. I am constantly looking to the Lord for you and the saints with you, and those in Great Britain generally, for I see that the present is a time of great anxiety and sorrow. Mr. Boyd's doings and Heath's conduct in sending out his paper (which I think is 'tempting the Lord' ) must be the occasion of great exercise to you all. I am well aware that many place most of the blame on me; as I said in my letter of January 15th I accept that I have exposed myself and the saints to attack, but I do not admit that error is taught in the 'Notes'. I have weighed the matter many times, and I cannot find I have had a wrong thought. There are expressions which admit of a construction that would be error, but this would not be my meaning. And I feel certain that I could satisfy any number of unbiased brethren that error was not intended in anything I said in the 'Notes'. I am a young brother and I feel I need help, and I shall be glad to accept it from anyone on your side who feels free to offer it. If any brother or brethren will put down formally the points that seem to cause difficulty I shall be glad to explain my meaning as to them as well as I can. If it be pointed out from Scripture that I am in any way in error I shall gladly acknowledge it. I wholly repudiate that I am in any way connected with a party. I have no special (i.e. as distinct from the truth of the church) connection with any brother.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 6th, 1907
Mr. John Lightburn.
My Dear Brother, -- I was very pleased to receive yours of January 21st, which came in due time.
The questions you put to me with a view to helping others
{61}
only indicate how far the spirit of misrepresentation has gone on your side of the water.
As to the first, 'Would you point a poor lost sinner to the church for salvation of the soul, or to the Lord Jesus Christ' -- I would say in the most absolute way that I would not direct a sinner to the church for salvation, I would point him to Christ and to Christ alone, according to @Acts 16: 31.
As to the second, 'Would you tell him to go to the assembly for living water, or to Christ'. I would say most positively that I would tell him to go to Christ for it. It is one side of the ministry of the truth to present Christ as the One from whom certain things are to be obtained and another to instruct souls as to *what* the things are that are to be obtained and *how* and *where* enjoyed. The Lord was in heaven some days before the Holy Spirit came; as there He was an Object for faith, but the living water could not be received until the Spirit came; although Christ, from His own words, could be said to be the Giver of it. He was the *Giver* then as much as He is now, only that the person who believes *now* receives that living water *because it is here to be received*. The same holds good as to salvation. Salvation from the power of Satan through the world, is not possible apart from the presence of the Holy Spirit here at the present time. The presence of the Holy Spirit here of necessity involves the church for He is not here apart from a vessel. But all this is instruction for the believer.
I trust the foregoing may be satisfactory to you, otherwise I shall be glad to hear from you again.
With love in the Lord, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
June 10th, 1907.
Beloved Brother, -- I could not make any alteration in the text after I heard from Mr. Henderson as the address was already printed. But on reading it over, I did not see anything needing to be changed, only I think the note added makes the point clearer. I think there is often a want of simplicity in reading Scripture; for myself, in dwelling upon the Lord's utterances I always endeavour to listen *to Him*, as it were, so
{62}
as to find out what He intended to convey always remembering that "the commandment" is exceedingly broad. I find that it is preventive from the tendency to rest in fixed interpretations. Reading @Luke 11 and @John 4 in this way it is utterly impossible for me to limit the bearing of the teaching in these passages to the period which preceded the coming of the Spirit. Even if one did ask for the Spirit at that time, the Gift would not be received *then*, as He was not yet given. No individual could receive the Spirit until after Pentecost, and it is individual prayer that is in view in the passages mentioned. The fact is that when the light of God enters into a man's heart it begets confidence in God and hence the *spirit of prayer is there*. This constitutes a man *morally* qualified to receive the divine Gift. You feel that it would not be suited that the Spirit should come into a person unless His presence were appreciated. But this in no way conflicts with God's sovereignty, that He gives the Spirit sovereignly. Whatever He may do for us we may say that He does it sovereignly, yet He does many things in answer to prayer. "How shall He not with Him give us all things?"
It is remarkable that although God had promised the Spirit the Lord speaks of begging the Father for Him for the disciples. Then in @Acts 8 the Spirit came on the Samaritans, of course sovereignly, yet not until the *apostles had prayed* that they might receive Him. The believer (characteristically) has the Spirit, but no one can prove from Scripture that he receives Him instantly on believing in Christ. The contrary can easily be shown. The Samaritans had believed for some time before they got the Spirit; then on the other hand He fell on Cornelius and his company before they made any profession of faith.
I am not favourably impressed with ------¬s remarks, for he does not seem to attach sufficient importance to Scripture. He speaks of @Luke 11 as the only ground for my statement. One scripture should be enough for us. But Luke 11 is not the only ground as I have shown. He says, 'I find from Scripture that the Spirit is the gift of the Father and Son to the believer, and not dependent on His being asked for'. I would not make anything that God has for man dependent on being asked for, for that would give prayer rather a meritorious character; divine blessings are available through Christ, and they are presented in the gospel as free to all. This is God's side. But God looks for a subjective response in man, and this is expressed in prayer. Hence if the Scripture (or more strictly
{63}
the Lord's own words) teach that the Spirit is given in answer to prayer, why should He not be prayed for? There should be no difficulty on the point of uniformity as the Scriptures do not present uniformity in the way the Spirit was received. See @Acts 8 and 10, as I have mentioned.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 15th, 1907.
Beloved Brother, -- I quite go with your remarks as to Luke's gospel. Luke presents Christ as here on the *part of God*, and in all that He does and says, He makes it evident that God had intervened for man's good. At the end of chapter 10 and in chapter 11 He is seen as Teacher -- the disciples taking the place as learners. In His instruction as to prayer He shows that the greatest possible gift, the Holy Spirit, is obtained through it. But it is the *Father* who is of, or in, heaven, who gives this gift. The gospel brings the light of God to man's soul, and the effect of this is that man has confidence in God which is expressed in prayer. It is the attitude the soul takes before God, and God's answer is the gift of the Spirit. What I have observed is, that there is a tendency to restrict God -- that He gives the Spirit only in a prescribed way. But there is no prescribed way. The scripture shows that He gives the Spirit in answer to prayer, and also that He gives Him sovereignly to believers to seal them as His property. I feel that it is of great advantage that saints should be exercised in regard to prayer. Divine things are too lightly valued and hence they are not possessed. When we value a divine gift we ask for it, and Luke 11 would encourage us to keep on asking till we get it. Jacob represents those who appreciate the divine blessing: "I will not let thee go, except thou bless me" (@Genesis 32: 26). Christ recovered everything in principle through death and resurrection, but it is evident that there could be no subjective recovery unless the Lord can give the Spirit to man. God obtains the response which He seeks from man in virtue of man having received the Spirit from Christ. Our Head is a life-giving Spirit.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
{64}
Extract from "The Course of the Testimony", New York, 1908
To return to the responsibility resting upon us now. God in recent times raised up men who recovered, as it were, the ark of the testimony. This was at the cost of much exercise and conflict. What they recovered they handed down to those following. These in their turn have had sorrow and conflict in seeking to preserve it, and so it has come from faithful hands to us. What are we going to do with it? Are we going to dance before it with joy, like David, and enshrine it in our affections? Shall we defend it, like Stephen, at the cost of our lives? These are weighty questions for the saints of God at the present time. The maintenance of the truth calls for constant self-judgment and self-surrender. Thus only can we hope to pass on what we have received to a generation following, if it please God that there should be one. In the absence of these we shall either sell the truth for worldly advantage, or corrupt it in the effort to gain positions of prominence in the church, as some were doing at Corinth. *The recent attack¦ of the enemy was to corrupt the saints by the introduction of human principles in the ordering of the house of God*. The Lord has graciously given deliverance, but we may be assured that Satan will set another snare for us. The occasion calls for men of God. Let it be remembered that to be a man of God is a question of faithfulness, and not gift, and so it is within the reach of all. <br>J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 23rd, 1909
My Dear Brother, -- Yours of the 7th inst. with paper by W. M------ enclosed came in due time and I proceed at once to answer your enquiry as to the latter.
What I would say at the outset is, I am unable to find a single one of the eight quotations or statements given by M------ in any paper for which I am responsible, and indeed, I am certain that I have not given utterance to them as they stand in that paper.
But before dealing with it in detail, I will mention a fact
¦Glanton
{65}
as to M------ which will enable you to judge as to the moral value of this paper, or indeed as to anything which the author may say as to the so-called American doctrines. He and J.B. met me here in the presence of several brethren and we went over the different points which were questioned and after two protracted meetings, M------ expressed himself as thoroughly satisfied with my explanations, etc., and asked my forgiveness for hard thoughts which he said he had harboured against me. The good relations thus established, were strengthened by his co-operation in the revision of the notes of the Chicago meetings (which at that time were the subject of much discussion). Mr. M------ parted with me under these conditions, and I have not seen him since, nor have I had any communication from him. Now he says, he used the compilation in America as his reason for refusing the doctrine; he never brought it before me, although at the time he was living within two blocks of my home. In other words he expressed himself as satisfied that I held nothing wrong and subsequently made the compilation which involved me (and indeed others also) in sin against Christ and yet never approached me as to it.
Had he retracted his former expressions of confidence, there would, at least, be some consistency in his course.
Now as to the statements in this paper, even if they were accurate quotations, it would be utterly unfair to present them in this way. Everyone knows that almost any writer can be made to say the very opposite of what he intended to express, by subjecting his writings to this kind of treatment. Even the Scriptures afford an example of this, e.g., the epistle to the Romans compared with the epistle of James. But, as I said, the statements are not to be found in any American production that I know of.
*As to No. 1*: 'The gospel is an explanation of what is down here'.
I find in notes of meetings at Woodstock (page 18), 'It is remarkable that the first gospel address took the form of an explanation of what was down here. I refer to @Acts 2 ... and the great theme of the apostles was that these wonderful things had come to pass through the humble Nazarene, whom the Jews had crucified, but whom God had raised up and exalted to His right hand'. A similar statement from Mr. Pellatt appears in the first reading of the Chicago notes (page 1). This statement was actually revised by Mr. M------ and was
{66}
published as he left it. It was no question of giving a definition of the gospel in either case, but of calling attention to an undeniable fact which @Acts 2 presents.
*No. 2*. 'Until the house of God was here in the Spirit there was nothing to preach about'.
I have remarked that there was no preaching after the Lord ascended until the Holy Spirit came and the church was formed. In connection with Christ's presence here there was preaching, but after He left there was no power for man's deliverance until the Holy Spirit came. This is undeniable. At meetings in Chicago three years ago it was remarked in this connection that Christ, His redemption work, His exaltation, etc., could be preached, but until the Holy Spirit came there was no power on earth to act in man's behalf and hence no preaching until He came.
*No. 3*. 'For all who have accepted the Spirit since the day of Pentecost, the believer is the source of supply'. This is not true. What has been said is, that those who have received the Holy Spirit since Pentecost have received Him as already here in the church. There has been no fresh pouring out of the Spirit.
*No 4*. 'To say that spiritual blessings are in Christ to the exclusion of the church is mischievous'. This is also false as it stands. In some notes withdrawn three years ago, improperly revised, there was a remark, that to press *salvation* as in Christ to the exclusion of the church was mischievous.
*No. 5*. 'Salvation is found in the church and nowhere else'. If you will kindly refer to 'Notes on Hebrews' you will see what I have said as to this point. It was a question of *where* salvation was *found practically* by the believer. It is in Christ, but realised practically in the sphere of the Spirit.
*No. 6*. 'God's intervention is in the church'. This is almost an accurate quotation, but it is only part of the sentence, the remaining part is: 'the Spirit is here in the saints'. In the passage immediately preceding, I had been saying that divine blessings had been brought to pass by Christ and this was announced by the apostles. Then I sought to show, that the things preached were brought palpably near to man by the power of the Spirit in the church (Woodstock Notes, pages 18 and 19).
*No. 7*. 'Christ is beyond the reach of anyone except in the church'. This is absolutely false as it stands. In Notes withdrawn
{67}
drawn three years ago (referred to above) I said something as to Christ being beyond our reach literally or corporeally (contrasting His position when on earth with His present one) but that association with Him in a spiritual way could be known in the assembly. I had no thought of denying that the Lord could be reached *by faith* in an individual way.
*No. 8*. 'The promises of God are established in the church'. This is utterly false as presented in this absolute way. The promises of God are established in Christ -- they are Yea and Amen in Him. But there is a testimony to them all practically in the church. The apostle says "Unto the glory of God by us".
It is sorrowful work to be compelled to show that one whom I have had cause to value in the past is guilty of untruthfulness, and what must we think of the cause which requires such miserable misrepresentation of others to support it.
I am thankful to say that outside a very few in this district, almost all the brethren in this country and Canada are standing firm, also the West Indies,
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 30th, 1909.
Mr. R. S. Sinclair.
My Dear Mr. Sinclair, -- I have been wishing for an opportunity all the week to acknowledge yours of the 23rd inst., which I duly received.
Some time ago the remarks made at the London reading regarding @1 Corinthians 3 had been mentioned to me by Mr. Bradbury. I am not satisfied that the interpretation of verse 12 is correct, although I do not like to be a critic of what is otherwise so helpful. Had I lived at Corinth when the letter of the apostle arrived, I think I should have had great difficulty in apprehending that he alluded to what was worthless by using the figures (for such they are) of gold, silver, precious stones; and in this I am not considering the sense in which they are employed throughout Scripture. But, taking the scriptural use of them into account, my difficulty would be all the greater. A series of figures are used in the chapter among them "building;" and it is hard to admit that gold could not be used in a building, or that, if used, it would not stand fire. It is true
{68}
that Babylon is decked with gold and precious stones; but the question is as to whether even in this case, these things do not represent *in themselves* what is of God. I believe they do -- also the purple and scarlet. They were seen in the tabernacle. There are things which in themselves are of God, such as royalty government, etc., which, for the moment, are outwardly in the hands of wicked persons. They belong rightly to Christ. Babylon was simply 'gilded' with gold and precious stones; whereas the heavenly city *was* gold, and the building or structure of its wall jasper. It seems to me, this would correspond with @1 Corinthians 3, "The fire shall try every man's work of what *sort* it is". "Sort" directs the mind to verse 12, where the material or work is sorted, or classified; and then comes verse 14, which corresponds with the first three kinds or sorts; and verse 15 would agree with the last three.
As to the elders praying, the remarks made are, in measure, supported in @Revelation 5, but then the "saints" whose prayers are referred to would not be those in the church; therefore it is hard to make the principle apply at the present time, seeing there are no saints on earth now save those who form the church. Still it is true, I am sure, that those who are in the position of elders carry in their *hearts* (this would more answer to the bowls) before God the needs and prayers of the saints. But it has to be noted that the living creatures also have bowls, so that the thought is not confined to the saints viewed as elders. Moreover, what is said is that they *have* the golden bowls -- nothing is mentioned as to the use made of them. Besides, they are vials or bowls, not censers; and the golden altar is not in view as in @chapter 8: 2 - 5. Here we have what is more official -- Christ is seen as Priest giving effect to the prayers of saints on the golden altar.
As to the sanctuary, I do not apprehend any difference for us between it and the holiest; but in the Old Testament the former includes the holy place and the holiest of all. The word is generally used of the Temple as a place set apart as God's dwelling. The *Father's* sphere of things, it seems to me, refers rather to Canaan than to the sanctuary. Of course, the Father's dwelling is a sanctified place, but I would connect the sanctuary with *God;* and it is in contrast to a scene of defilement outside. It is a place where we get light rather than a place where affection involved in relationship is enjoyed.
{69}
I have just returned from the meeting at Duane Street. We had a profitable time on @Genesis 28. The interest this season is greater than heretofore. Indeed, the interest lately in all our meetings has been very decided.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
August 25th, 1909.
Mr. P. R. Morford.
My Dear Brother, -- Thanks for yours of the 10th inst.
Since your letter arrived *Mutual Comfort* for September has come, and I have looked at your article 'In the Midst' as you requested. Probably you will anticipate that I have difficulty in going with some of the things said. I am unable to see that there is any scripture for saying that the Lord's presence in the midst of His own refers to them in any way but as convened. Certainly you do not cite any. As far as I know, each passage that contains the thought contemplates the saints as gathered together. According to my understanding, the words "in the midst" do not admit of anything else. Besides, to say that the Lord is in the midst of the saints generally in a continuous way destroys the moral force of @Matthew 18: 20, and @John 14: 23.
You speak rightly of @John 20 being pattern; but what part of the 'pattern' contemplates the Lord in the midst of His people not convened? On the first day mentioned they were together, and Jesus *came* and stood in the midst; then eight days afterwards they were together and Jesus *came again* and stood in the midst (verse 27). If there is pattern here it is pattern of Jesus in the midst *only* when the saints were gathered together. Had the Lord been "in the midst" during the six days that intervened how could it be said that He *came* in on the second first day of the week mentioned? No doubt Thomas may be regarded as representing the Jewish remnant, but the fact remains that the Lord came *twice* to the same company; and on each time it was when they were gathered together. I fail, therefore, to see how you can say that 'on His side it is not occasional nor recurrent, but continuous'. As to @John 14, the Spirit was to come and abide "forever", but the Lord did not indicate this of Himself. I take "I am coming to you" to be characteristic rather than as referring
{70}
exclusively to the now historic fact recorded in chapter 20. We may always speak of the British Parliament, but the members do not really form a parliament unless as convened according to the law of the land. Certain legal requirements must be conformed to before members of parliament can be regarded as a body qualified to enact laws. I refer to this because it seems to me that to make the Lord "in the midst" general and continuous obscures the great truth of the assembly in function. It can only be viewed thus when convened, having the Lord in the midst. But for this there are certain requirements, for it is evident that a given company do not have the Lord in the midst simply because they are believers any more than any number of members of parliament met together (perhaps in rebellion) could secure the King's favour, or be regarded as parliament, just because they were elected members.
This leads to the question of state, and I am altogether unable to follow you when you separate, as you do on page 226, between 'divinely formed state in the Spirit and practical state', making out (as I understand you) that the former by itself secures the Lord in the midst. I quite see that we have to distinguish between the work of God in us and our keeping ourselves from defilement -- cleansing ourselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit -- but I would not intimate that the Lord could be in the midst where the latter was not maintained (compare @2 Corinthians 6: 14 - 18).
I have written thus freely, as you asked for my opinion as to the article; and I know that you are not averse to frank criticism.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 20th, 1909.
Mr. P. R. Morford.
My Dear Brother, -- Yours of the 8th inst. was read with very great interest, and I thank you for it. I am writing Mrs. M. so I shall confine myself to your remarks as to the difficulties I expressed regarding your article 'In the Midst'.
I have thought of the matter a good deal since I wrote, and I am quite unable to see that you have Scripture for saying that the Lord is in the midst *continuously;* indeed I feel assured
{71}
that in saying this, you are going beyond Scripture. Of course, the Lord is always *with* His people (that is, those who are walking in the truth and set for His interests), but this is another matter. He is with us as in service, individually or otherwise, or as seeking to help each other in readings and the like; and then He is *in* the assembly viewed as His body; and besides, as a divine Person, He dwells, by the Spirit, in the habitation of God here on earth -- but in all this we have not the thought of "in the midst", as presented in @John 20. In this chapter it is a question of the out-of-the-world, heavenly position of the assembly, as risen with Christ, dignified by the presence of the Lord in the midst. To my mind, this is what is obscured by the article in question; and your further remarks, and those of D.L.H., which you quote, only confirm me that this is the tendency of the line of thought presented.
John's line should be kept distinct, if we are to maintain the *privilege* side; Matthew has the maintenance of the testimony in view, and the structure, as that in which it is maintained, is set before us. In @Matthew 16: 18 the Lord is not said to be in the midst, as you say, but "the gates of hell shall not prevail against *it*". The invulnerability of the structure as built by Him is before us, rather than a company with Him in the midst. In chapter 18 the smallest number, when *gathered together*, have Him in the midst. As I said before, if we say He is in the midst all the time, the force of the latter scripture is lost entirely. But here, as I apprehend, it is not privilege exactly, but we are assured of the Lord's presence in the way of support as engaged with His interests. And the Lord's word at the close of the gospel is on the same line -- He is with us always. This, of course, has a *general* application. In @John 20 we have Christ's brethren, and into the midst of these, as convened, He comes. This is unique, and shows the great end in view in John.
The fact is that I am altogether at a loss to see how the Lord could be said to be in the midst, as presented in this chapter, when the saints are separated, and following their individual vocations. To say that He is, to my mind, is confusing, and indeed, meaningless. But to look for the Lord to come into the midst of His people as gathered together, is a very proper and holy expectation.
As to state, I quite see, as I said in my last letter, that we have to distinguish between the work of the Spirit in the
{72}
believer and his practical ways, or walk. My difficulty is that you connect "in the midst;" with the former *by itself*. According to John's first epistle the two things are correlative. But then, Scripture also contemplates that a Christian, although a subject of God's work may turn aside; the work of the Spirit would remain (for what God does is done forever), but the man's practical ways would not correspond. Now according to your article "in the midst" would be true for this man although the practical state was wrong. It may be that I misunderstand you, but this is all I can make out of your remarks in this connection. And I feel therefore, that there is confusion; and besides, Open Brethren and independents generally would consider their position confirmed by the article. I think the distinction made in 1889 - 90 was between the believer's state viewed as in Christ and his 'mixed condition', as in the body, here on earth; e.g. @2 Corinthians 12. Practical holiness was not so much in question. The most spiritual cannot avoid the mixed condition while in the body.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 22nd, 1909.
Mr. P. R. Morford.
My Dear Brother, -- Yours of the 9th with enclosure -- "In the Midst, No. 2" -- has just come. I cannot say that it (No. 2) helps me at all, or removes the fears I expressed as to the ultimate result of the article. Indeed I shall be sorry to see it in *Mutual Comfort*, for it only forces home more fully a thought that I am assured is not founded in Scripture.
Many details commend themselves to me, but the bottom idea in the paper, that the Lord is in the midst of the saints whether convened or not, is not scriptural, I believe. Nor can I see anything in @John 20 but what is strictly concrete. And I do not understand how the Lord could be in the midst of His people and they (I mean, at least some in the company) not know it; I say this because the Lord is known *in us* now in a spiritual way, and not outside of us, so to speak, as in @John 20 and @Luke 24. It is because of this that good spiritual state is so essential. In @Revelation 2 He is in the midst of *the churches*, but as judging them; in the address to Laodicea He speaks of Himself as outside. Your remarks as to the eighth day in
{73}
@John 20 I agree with in the main; it is not clear, however, that the *company* into the midst of which the Lord came represents the Jewish remnant. Thomas clearly does. His attention *alone* is called to the Lord's hands and side. It was historically 'church gathering'.
Your remarks on Hebrews I cannot follow quite. @Chapter 2: 12 is a quotation, and it is not introduced to show church privilege, but as showing the humanity of our Lord. Then chapter 8 does not support your thought for it sets forth the Lord on the right hand of the throne in heaven, and not in the midst of His own here on earth. The former is a wider thought. The bearing of Hebrews goes beyond the assembly. The teaching of the epistle in no way proves that the word "assembly" in chapter 2 does not necessarily mean a company of people gathered together.
To make the Lord in the midst answer to the Shekinah will not do either. The Shekinah answers rather to the presence of *God* in the church. This refers to Pentecost, and, of course, is continuous. The Lord is a divine Person, but in the midst of the assembly, as in @Hebrews 2 for instance, He is viewed as Man, on our side.
In conclusion I would say that I think it would be well for you to consider as to *how* the Lord appears in the midst *now*. Although @John 20 is pattern, yet the mode of the Lord's appearance now is not as it was then. Then He appeared miraculously, and as I said, outside of, or separate from the disciples; their state could not hinder Him. Now His presence is entirely spiritual; He is known to our affections and not to our natural eyes. Hence the need for a state formed by the Spirit. How He can be said to be in our midst, leading our praises, etc., when we are separate from each other -- perhaps engaged in toil or conflict -- is entirely beyond me.
Affectionately yours in the Lord,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 10th, 1909.
Beloved Brother, -- Yours of October 6th was duly received, and I was glad to get it. It has remained unanswered longer than I anticipated, but this is for want of time. I quite go
{74}
with your remarks as to @John 14, etc. That section necessarily contemplates the Lord's death, resurrection *and ascension*. It is of great importance to note that ascension is involved. As ascended to the Father He sends the Spirit, and He speaks of coming to the disciples Himself *after* speaking of the coming of the Spirit (verses 16, 17). It is clear from this that chapter 20 is not the fulfilment of verse 18. Chapters 13 and 14 contemplate the assembly here in the *absence of Christ* and the latter sets forth resources which should be available; of course, the existence of the assembly as inaugurated at Pentecost (of which @John 20 is pattern) is supposed. I do not think the presence of the Spirit changes the orphan state. After speaking of the coming of the Holy Spirit, the Lord says, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you". You would not like to detract from the blessedness of the presence of the Comforter, but still we have to pay attention to the wording of Scripture. The Spirit is truly a Comforter, but He produces affection for Christ in our hearts, so that we look for the Lord to come, feeling His absence. "I am coming to you" sets forth the great privilege vouchsafed to us pending His appearing.
As to the "Shekinah", I would say that it refers to the presence of *God* here by the Spirit.
As to @John 14: 21 - 23, I believe the Lord there has the breakdown in view, and therefore His words have special reference to our own times. Faithfulness secures for the individual the privilege enjoyed by the whole company at the outset. *Where* this favour is enjoyed is a question. "To him" and "with him" (verse 23) refer, I daresay, to his location ecclesiastically, so to speak. I think a careful comparison of 2 Timothy helps as to the bearing of the passage, "Open the door" (@Revelation 3: 20) helps. This involves that the individual accords to the Lord His place. "He with me" involves the church. On the whole, I feel that @John 14: 23 contemplates, in principle at least, the assembly.
Referring to @John 13, I think the point in it is the *example* set by the Lord. He would be away, and saints should serve each other in His absence as He had served them when present. The chapter shows what the disciples should be to each other in His absence -- hence the new commandment. Chapter 14 is what He would be for them on high. I am unable to see that the Lord's supper is intended for feet washing, for the latter,
{75}
as I say, is, I believe, *our* service now; although the Lord does it.
@John 6, as you say, refers to the individual -- what he must eat so as to live; in chapter 14 the company lives because Christ lives. This involves association with Him in resurrection.
In speaking of the regulation for the tabernacle not extending beyond the brazen serpent, I had in mind the law given at Sinai. This had man in the flesh in view, and he was terminated, typically, in the brazen serpent. Then we get another generation (typically, the people of purpose), and to them *another law* is given; @Deuteronomy 1.
In saying that the world to come will be testimony (Toronto notes) I think I was right. It will not be moral, as it is now, of course, but actual display; but in it God will "show" (this means testimony -- in that day the faithful and true *Witness* shall be seen) every thought of His established in Christ.
*Remembrance* is of One who is absent, not of One who is present. The word is "call to mind;" this would have no force if the Lord were present.
It will not do to distinguish the Supper from the breaking of bread. They are identical. A person who participates in the breaking of bread participates in the Supper. The Supper does not refer to heavenly privilege (Canaan) but to the wilderness position. It is truly a supper in a spiritual sense, but outwardly it is a testimony now. "As often as ye eat ... ye do *show* the Lord's death till He come". The spiritual thought cannot be separated from the symbols.
To say that the Lord is at the head of the table is confusion. If He was there *He* would break the bread, as He did when He instituted the Supper; but having broken it He said to the disciples, "This is for a remembrance of me". Hence the apostle says, "The cup which *we* bless ... the bread which *we* break".
To say that the assembly is neither in heaven nor earth is simply untrue and leads to mysticism. "The assembly of God which is in *Corinth*". Corinth was somewhere on the earth. It is true that by the Spirit we may be enabled to abstract ourselves from our terrestrial condition, and thus enjoy partnership with Christ as risen with Him. This is our great privilege. The fact remains that the assembly is regarded in Scripture as on earth till the Lord comes. It is well to press
{76}
the spiritual and heavenly side of the assembly, but we must remember that it is composed of persons (it is not abstract) who are actually here on earth. Besides, we should not make statements which contradict Scripture.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 6th, 1909.
Mr. J. Henderson.
My Dear Mr. Henderson, -- Copies of J.S.A.¬s letters have just come and, as you requested, I send a line as to them. F.L. wishes them back, so no doubt he will return them to you.
I like the tone of the letters, and I am thankful to see a desire to keep the things of God in their scriptural setting. In saying, 'I do not agree with the old thought ... that at a given moment on the Lord's day morning, the hour varying immensely at different places, the Lord comes in a spiritual way into the different companies and remains there', etc. I wish Mr. A. had made it clear that he believes the Lord does come to His people as gathered. From the tenor of his letter, I believe he holds this. If he does not he must think with P.R.M. that the Lord is in the midst continuously. If the Lord is in the midst whether the saints are convened or not, of course there can be no *coming in and leaving*. My attention has been called to an alleged remark of J.N.D. that we ought to know when the Lord comes into our midst and when He goes out -- Readings in Crieff, 1889. This was reassuring to my own soul as confirming my understanding of @John 14 and 20.
It cannot be denied that He promised to come to the disciples (@John 14: 18); and there is nothing in the passage that indicates that He meant to come once for all. The *Spirit* should abide with them for ever. Then we have His manifestation to one who kept His commandments, and finally, the Father and He *coming*, and abiding with one who kept His word. It is all one instruction, and by comparing it with other scriptures, we may trace the history of the church in it. That is, His coming (verse 18) to the disciples was normal -- things were in every way according to His mind, as we see in the Acts; subsequently the manifesting and coming are made conditional
{77}
-- there would be defection and unfaithfulness, but to the faithful ones would be vouchsafed the privileges enjoyed when things were in order at the beginning.
@John 20 cannot be the fulfilment of all this. It is clear to me that in @John 14 the Lord is setting forth the resources which the saints should have during His absence, and not simply the inauguration of the assembly on earth as in chapter 20. In the former the Lord is thinking of His people as left here in His absence: He prays the Father for another Comforter (this loses its force if He contemplated being in the midst permanently Himself); then He would come Himself to them, etc.
In the latter (chapter 20) the dignity of His Person is in view; also the dignity of the assembly as formed of His brethren. His coming into the midst here is not *after* the coming of the Spirit as in chapter 14. And He does not ask the Father for the Spirit -- He gives it.
Here a question arises as to *where* the Lord comes from when He comes to us (@John 14). It is clear that He comes from the Father, or heaven. The situation is, that He should be away from the saints; but He would not leave them orphans, He would be coming to them. It is characteristic rather than specific. I believe it is of great importance to see that @John 14: 15 is subsequent to Pentecost. Verse 18 I would connect with chapter 20 to show what His coming involves; but then the latter chapter is entirely unique as setting forth the inauguration of the assembly.
As to Colossians, I do not apprehend that "Christ in you" is the same as Christ being in the midst of the assembly. Mr. A. evidently does not either. I think it is that He is in our affections, as we are in His (see @John 14: 20). In this sense the Ark has a place here. In the types the Ark is distinct from the Shekinah. In both the Tabernacle and the Temple the Ark is seen in its place before the glory enters.
As to @Hebrews 2, I am unable to see that there is any ground for saying that the Lord's position in the midst of the assembly is continuous; indeed I am confident that it is not. We must leave room for the divine side. As singing He is on *our* side; but He is known also in the assembly as on *God's* side. "I will declare thy name unto my brethren". One would like to get nearer to Him in the assembly so as to know these things *practically*. The assembly is composed of persons (it is
{78}
not abstract), and the Lord is known in it as a living Person. I do not see that we are warranted to speak of things in an abstract way which in Scripture are presented concretely.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
December 10th, 1909.
Beloved Brother, -- For a good while I felt that the custom with some to speak of the assembly in an abstract way was not right. It is utterly meaningless to me to hear of the Lord being in the midst of something abstract. It seems as if there was in the mind the idea of an abstract existence of the assembly -- as if it did not refer to actual living persons moving here on earth. It is true that in the power of the Spirit we have to abstract *ourselves* so as to realise fully companionship with Christ in this assembly, but this is another matter; we still remain living persons although withdrawn in our spirits from the world and nature. I do not see any warrant for speaking of things as abstract which in Scripture are presented only as concrete. It would be much more seemly to humbly own the absence of the conditions which render the concrete possible. But the concrete *is* possible in measure, if we return to the conditions in which it was seen originally. Hence I believe @John 20 presents a pattern of what may be enjoyed now in some measure, even by a very small company. As to the second meeting in John 20 I quite see the allusion to the Jewish remnant, but it would be a mistake to *limit* the passage to this. "Thy commandment is exceeding broad", that is, other thoughts (besides a given one) appear in such a passage as this. As an actual fact the Lord came *twice* to the *same* company inside of eight days.
As to @Hebrews 2: 12 I do not know of anything to indicate that it does not refer only to the Lord's people as convened.
Affectionately yours in Christ.
James Taylor.
<hr>
December 27th, 1909.
Beloved Brother, -- I have no difficulty with the thought (I should hold it firmly) that the assembly is characterised by the Lord's presence in the *midst*, understanding it to mean that
{79}
the Lord is known in the midst of His own when (under the normal conditions) they are gathered together. I hold also, I need not say, that He is with us *always*, according to Matthew. I am unable to go further than this for the reason that Scripture does not, as far as I understand it. I feel that to speak of His *abiding* presence in the midst of the church whether convened or not, is a thought added (unintentionally, of course) to the passages which treat of the subject.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
January 5th, 1910.
Beloved Brother, -- I fully admit that we have to view the assembly in an abstract way in certain respects, but I do not think it is right to view as abstract what Scripture views only in a concrete way. Such a practice is not only going beyond Scripture but is damaging to souls, as it leads to an unreal state ... . As to the Lord's coming to the saints, He is, as it were, the Hind of the morning (@Psalm 22) and in this sovereign agility He visits when He pleases. His visits are the necessities of affection, so to say, but at the same time they are always of a sovereign character. @Psalm 22 contemplates the wide field of His activity, and @John 20 and 21 undoubtedly correspond. It is important, however, to remember that Scripture is ever wide in its meaning, so that while the second coming to the company mentioned in John 20 has reference to the Jewish remnant, it cannot be restricted to this. Historically it was *another* visit of the Lord to His people.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
January 20th, 1910.
Mr. J. Henderson.
Beloved Brother, -- Yours of January 4th came this week. I am very glad to have the opportunity of seeing D.L.H.¬s remarks on my letter of December 6th to you, and also your letter to Mr. H. as to them.
I am sorry that Mr. H. felt it necessary to write so strongly, and, of course, I am concerned lest I am responsible for this
{80}
in any way. My earnest desire has been that anything said or written on the important and interesting subject that has been brought up should not go beyond brotherly interchange of thought. Kept within this limit nothing but good can come out of it; for I am sure we all desire light and help on the blessed truth of Christ's relation to the assembly. The Scriptures are in our hands, and we may count on the Holy Spirit throwing light on what must be of such infinite import to each of us.
By this time you will have my last letter, and I hope you will show it to Mr. H. so that he may be assured that I fully recognise that the assembly may be viewed in an abstract way. Had he this assurance earlier he would not be under the necessity of writing most of his paper; but I am sorry my letter to you was not clearer on this point. Scripture views it sometimes in an abstract way; for instance, the "pearl" and "treasure", and in many other connections, as D.L.H. and P.R.M. say; with this I have no difficulty -- indeed it is impossible to set forth the truth of the assembly *now* except we have the liberty of speaking of it thus. But when I speak of it thus I think of it as it was at the beginning, or as it shall be in the future -- that is, the concrete thing is in my mind all the time. It may be that my mind is not formed to take in abstract ideas, but I cannot conceive of a thing that is concrete (and the church cannot be other than concrete, as formed of living persons) in itself being viewed abstractly in any other way. In saying that 'I do not see that we are warranted to speak of things in an abstract way which in Scripture are presented concretely', I had @John 20 in my mind. But, taken by itself, the statement is clear enough, as you say, and I feel sure it expresses the truth. I was writing a brother, in answer to some inquiries, a few days after I wrote you and I used the same expression, only supplying the word 'only' before 'concretely' so as to guard against him thinking that I held that the church could not be viewed in an abstract way. As John 20 presents what was strictly concrete I am quite unable to see that it is a pattern of something abstract. If it had been said that we had to view the chapter in an abstract way *now* (because the concrete is not fully in evidence) so as to understand it fully, I could have accepted the thought; but this was not the way 'In the Midst' treated it.
In view of what I have, said you can understand how easily
{81}
I would concede that @Hebrews 2: 12 might be viewed in an abstract way, providing it be understood that the Lord had in His mind, in uttering these precious words, His being actually in the midst of the assembly of His brethren.
As to J.N.D. being 'pressed into service', I cited his alleged remark, considering that it was worthy of mention, being so direct in its bearing on the point, and more especially as evidently quoted by J.B.S. I am sure Mr. Higgins must have bowed at times to the judgment of such honoured servants. Of course, their statements are not Scripture, but they aid us greatly (and are intended of the Lord for this purpose) in the understanding of Scripture. I may say that I am continually exercised that I may get all the gain available from the ministry of those who have gone before. But at the same time, the Scriptures are the test of what is of God and the contrary.
I may as well quote from Readings in Crieff (1889) as the matter has been so referred to: Mr. Darby has said that we ought to know when the Lord comes into our midst and when He goes out. 'For my part, I often feel that I know when He comes in' (page 31). Mr. H. says, 'If J.N.D. did as J.B.S. reported I am convinced he never thought his remark would be resolved into a dogmatic pronouncement such as the one now made. I should understand him to refer to the apprehension of spiritual persons of the Lord's presence rather than of His actual coming and leaving'. Now there was no thought of resolving the statement into a 'dogmatic pronouncement'. My understanding of the subject has been for many years (indeed since I have apprehended anything of the truth) what it is now, and I do not recall having seen this remark of J.N.D.¬s till last November. But Mr. H.¬s understanding of the remark is very peculiar. J.N.D. says, in effect, that the Lord *comes* into our midst and *goes out;* Mr. H. says he understands him to refer to the apprehension of spiritual persons of the Lord's presence. In other words, J.N.D. speaks of the Lord doing something, and Mr. H. understands him to mean by this that spiritual persons do something -- i.e. they apprehend His presence! I am sorry Mr. H. has committed himself to such a mode of interpretation, for it is far below his ordinary level.
I feel that Mr. H. is fully justified in saying he would like to ask me for a scripture for the Lord 'leaving' the assembly. He notes, however, that I would give @John 14 as one for His 'coming'. In using the word 'leaving' I was alluding to
{82}
Mr. Darby's remark cited. I said, 'If the Lord is in the midst whether the saints are convened or not, of course there can be no *coming in or leaving*' -- that is, J.N.D.¬s remark is wrong. But if we consider the matter impartially I do not think we can deny that there is scripture for the Lord leaving, if we allow that there is scripture for His coming more often than once. What I firmly believe Scripture teaches is that the Lord, so to speak, holds Himself free, and comes to the assembly at His pleasure; but His coming shows His love for us, and thus His care. It is presented in @John 14 as one of the great re-sources we should count on. Mr. H. will be satisfied, I am sure, if I make this (His leaving) 'clear from scripture'. I confess I do not feel very happy in being called upon to prove the negative side of which the positive is so blessed. If a loved one announces that he is coming to see you, you are anxious to make sure that he is indeed coming, and every proof that he is is cherished -- his leaving will be left to take care of itself We are sure to feel it when it occurs. I think the Lord occupied His own with His coming, not with His leaving in @John 14: 18 - 21. But if it can be shown that the Lord *came* more than once to the *same* company of His own after His resurrection and ascension (for @John 20 contemplates the latter), I submit that it is 'made clear' from Scripture *that He must have left them in some way in order to come a second time*. @John 20: 18 and 36. I am not overlooking what Mr. H. says as to the dispensational teaching in this and the following chapter; I go with it fully, and enjoy it much. As I said in my last to you, the Lord is here "the hind of the morning" (@Psalm 22), and He is free in His divine agility to go anywhere, to visit all families or circles, in the vast domain into which He introduces the blessing of God. This is all most true, but then there are other great thoughts as well in the chapters. The commandment is exceeding broad. The fact is there undeniably that the Lord came to the *same* company on two consecutive first days of the week. Why are we not warranted in regarding this second visit as church privilege -- seeing that it was, historically, a visit to the assembly -- as well as pointing to the Jewish remnant in Thomas? I believe we are. Here Mr. Darby helps me again: he says (referring to this visit), 'The Lord here, by His actions, consecrates the first day of the week for His meeting together with His own, in spirit here below' (Synopsis, Volume 3, pp. 525, 526). Mr. H. says Thomas is the characteristic
{83}
member of this company: I do not think this is fair to the others; nor do the facts show that it is so. They had seen the Lord the week before and had been made glad. But there can be no doubt that Thomas sets forth what shall mark the remnant of Israel before the Lord reveals Himself to them.
I may add that I feel very deeply concerned that a brother like Mr. Higgins should say that my 'line of argument is a dangerous one', especially as it involves what I have always held on the subject, and have spoken of it in many ways and places for years past. I do not think he could have given full consideration to my remarks on @John 14, otherwise I do not see how he could say that 'J.T.¬s thought is as plain as can be that the Lord Jesus comes and leaves the little meetings ... and that this is the present and only fulfilment of @John 14 and 20'. In my letter to you I sought to show that chapter 14: 18 was normal -- 'things were in every way according to His mind, as we see in the Acts'. Then I said that subsequently the manifesting and coming were made conditional -- there would be defection and unfaithfulness, but to the faithful ones would be vouchsafed the privileges enjoyed when things were in order at the beginning. Surely there is plain discrimination here as to normal and abnormal conditions in the church, and this is in strict accord with the passage.
Then Mr. H. says he hopes I 'would hasten to repudiate that these specified meetings have the privilege of the Lord's blessed presence all to themselves'. I never understood that any company, even the whole church on earth, could have the Lord's presence *all to themselves*. The Father has a claim on His presence, and angels enjoy it in a measure, also other families. But although all share it, the Lord's presence is vouchsafed now to the very smallest companies of His own, who seek and are prepared for it in as real and blessed a manner as it was known in the church at the beginning. Note the Lord's words even as to an individual. "We (the Father and He) will *come* unto him and make our abode with him". I fully recognise with Mr. Higgins the danger of arrogating to ourselves what belongs only to the assembly as a whole, but we do ourselves great wrong if we allow this danger to deprive us of the privileges which the Lord has graciously promised to His own for a day such as ours. The more we enjoy them the less exposed we are to the threatened danger. In Laodicea the Lord was ready to go in to any one that would open to
{84}
Him. This shows that there is *movement on His part* in response to movement on our side. As far as I understand Mr. Higgins there is no movement on the Lord's side; He has taken up a position in the midst, and we move to Him; now, we do move to His side -- that shows *our* love; but then He moves *to us*, and this evidences His love. I am greatly interested in what you said as to the Song of Solomon. I love the thought of the Lord *coming* -- His is active love, not *stationary* love. I believe this is behind His word *coming* in every connection.
But I have made my letter very long.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
New York,
April 7th, 1910.
My Dear Brother, -- I am glad to have yours of October 8th. I think with you that @Hebrews 2: 10 - 12 is an advance on @Hebrews 10: 19 - 22. The tabernacle was really for the wilderness, it did not suggest a place of enjoyment. The holiest represents what we apprehend (by the Spirit, of course) with the *mind* rather than what we enjoy in the affections, which flow from relationship. @Hebrews 2: 10 - 12 involved the latter only. Christ's side is in view rather than ours. Hebrews 2 and @John 20 are, of course, on resurrection ground, but they go beyond this. Resurrection refers to *God's* power, His victory. It is the ground (righteousness accomplished) upon which God establishes the whole system which He purposes. There are many degrees of privilege in this system; the church has the greatest. We must be on our guard that we do not limit our privilege simply by resurrection ground. *Angels* announced the resurrection in the gospels, but the *Lord* announced our privileges, @John 20. These consist of relationship and position. We are sons of God, brethren of Christ, and our place is heaven.
As to the wilderness, I apprehend it (1) to set forth the progress of the believer from Egypt to Canaan. I connect Marah, @Numbers 21, Jordan, etc., with this, rather than the assembly as such. Then (2) I look upon the wilderness as the sphere in which God's testimony is set forth, that is, the world where Christ died. Vitally the assembly is formed in Canaan, but those formed are also viewed as in flesh and blood, and they
{85}
form God's assembly in the world. With this position the Supper stands connected, as Scripture presents it. We know Christ is out of death, and by faith we are out of it; but we are actually in a state (flesh and blood) to which resurrection does not refer, and we are actually in a scene to which resurrection does not refer; the scene of Christ's death and His absence now. There we remember Him; we remember Him as absent, but by a symbol which speaks of His death. To make my meaning clear, I would say again that when I say the Supper is celebrated in the wilderness, I mean that it is celebrated in the world viewed as the scene out of which Christ has gone ... where He is absent and where His rejection and death occurred, and that we celebrate it in the condition in which the Lord left us here (flesh and blood) and that it refers to us only in this condition. It is "till He come", when this condition will cease.
Our assembly privileges lie outside this condition, and to touch them now we have to pass over to Christ's side; but this involves spiritual power.
As to @John 6, the point is to apprehend the Lord *coming down* so as to be food for all; but He dies, and the flesh is truly food, and His blood truly drink. "He that eats ... has eternal life;" it is individual.
The Supper refers to Christ's love for us and ours for Him, but the more one is in @John 6, the more will he respond to the Supper. I hope my meaning is clear to you.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On board R.M.S. Mauretania.
July 5th, 1910.
Mr. J. S. Allen.
Dear Me. Allen, -- I had hoped to have replied to your letter before sailing, but time failed me. I am glad to have your views on the Supper.
During my visit to your side of the water, nothing has impressed me more than the great need at the present time of keeping to the way Scripture presents the truth, and of allowing it to have its full force and authority in the way in which it may set forth any subject. Therefore, as the Supper is not introduced in an epistle which views the saints as risen with Christ, I hesitate to accept that it is on this ground; on the
{86}
other hand, I am thankful to know that I can at *all* times account of myself as risen with Christ -- for it is a matter of *faith*, not actual. But I find that risen with Christ is connected in Scripture (@Colossians 2) with a spiritual state -- "quickened together" -- indeed it is only in the power of the latter that the former is of *practical* value. I think there is perfect wisdom in the way the truth is presented.
Your remark, 'There can, I think, be no doubt that it is on resurrection ground that one truly apprehends the Supper', I agree with, only I would connect the power of apprehension with a spiritual state rather than with a ground which faith takes. But then our apprehension is not the point, but rather, In what position does Scripture regard us when breaking bread? First, we are where Christ is not, for the Supper is, "till He comes;" it is during His absence, for it is a remembrance; the place of Christ's absence is not Canaan. Secondly, we are in a flesh and blood condition, and our eating the bread and drinking the cup is before the world and a testimony to it of our complete identification with the Christ it crucified -- ye do show the Lord's death till He come. Thirdly, the Supper is celebrated in the assembly viewed as recognised in *this world*, not as a new creation in Christ, in which latter view it is beyond the ken of the world. It is celebrated in the assembly as marked off from Jew and Gentile. There was the Jew, the Gentile, and the church of God. In other words, it is in the assembly as under man's eye, where divine order (involving the relative place of man and woman) is seen, and where all are publicly committed to the death of Christ. What may go on in our souls is another matter, and our spiritual states will vary, but Scripture contemplates all as partaking of the Supper.
I would not undervalue for a moment the spiritual state by which we are enabled to appreciate the Supper; this the Lord takes account of, and it will involve power to pass over to His side as He is brought to our minds by the breaking of bread. The latter (passing to His side) is entirely a spiritual action and is outside of the world and nature altogether. It belongs to Canaan. The Supper is the introduction to it.
As regards the breaking of bread, it is quite clear to me that this is distinct from the *communion;* that is, the former is what *Christ did*, and we are to do it also. "The Lord Jesus ... took bread, and having given thanks, broke it and said ... *this do*". Hence, "the bread which we break". Nothing can be plainer
{87}
than this, it seems to me. Our partaking or eating is another thought -- this is communion. In other words, *breaking* bread is one thing, and *eating* another, both necessary to the Supper. J.N.D.¬s remarks I do not well understand, but I judge he is dwelling on the communion side, evidently showing that this is distinct from the breaking of the loaf. But he does say the latter is 'absolutely necessary as a figure'. But we have to go by the Lord's words -- @Luke 22: 19; @1 Corinthians 11: 24.
I am glad you wrote me, and I do not think we differ very much on this point.
I must thank you again for all your kindness to me while in Liverpool. It is an advantage to me to have met the brethren in that district.
With love in Christ,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
August 13th, 1910.
Mr. J. S. Allen.
Dear Mr. Allen, -- I have to thank you for the two letters, and also for your 'Remarks' on the Supper. I had heard with regret of the dear Morfords¬ accident, but I am glad to find it was not so serious as was at first feared. I deeply regret dear Mrs. Raven's sorrow in the loss of her son. She has had sorrow upon sorrow, but the Lord's way is perfect. I trust she finds consolation in Him. As regards your paper, I am sorry to find such divergence of mind between us, and I note that Messrs. S.H. and D.L.H. share your views. I have weighed what you write and I cannot say that it helps me any or that I can alter anything I have said on the subject. As far as I understand you, you admit that the celebration of the Supper is in the wilderness, but as in 'the resurrection state'. That is, you agree with Mr. Darby on this point, quoting him approvingly. As I agree with him also, we are not far apart in this respect. As I said in my letter to you (and also to S.H.) I make full allowance for the spiritual state we may possess. Surely I am entitled to regard myself while at the Supper in the full light of what I am in Christ as the result of the death and resurrection. But we partake of the Supper, as
{88}
a matter of fact, in a place to which all this does not refer. My spiritual state and the light in which God takes account of me have reference to another scene altogether; but I remember Christ, as J.N.D. says, here 'in the wilderness'. But the Supper is more than a remembrance; it is communion in Christ's death. In this we judge and are separated from the idolatrous world outside. But in the breaking of bread the Lord is recalled to our minds, and as we accord Him His place, we are led into the assembly in its true character as risen with Him. As I said, my exercise is to have things as they are presented in Scripture. The subject raises the whole question of the difference between the wilderness and Canaan. The former has to be viewed in two ways. First, it is what the world is to the *believer* as justified by faith in Christ. Here he is tested, but God is with him and he carries out God's will, feeding on the manna. With this aspect Romans corresponds. Secondly, the wilderness is a scene in which God's people, viewed collectively, are placed by God, as called out from the world, in relation to His testimony. They are marked off as saints and they recognise the authority of the Lord Jesus -- whom the world crucified. The mind of God is known among them -- they are *His* temple -- they are God's assembly in contrast to Jew and Gentile; they are in the fellowship of the death of Christ; they are practically united -- one body; and divine order and intelligence is witnessed among them. This is 1 Corinthians and a comparison of this epistle with the early part of Numbers will show that the Spirit has made a special connection between these two sections of Scripture. It is in this connection the Supper stands in Scripture. Compare also the Acts. As I understand it, Scripture contemplates the assembly, as well as the individual believer, in the wilderness, but it has to be noted that the assembly convened is not the wilderness -- far from it, for there we escape wilderness conditions. But outwardly and as to actual fact, we are there, we come together in the scene of Christ's absence to partake of the Supper. And it has to be remembered that wilderness provision goes even over Jordan. The manna did not cease until the people ate of the old corn of the land. Christ as known in the wilderness is only replaced by Him as the heavenly Man in His own sphere. Canaan has also a double bearing, that is, it typifies a sphere of privilege, and of conflict. John's writings (his gospel and epistles), Colossians and Ephesians,
{89}
specially afford us the antitypes. These do not present the Supper -- God's work in the saints, eternal life, and God's counsels concerning Christ and the church are in view. Divine relationships -- our connection with them -- vitality -- affection, etc., are enlarged upon here. In a word it is not testimony in the wilderness (although this is involved) but what God has for His own pleasure and our eternal blessing. The church has to be taken account of according to what it is *inwardly* and *outwardly* -- the former has reference to the land, the latter to the wilderness. But the true power and bearing of the church's testimony in the wilderness depends upon what it is in its outward relationships. I believe the Supper is the link properly between the outward and the inward. I would further remark in this connection that the ground of the church is not simply resurrection -- resurrection falls short of the full position accorded to the church. For the proper ground of the assembly we have to go to Ephesians. Here she is not only risen with Christ, but seated in the heavenlies in Christ. It is as heavenly, she is the habitation of God here upon earth, and not simply as risen. I would not minimise the resurrection (God forbid!) it is the great testimony to God's power, and the platform upon which He accomplishes His counsels -- for this He must have man out of death; but the church's place is beyond it. The truth of the house of God is properly connected with Ephesus. I refer to this as a weighty fact, which, if we overlook, our testimony will be lower in principle than the divine standard. S.H.¬s remark as to an Israelite bringing an offering into the court of the tabernacle is a good one. The man entered into a system of things that had a heavenly character. Inside the enclosure the man would not be in the wilderness strictly, for there would be nothing adverse there (except the sand under his feet), *but the tabernacle was in the wilderness*. Taking the tabernacle as figurative of the assembly, this expresses my point of view exactly. As to the Corinthians, you will easily understand from what I have said, that I do not consider what you say -- to show that they are viewed on resurrection ground -- as conclusive. That they were gathered on the ground of Christ's death and resurrection, is, of course, true; but this is not saying *they* are regarded as risen. If the Spirit of God wished us to understand that He viewed them as risen, He would undoubtedly say so, as in Colossians and Ephesians. He does not touch resurrection in 1 Corinthians until chapter 15 (except
{90}
in chapter 6, where it is treated as in chapter 15) and there Christ only is said to be risen -- the saints¬ resurrection is future. The saints at Corinth were the assembly of God *there* -- they were a company of men and women in that city that had been separated from the world by the testimony of the gospel. They were marked off *there* as God's assembly. Whereas, as risen with Christ we are in an out-of-the-world order of things. As risen with Christ we are over Jordan clearly -- qualified to be His companions. As to the temple in Corinthians, I do not think it is alluded to as a fixed abode in contrast to the tabernacle but rather that it was "holy". This they were by the death of Christ and as possessing the Holy Spirit. The *tabernacle* was in principle what they were (compare @2 Corinthians 6: 16 where the temple is connected with God *walking*, also @Leviticus 26: 12 and @Exodus 29: 45). The *body* of the believer is a temple of the Holy Spirit, and *it* is not viewed as raised. The same remarks apply equally, in measure, to the "body" as viewed in 1 Corinthians. The Corinthian saints were Christ's body as having the Spirit. Corinthians treats the body as it is *now* -- not exactly in relation to divine purpose -- this latter is Ephesians. But it is clear that they are regarded in this respect as in their flesh and blood condition -- their *bodies* were members of Christ. God had raised up the Lord and will raise us up "from among the dead by His power", chapter 6. This does not show that they were viewed on resurrection ground (compare @Acts 9: 4, 5; @Acts 12: 1, 2). As to the Supper being out of the view of the world -- that the doors were shut according to the gospel history, and that you know of nothing in Corinthians to change this, I would say that chapter 14: 24 is a proof that there was a change. I think too, that @Acts 2: 42 - 47 shows that things were more or less public. You say the testimony seen in the 'sacraments is for God, and not for the world'. I am entirely at a loss to know how our eating the Supper is an announcement *to God* that Christ died, or that baptism is not a testimony to the world that Christ's claim over the believer is recognised by him. As to the act of breaking bread I have hardly anything to add to what I said in my previous letters. I have been unable to look up J.N.D.¬s paper to which you refer. It is likely that he was dealing with materialism -- that the element is changed by the action of the priest. At any rate, he says that the breaking of the bread is 'absolutely necessary as a figure'. However, as I said in my last, we have
{91}
to do with Scripture -- in this case, with the Lord's direct utterance "the Lord Jesus the same night ... took bread: And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take eat: this is my body, which is broken for you: *this do in remembrance of me"* (@1 Corinthians 11: 23, 24). He does not say 'this take', or 'this eat', but "this *do*". I would utterly refuse the idea that the person who breaks the loaf is acting in any special capacity -- he acts as one of the members and for all, but the Supper scene on the night of Christ's betrayal is recalled. We know from @Matthew 14 and other passages, that the Lord was accustomed to break the bread, and unquestionably if His disciples had to sit down to a meal in His absence, one of them would do the same. Paul broke the bread at Troas (@Acts 20). There would be no thought of assuming the Lord's place. It would be an *act of necessity* which some one has to perform, but it recalls Christ. The breaking was to render the bread in a condition to be eaten, but although a simple necessity for convenience, it had to be done, *and the Lord did it when here*, and so the action reminded the disciples of Him. @Luke 24 is of full legitimate importance as showing the import of the "breaking of the loaf". The words 'breaking of bread' or 'to break bread' are almost a formula for the Supper, and this shows how wide the thought was in the mind of the Spirit and of the early Christians. I note your remark -- 'It is a serious matter'. It is a serious matter in another sense to me, for the authority of the Lord's words is at stake. If the thing *has* to be done, and the Lord tells us to do what He did, surely no one assumes to take *His* place in breaking the loaf.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
September 15th, 1910.
*A Statement of Facts relating to the recent Case of Discipline in New York*
As we have heard that some brethren at a distance have been disturbed by the reports which are being circulated of the case of discipline which we have thought necessary to exercise in this city of late, it seems to us that a brief statement of the facts may be of service.
For nearly two years there has been a disturbed condition in
{92}
the meeting at Brooklyn, which began by a contentious spirit shown in the readings on the part of certain brothers. Early in last year it became so serious that the brethren felt something should be done to modify or stop it entirely. On certain occasions painful scenes occurred. Brethren came together and it was found that three brothers were almost entirely responsible for this, and they were admonished by all to avoid participating in the meetings in a contentious or controversial way. In a short time, however, they reverted to their old ways, and again sorrowful scenes ensued. The brethren again came together, and these brothers were admonished a second time to desist. At the second meeting a question arose as to what could be done further if these brothers persisted in a course which was throwing the saints into confusion, and it was pointed out that in the event of this a severer discipline would have to be inflicted. About this time one of the brothers left the city permanently, and he expressed great regret for the part he had taken in the meetings. One of the other brothers also expressed sorrow for his part, and did not subsequently participate in the meetings in any contentious spirit. The third brother, Mr. F. Murphy, was very refractory and remained away from the meetings for some six weeks; and when the brethren visited him he alleged that they were governed by clerical principles, and that it was wrong to admonish him: that those who did so were governed by a partisan spirit. The brethren however, hoped for the best, so allowed him to come back and break bread; but we feel now that fellowship should have been refused him then until he had judged his ways. The brethren, however, treated him as one under discipline, but this he resented throughout, and took every opportunity to disregard our consciences. He waxed so bold in this that a third meeting had to be called. This meeting resulted in a meagre admission by Mr. Murphy that he had been wrong, and he expressed some sorrow for offending the brethren. We were most grateful for this, as can be understood, as we had hoped that God had been working with him leading to repentance. It soon appeared, however, that this was not so, as he again began to assume a contentious attitude in the meetings, and the brethren generally in the three meetings were forced to the conclusion that if he continued we should have to refuse to walk with him so as to maintain the order and holiness due to God's house.
{93}
It may be said here that during all these sorrowful experiences Mr. Murphy was directly and indirectly supported by quite a few in the meeting (although there was general agreement to the admonitions); were it not for this, as can be understood he would not have continued such a course.
In the month of July two readings were greatly disturbed, and at the close of the second it was laid upon some of us that the brethren should be asked to meet again to face the difficulty. All agreed to the meeting, which was held at the close of that week. The three meetings were well represented on this occasion, and there was a full discussion of all the facts referring to the matter. It was clear that most present had judged Mr. Murphy's course to be lawless and so we thought well to ask all the saints (brothers and sisters) to come together and lay the matter before them in an orderly way. The ground of our judgment that Mr. Murphy was a lawless man was, that he had pursued a course in the meetings which caused disorder and threw the saints into confusion, and that he had refused to listen to the admonitions of the brethren to desist from this course. Besides, he had gathered a party around him.
When all the saints were gathered on the appointed evening, the history of the case was related to them, certain brethren stating their individual exercises and giving their reasons for refusing to longer walk with Mr. Murphy. Mr. Murphy gave a long address in his own defence, and one of his supporters read some papers objecting to what the brethren felt they were forced to resort to. Mr. Murphy also stated he would be present on the following Lord's day to break bread, those who judged his course to be evil could not go there as this would involve confusion, and God is not the author of confusion but of peace. Consequently we broke bread elsewhere, and Mr. Murphy and his supporters met in the room and continued to meet there for some weeks. The room has since been given up by them, and we meet there at present as usual. It was found that the other two meetings in the city with two-thirds of the meeting of Brooklyn were unanimous in their refusal to walk with Mr. Murphy in Christian fellowship. We might add that the meetings in the district are in sympathy with us in what we have done, and, as far as we know, all the meetings in the States and Canada, who know of the difficulty, accept our action as right.
{94}
We are deeply humbled that such a state of things should have existed among us, but we have had distinct help from the Lord in seeking to meet it.
Charles H. Butler.
Thomas Attridge.
Henry M. Bailey.
W. L. Perrin.
James Taylor.
<hr>
September 23rd, 1910.
Beloved Brother, -- As to sonship I think in Ephesians it is connected with God's purpose. We were predestinated to it ... but it has also reference to us here in this world where God's testimony and service are to be maintained. Matthew treats of it in this connection. Galatians is for *liberty* -- we are no longer servants but sons. F.E.R. had on his mind the proper sphere of sonship but I do not think he would object to a present application such as I have spoken of. At any rate there is no question as to its correctness.
Thinking of the assembly in an abstract way I contemplate it as in God's mind for future display, or according to what it was in the beginning. There is the past and future glory: I seek to walk in the light of both.
As to Ephesians I think the epistle contemplates a state in that assembly answering in measure at least to the light presented. We cannot predicate of people something that is not true of them actually; unless we speak *abstractly*, i.e., unless we view them in the light of God's purpose and power. We are then entitled to call things which be not as though they were. But manifestly it would be damaging to a soul to say to him 'You are quickened with Christ' *if he is not*, for quickening is subjective work.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
As regards the Lord's breathing ... no doubt it took place historically in @Acts 2.
{95}
On Board R.M.S. Baltic.
October 20th, 1910.
Mr. C. A. Coates.
Beloved Brother, -- Miss Elwood mentioned that you had made enquiry as to my view of @Hebrews 2: 12, and I think it well to send a line. It seems to me that to arrive at the truth we ought to seek to determine what the Lord had in His mind when He uttered these words. Did He take account of the assembly only in the light of God's purpose or did He also include in His mind her wilderness circumstances? My conviction is that the latter was not in the Lord's thought: that He contemplated the saints as gathered around Him, consequent on His death and resurrection, and so viewed outside of wilderness conditions. To apprehend the thing in a concrete way I think we have to go back to *original* conditions -- we have to do this indeed to rightly understand any church truth. And I would say that when the saints came together in assembly, the Lord came to them and this was realised. The Spirit does not record or give examples of the *inward* working of the assembly, viewed in this exalted position, after Pentecost. I think it is left to intelligent affection to find out. The scene after the Supper, when they sang a hymn, is the closest analogy, as to singing, but this was *before* death and resurrection. They were then on Jewish ground, afterwards the disciples would be regarded as His brethren before the Father -- now made known. But as to @Hebrews 2, it is well to remember that it is not the unfolding of church truth, but to show the humanity of our Lord; therefore it is not a question of *when* He sings, but that He sings in the midst of the church. It is a characteristic function, as also the declaring of the Father's name to His brethren. It seems clear that the primary thought of the church is that those who form it should be together and its distinctive privileges are thus enjoyed. This shall be true eternally -- "caught up *together*". Much may be said of the wilderness, as involving God's ways, but it is incidental. But our wilderness position cannot be ignored, and I am sure it is not right to apply to us *in it* what Scripture connects with us only as viewed in the land.
I trust, dear brother, your health is much improved and that you find much cheer in serving Christ and His people.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
{96}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 8th, 1910.
Dear Brother, -- -I am in receipt of your letter of October 19th, and I am glad to send a line in reply. As to the wilderness, there are two ways as I understand, in which it has to be taken account of. First, it is the sphere in which the believer carries out the will of God and where he learns what is in his own heart, etc., and it sets forth the progress he makes from Egypt to Canaan. Secondly, the wilderness is the scene in which God's testimony (as the tabernacle represents it) is set forth. This is seen in the book of Numbers; in the antitype this involves the saints collectively and 1 Corinthians corresponds.
In this epistle the saints are viewed as God's assembly in Corinth -- not in heavenly places, or as risen with Christ but as called out of the world morally but actually still in it. It is God's assembly as distinct from Jew and Gentile. The Supper stands in this relation and hence I understand it is celebrated in the wilderness. The Supper is a remembrance and hence has no force where Christ is -- it refers to His absence. Normally the saints came together to break bread because they loved Christ. They felt His absence and the Supper reminded them of Him. If He is present we do not need a symbol to remind us of Him. He is made known in the breaking of bread.
The land I understand to represent what is entirely spiritual and is entered into only in the power of the Holy Spirit. It is an out-of-the-world or heavenly order of things. It is where Christ is known in His Own sphere. It will but lead to an unreal state in the saints to lead them to believe they are in a spiritual state when in truth they are not. Besides the breaking of bread contemplates us in flesh and blood, a condition which Jordan terminates. How then can it be Canaan?
I think @John 20 and Ephesians correspond. The latter presents the conflict side, which the former does not.
I hope you will consider the above an answer to your letter in some sort.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
December 10th, 1910.
Dear Brother, -- Colossians being corrective, the full church position is not stated -- deliverance from man's mind in its activity philosophically and religiously is in view. It is Christ
{97}
and what He is personally and our relationships with Him, and not His and our position in the counsels of God.
It is not a heavenly people on earth, but those who refuse the flesh (accepting Christ's circumcision as the end of it) and the world in which the flesh lives (baptism answering to this) but still exposed to the influence of man's mind. The doctrine and exhortations suppose a work of God in the saints but not to the extent that enables us to take complete church position.
I used to think that Colossians and @John 20 were equivalent but now I see that the latter corresponds more to Ephesians. I think therefore, that while Colossians supposes the Christian circle it is not such as Ephesians would contemplate. Quickened together with Christ involves association with Christ in life but it does not go to the length of association with the ascended Man. Colossians contemplates a company on earth in the life of Christ, but not in the place designed for them in God's counsels. Christ is the *hope* of glory.
They are not there as in Ephesians. I would object, therefore, to Colossians being regarded as proper Christian ground.
There is great need of maintaining the balance between the objective and subjective. Wherever the desire for leadership exists the former is sure to be made much of and no doubt this is because the latter is necessarily wanting; if it is present we are content in obscurity.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 17th, 1910.
Mr. C. A. Coates.
Beloved Brother, -- I am very glad to find that we are not far apart as to the subject in question -- @Hebrews 2: 12. I do not object to anything you say, only with yourself I think your view may be a bit too general. I doubt, however, that I can say anything to make the matter any clearer. But it is well to enquire fully, and we may be sure that when Christ only and the truth are before us, we shall get help. My conviction is that the Lord in using these precious words did not contemplate the saints as in their wilderness, or incidental, circumstances, but rather as a company -- the glorious result of His death. Were we to take the assembly as viewed only in the light of this passage we would think of it in no other circumstances than as
{98}
surrounding Christ -- going no more out. That is, we should not think of the wilderness. I am afraid therefore that if we make the "praise" here to include what may ascend from individuals as such we lower its character. I believe it refers to the assembly as outside all here, and that it extends beyond the present period. Indeed it does not specially refer to any period. From another point of view, I believe the words "in the midst" mean, in their ordinary force, that the saints are *together*.
I am thankful to hear of your cheer in the visit north, and that our health is much improved. I suppose the winter months will be severe on you. But I am sure you find the Lord's help in your weakness.
I wish we could see you in America!
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
December 24th, 1910.
Mr. E. H. Chater.
My Dear Brother, -- I am very glad to have another letter from you, and especially for your remarks on the Supper, etc. In my last letter, my effort was to show that the passage of the Jordan, as a type, is connected with the experimental side; as to the people, it follows the brazen serpent and springing well; it involves, therefore, a spiritual state. It is true that 'in the mind of God' (for He can call things that be not, as though they were), all are over; but then the Scripture views us *also* in the wilderness; we have to be careful to note how Scripture presents the truth.
Now, where the antitype to the passage of the Jordan, and Canaan appears in the New Testament (as Colossians and Ephesians), it will be found that a spiritual state, or formation, in the saints is also introduced. On the other hand, epistles (such as Romans and 1 Corinthians), which view the saints in the wilderness, do not speak of their being quickened as a present fact. The truth is that baptism, rightly accepted, places one in the wilderness, but it does not place him in Canaan, it is by the power of the Spirit that he enters Canaan, although on the ground (objectively) of Christ having gone through Jordan before him. What I see, therefore, is that all who have accepted baptism, having the Spirit, are qualified for the Supper,
{99}
and may enjoy it in measure, although each may not have spiritual power to pass over to the Canaan side. *Some* may have this power and so enter into the truth and reality of the assembly viewed as a new creation. As to what we may be in the mind of God, this applies at *all* times as a matter of *light*, as well as when we are gathered together: that is, we can always revert to what we are in God's counsels.
But then the Scriptures contemplate us *also*, as we are actually down here, *and it is in this connection the Lord's supper is found*. But viewed in God's counsels, we are outside this state, hence, "if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new" (@2 Corinthians 5: 17). If there is power for it, I believe that after the breaking of bread is the opportune time for entering into this; hence, I spoke of the assembly as a new creation, as properly connected with the latter part of the meeting for the breaking of bread. I note your remark 'I should have said that there is the distinction between male and female throughout, both before and after the breaking of bread'. But this would mean that we *never* rise to new creation collectively. In Christ Jesus, there is neither male nor female.
When I say that "over Jordan" is on the experimental side, I do not mean that there is not a corresponding objective side, for there is; this is in the fact that Christ is over. *Title* to Canaan is for all, but entrance into it is by the *Spirit;* hence, as I said, it is found in Scripture side by side with a spiritual state in the saints. But to treat as Canaan what Scripture regards as the wilderness is confusion, and but reduces the character of the blessing involved in the former. And this is an end the enemy would like to reach. Canaan represents, typically, our highest privileges; there we feed on Christ, as the old corn, the ascended, heavenly Man. It is not the manna, or @John 6; these refer to Christ coming *down;* the old corn is Christ having gone up. We do not enjoy this, as brothers or sisters; but as risen with Christ, and heavenly.
It is true that we may not rise from the level of male and female after the breaking of bread, but we are *entitled to;* but to do so *before* would be confusion, because the ordinance contemplates us *in a flesh and blood condition*.
As to the holiest, the reference to it in the New Testament alludes to the wilderness position, the tabernacle. But it is a thought *beyond* the Supper; the latter suggests the *way* into it.
{100}
It is true that as the sons of Aaron, our place is within, with Christ but this is not the ground we are on at the Supper. The Supper is the death of Christ, and this took place (typically) in the *court* of the tabernacle, actually outside the gate. It was public, and we are identified with it. But our place is inside with the Father, and we go in, as it were, through the Supper. The way is paved with the love of Christ.
As to your remark: 'All who have the Spirit are in Christ, etc.', I would say that this is true from the divine side, as you say, but I think we do well to bear in mind that "in Christ" in Scripture, is made to involve new creation. The truth of the body is involved in the Supper, but clearly, it is practical unity, as seen on earth, that is in view, and not the body viewed in God's counsels, as in Ephesians. In Corinthians, we are viewed as here in the flesh; hence "if one member *suffer*". I refer to this, as an important distinction; the truth of the body applies to us as we are in the world, as well as applying to us, viewed as in Christ, in God's world.
I am thankful that you and Mr. Gipps could go with what I said in a general way. I can say that I only desire what is according to the Word, and I shall be glad if you will point out anything that you may think contrary to it. I am sorry that so many whom I esteem differ from me on these points, but as far as I can judge, the oppositions offered to what I have said are not founded on Scripture.
I am much interested in what you mention as to St. Petersburg. I earnestly trust the dear saints there may be supported of the Lord. The special meetings with Mr. W. Johnson are now on at Winnipeg, and we are looking forward to Indianapolis at the end of this week. I trust there may be encouragement on your side, during the holiday meetings.
With warm love, I am,
Yours affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
December 28th, 1910.
Dear Mrs. M------, -- As to your question about the Supper, Christ's body and blood being presented separately is the strongest possible way of presenting His death. The blood is separated from the body. Communion in both therefore is spoken of in contrast to "all that is contrary to God" (see
{101}
@1 Corinthians 10: 21, 22). Our eating and drinking is communion in Christ's death. But Christ's part in the Supper is not this, but in the bread broken (referring to His body given) and in the cup (referring to His blood poured out). There is what is presented *to us* in the Supper and then our communion in that which is presented.
But the body and blood of Christ have severally a distinct meaning. The blood clearly represents the precious life of Christ given up for us, and hence it speaks of divine love: the body of Christ was that in which He carried out God's will: but His going into death sets our will aside. We have no right to a will therefore so we cannot be independent. Besides in partaking of the loaf we are committing ourselves to the truth of the "one body", and so we must regard our brethren in everything we may do as walking through an idolatrous world.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
January 22nd, 1911.
Mr. J. Henderson.
Beloved Brother, -- Resurrection is not *peculiar* to the church: the whole twelve tribes were represented in the death and resurrection of Christ -- the twelve stones in Jordan and at Gilgal -- but the tribe of Levi had something special. They had the sacrifices of the Lord God of Israel made by fire -- the Lord Himself and the Priesthood as their inheritance; then they had cities to live in. In the antitype, this latter means that our living associations are heavenly for our city is heavenly Jerusalem. Our associations are marked by life of course -- the city of the living God, but alongside this we have heavenly Jerusalem and the assembly of the firstborn who are enregistered in heaven. And it will not do to make John's gospel and Colossians equivalent. The former is the heavenly on earth. This is true not only as to Christ, but also as to the saints forming the church (chapter 20). They are the brethren of the heavenly or ascending Man, and they are formed inwardly by the truth of the ascended Man. @John 20 involves @Genesis 24.
I see nothing to hinder us from walking with our brethren, seeking to take the best view of what they present; at the same time holding fast in our own souls what has come down to us through God's great favour, and ministering it *frankly* and fully as the Lord gives opportunity. We may be sure that God
{102}
will be with His truth, and that in time all who love it will discern it. Nothing is more to be dreaded than the spirit of party.
Unless our great and unique place as the companions of the risen ascended Man is maintained and enjoyed (and the latter is in the assembly convened) the heavenly colour will disappear and we shall drop to the level of man on earth.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
February 20th, 1911.
Beloved Brother, -- As to Colossians and Ephesians there is clearly a correspondence between the former and @1 John. The subject of 1 John, however, is more formally life -- "That which was from the beginning". Colossians is *Christ*, hence His personal greatness is first emphasised. It was a question of His having His full place with the saints so that they should admit of nothing but him. All was to be "according to Christ". Then association with Him is seen in the word "with" -- all intended to endear Him to the Christian heart, so that there should be no room for any other. If the mind is to be set on things above it is because He sits there at God's right hand. And in the new circle Christ is everything and in all. The epistle is corrective, but it contemplates the Christian circle in which the traits of Christ (the new Man) are seen. Much is put forward now as to Colossians being christian ground, but at bottom the truth is being reduced, for normal christian ground is Ephesians.
In truth I believe the truth is making headway, and there is an adjustment going on. The Lord's good hand is over His people preserving them and the truth with them.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
March 27th, 1911.
Mr. H. W. Selby.
My Dear Brother, -- I think all this exercise as to Colossians and Ephesians will work out for good. Romans and Ephesians are not corrective epistles; the former lays the ground for the latter -- compare @Romans 8: 29, 30; and 16: 25, 26. God brought Israel out of Egypt that He might being them into Canaan. Colossians is not Canaan, but the way into it. It is on the experimental side; it is necessary on account of the
{103}
flesh in us. But viewed from the divine side, Ephesians follows Romans. Ephesians shows how God takes us from a state of death and as under Satan's power, and sets us down in heaven in Christ. This is full Christian position, and it is the ground we should take in the faith of our souls. Colossians shows how the believer enters into this in a practical way *now;* hence we have circumcision, burial, resurrection with Christ by faith, and quickening with Christ. These things are most blessed, especially that we are risen and quickened with Christ; they involve wonderful spiritual experience -- but they are a means to an end and not the end. The end is heaven, hence we have, "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above" (@Colossians 3: 1). God has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ, and He has made us to sit down in the heavenlies in Christ, and we are thus entitled to take this *ground* in the faith of our souls, both as involving privilege and testimony. "In Christ" in Ephesians has reference to His full official place as Head. Some speak of it as abstract, meaning that we are not there literally, and that thus *in* is used instead of *with*. We are not there literally, but the statement has in view our being there literally, and when we are there literally, the statement will have the same force that it has now -- it will not be dropped. All shall be headed up in Christ, things in heaven and things on earth. We shall truly sit with Christ on His throne, but Ephesians is God's purpose and hence Christ's full place as Head is in view, and so *in* is right -- *with* does not go beyond quickening. It fits in *on the road* to purpose and is most precious; but as we love Christ, we are glad to recognise His full official place.
I agree that sonship in Galatians is the light in which God regards all Christians, and affections are formed according to the relationship.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
April, 1911.
Miss F. J. Elwood.
Dear Miss Elwood, -- As to 'ground', the ground I take is that I am heavenly, and heaven is my place; this is my calling, and I wish to walk worthy of it. Who can deny, in the light of Ephesians, that this is *normal christian ground*? As to being *raised* with Christ and not *ascended;* the former is no more true than the latter. We are not *actually* raised, and
{104}
we are not *actually* ascended; but both are true in faith. It is a question of God's counsel and power; and in the light of Ephesians, all is regarded as accomplished. Faith takes account of things as *God does* and He calls things that *be not as though they were*. "Whom he has justified, these also he has glorified" (@Romans 8: 30, N.T.). In truth the possession of the Spirit involves that we are glorified; F.E.R. said this. We are as much seated in the heavenlies *in* Christ as we are risen *with* Him. "In Christ" is characteristic of Ephesians and makes for His full official place in God's counsels. Others, as well as we, are in Him, for, it is God's thought to head up all things in Him; but we are in Him in a special way, for we are seated in the heavenlies in Him, "blessed with all spiritual blessings in the heavenlies in Christ". It is true that "risen with Christ" is wonderful ground to be on, and I believe "risen with" is peculiar to Christians; but it is *on the road* to heaven and *not heaven*, or full Christian ground. As a matter of fact Romans lays the ground for Ephesians from the divine side (compare @Romans 8: 29; and 16: 25, 26). Colossians is the experimental side. It shows *how* we enter in. Privilege refers to what we are *called* to, *not the way we reach* what we are called to. Gilgal is most important for us, on account of the flesh, but it is not referred to when the land is spoken of as the sphere of purpose. Joshua and Caleb presented the tidings of the land, and although they had to go through Jordan and Gilgal, they would always think of the whole land as that to which they were called. This is the *ground* they would take. The people were brought *out* that they might be brought *in*. Colossians is the *way in* experimentally, because of the flesh, but Ephesians shows us how God takes us out of death, and the power of the enemy, and places us in heaven. Here (@Ephesians 2) there is neither baptism nor circumcision: but it gives the full church position, and as we take the ground there is conflict. We are entitled to take it, both as involving privilege and blessings and testimony.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
June 10th, 1911.
Mr. J. Stewart.
My Dear Brother, -- I regret I have been so long in answering your letter of May 11th. I like what you say as to F.E.R.¬s ministry. A ministry of the Spirit will always have reference
{105}
to the then state of the saints, and hence, as you say, full justice will be done to the side of the truth that may be considered necessary to press. Thus, while statements contained in such ministry have their own weight, they cannot be considered as *final*. As to Colossians, that resurrection ground viewed by itself, is not heavenly ground is as certain as anything can be. I remember hearing of F.E.R. *whistling* in ridicule when told that a brother said at a reading on Colossians that resurrection took us to heaven. We all know how he used to speak of eternal life not going beyond the earth, and how he connected it with the Christian circle. He distinguished the heavenly position from this, but we have to rely on Scripture and Colossians does not treat of a company viewed in heavenly places, nor of a heavenly people on earth; but a risen people, who are exhorted to set their minds on things above *where Christ is* ... heaven is set before them, not yet accepted as to position. I believe the Lord is helping as to these things, especially on your side. I believe brethren generally are recognising the importance of insisting on the heavenly position, while clinging to resurrection as the victory of God over Satan and death. Too much can scarcely be made of resurrection and I am thankful it is so prominent. As to @John 20, I have never taken the Lord's act of breathing into His disciples as anything more than signifying that they should partake of His life, that this took place actually at Pentecost. But breathing into them is a much more *endearing* transaction, and more intimate, than sending the Holy Spirit from heaven. @John 20 is pattern, as we have often heard, the Lord's ascension is assumed, otherwise He would not take the ground of giving the Holy Spirit (@John 7), but then really He had not ascended, and so the Holy Spirit was not given. All is pattern and was made good historically at Pentecost. But when the Holy Spirit did come the disciples would know that as well as having a personal Comforter, they had the very Spirit and life of Christ. This they would understand from the Lord's action in @John 20.
We had a good time during our special meetings. We looked at Proverbs connecting wisdom with the gospel and the mystery.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
{106}
October 31st, 1911.
My Dear Brother, -- Yours of September 13th reached me in London last week, also the papers you sent. As I am much pressed for time I am unable to write at length, but I wish to say at once I have no sympathy with what I have seen in extracts and quotations from C. W------. As to our Lord's Person he says somewhere that God has no equal. This and all it represents in Mr. W------¬s mind is shocking, both as derogatory to the Lord's Person and the opposite to what Scripture states (@Philippians 2 and @John 1). It may be said that @Philippians 2: 6 is before incarnation, which is true, but the fact remains that a Person is there said to be equal with God, and this Person remains unchanged in incarnation, the same yesterday, today and forever. Besides in @John 5, the Lord formally insists on His equality with the Father as Son in this world, the Jews said "making himself equal with God;" they understood well what the Lord meant. If Mr. W------ had been there, he would have had to correct them, but the Lord did not, although the Jews would have stoned Him for what He said. Much may be said, if we are spiritual enough for it, as to the wonderful downstooping of the Lord to carry out God's will, but "the Son" is a term which covers His Person and to say that the Son is inferior to God or the Father is blasphemy outright, and should be refused at every point. Mr. W------ has allowed his mind to work in the matter and has been misled. I am truly sorry for him.
He incidentally holds the Lord's Deity, and there is hope for him, but we have to deal with his words, "For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned" (@Matthew 12: 37).
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board S.S. Celtic.
November 18th, 1911.
My Dear Brother, -- I have to thank you for your letter and papers. I am glad to have these notes as a testimony to what J.N.D. and J.B.S. thought as to the subject of the Lord in the midst of His own. I do not know whether you have seen some readings in Crieff many years ago with J.B.S., in which the latter quotes J.N.D. as holding that the Lord comes into the
{107}
midst of the meeting; and emphasising this fact by some remarks of his own to the effect that the Lord went out of the meeting. I have not the book by me. As you are aware I have had a good deal of exercise as to this new idea, of the Lord having come in to abide in the assembly, and have had a good deal of correspondence with those who are responsible for it. It may be said that there is nothing vital, and, in a sense, this is true -- indeed I have taken this ground and have no difficulty in going on with those dear brethren. But if the idea is unscriptural, it is like a screw loose in a machine, which is sure to work more damage if unremedied. There is the question of the authority of Scripture, and if I am allowed to teach from @John 20 that the Lord has come in to abide, I may teach anything I please, if allowed the same liberty with other passages -- for @John 20 teaches the opposite of what is stated, if facts and language are allowed their own testimony. If Christ is admitted to be in the midst unqualifiedly (moreover, and mark that it is the church, as a whole apart from conditions) the minds of the saints become accustomed to this idea, and the state needed for the Lord's presence will be overlooked and the claims of Open Brethren and other independent bodies cannot be denied, for we cannot deny that they form part of the church. Of course, it is very nice to say the Lord is always in the midst, and this will be accepted without a question unless we are accustomed to prove all things by Scripture, and one hates to say anything that would deprive the saints of the comfort of knowing that the Lord is always with them, especially as it is preciously true in another sense, where there is uprightness of walk, and indeed, He never withdraws His eye from the most wayward of His own. All this belongs to another line of truth. What we are dealing with is a chapter that involves assembly privilege; witness the way Scripture is handled (as evidencing what I have said above) by an article called 'The two companies' in this month's 'Mutual Comfort'. The Scriptures under consideration are @John 12 and 17. It is said from these chapters, that what marks the Christian company is that Christ is in the midst (underlined) and that everything flows from this. The most superficial perusal of the chapters will show that the Lord contemplates *going out of the world to the Father*, for He would send the Spirit who would be another Comforter. He would take the place of Christ until Christ should come back for His own. In addition to the coming of
{108}
the Comforter, He would come Himself, but He does not say to abide; clearly this is special. He was to be with the Father, and they in the world, but they to pray to Him (according to this paper referred to, He prays in the assembly, page 296). Scripture speaks of Him as our Advocate with the Father. I might say much more as to what is put forward in this paper, how that, while there is much one can heartily endorse yet the true situation is beclouded, that is Christ in heaven as an Object of faith, and the promise of divine Persons coming to us, all these things are deranged by the article. But I have confidence in the Lord that there will be exercise, so that the balance of the truth may be preserved amongst us, and that brotherly love may abide.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December, 1911.
Mr. R. S. Sinclair.
My Dear Mr. Sinclair, -- Thanks for yours of November 25th and enclosure. I am sure Miss Elwood will be sorry that you do not allow your address to be published. I doubt very much that the saints are overtaxed with written ministry. For myself, I read almost everything published amongst us, and I never feel that the writer of any book or paper has done me an injustice in giving me an opportunity of looking over the result of his exercises. Of course, if things put out are unscriptural it is another matter. I doubt that saints are hindered in reading their Bibles by reading current literature published amongst us; it is more likely that they are hindered in reading something that would minister more to the flock. *Reading* notes of an address is the next best thing to *listening* to it. If the publisher does not suffer, I doubt if anyone else does.
I enclose a letter from Miss Elwood which you both may be glad to see; also 'Recollections' as to Plymouth. Please return. I also enclose medical prescription you kindly sent Arthur some time ago. Pardon delay in returning it.
Mr. and Mrs. Johnson are with us and we get along well together. We had a good day at Plainfield, and his meetings here have been very helpful, and much appreciated by all. They hope to sail on December 13th. I am glad G. Harrison went to Council Bluffs. I hear they had a good time.
{109}
Notice of your proposed meetings duly came. I hope to be with you, please God. I do not think anyone else will go from here. The brethren at Cambridge are arranging meetings for Christmas, and wish me to go. I am hardly able to decide in view of going to Indianapolis. I would very much like to go.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
June 12th, 1912.
Mr. Eardly Binney.
My Dear Brother, -- You must pardon my long delay in answering yours of May 11th. I would have written from the steamer, but I did not feel so much up to writing as usual, and I had a great deal of urgent matters to attend to, and you kindly intimated that your letter was *not* urgent. On arrival here there were special meetings on, and this took up a great deal of my time.
Now as to the Lord's presence at the breaking of bread, I think I fully understand your difficulty. Let me say at the outset that I quite accept that the Lord is with His people (assuming that they are seeking to follow righteousness) at all times when they are together, especially for support and protection. I always feel like nestling under the wing of His protection when gathered with His people. This involves the care which His love prompts, and which His power affords. @Matthew 18 is on this line, especially as to support.
But however blessed all this is, it is not *full* assembly privilege. This involves that the Lord comes to us as Head, and leads us into the consciousness of our relation with Him before the Father.
I am sure a moment's reflection will enable any thoughtful person to see that this is altogether to be distinguished from the Lord's presence in the way of authority and protective and sustaining power in connection with our wilderness circumstances. I wish I knew more of the distinction myself, and my constant prayer is that the saints may be exercised as to the full privilege of the assembly that we may know what it is to be for Christ and so to be *with* Him outside of what we are in flesh and blood.
I cannot see why it is not seen to be quite inconsistent and indeed confusing to identify this with the actual breaking of bread, for the latter is a remembrance whereas the former is the presence of the One we love. I believe a good deal of the
{110}
difficulty lies in not distinguishing between the assembly (a company composed of men and women) as seen historically down here in connection with the ways of God, and the assembly viewed as a wholly spiritual formation, in connection with God's eternal purpose.
As to whether we remember the Lord as He *is* or as He *was* -- my understanding is that we remember *Him* -- the Person who is absent. The Lord did not ask the disciples to remember Him *as He was*. He said, "This do for remembrance of me". I always think of christendom as guilty of forgetfulness of Christ.
With much love, I am,
Yours affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
December 13th. 1911.
My Dear Brother, -- What you refer to as to the city and eternal life has been on my mind also. One thing I see is that a primary *may* become relative, and so serve God's purpose in *time* in meeting the result of sin. Eternal life comes in in that way. It appears in contrast to death, but at the same time it was the condition in which God purposed man to be before Him eternally. So it abides essentially. Then as to the city, while in @Revelation 21 it is spoke in connection with the eternal state of things the *tabernacle* idea takes its place. "The tabernacle of God is with men" was what *heaven* understood.
Besides the description given shows that it is a question of what the church is to be for Christ eternally as well as being God's tabernacle. "Prepared as a bride adorned *for her husband*". "Holy city" and "New Jerusalem" are obviously relative terms, but "tabernacle" refers to an abiding place.
That in which light and rule were administered in the millennium becomes the eternal dwelling place of God -- "with men". Identity is maintained in the term "city;" as I write the matter is clearer to my own soul.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
New York.
December 11th, 1912.
Mr. J. Stewart.
My Dear Brother, -- I must ask you to pardon my long delay in answering yours of November 2nd, I have been greatly pressed for time.
{111}
I judge you quite understand my thought as to @Romans 7 and 8. It is that in the former we have the covenant, in principle, in the Lord's body given in death for us; the result is that we are married to Him as raised from the dead. Chapter 8 is His power -- by which we are supported. He supports us in the wilderness *out* of it. "Right hand" is expressive of power. The Lord holds the seven stars (to which you refer) in His right hand. I have no doubt this refers to how He upheld the early church, or those responsible in it. It was by the Spirit, of course.
As to the candlestick, the early church was this, and owned as such, but the expression is not used after Ephesus. I have no doubt, however, that the public body was recognised as such up till Thyatira. Here there is the *formal* acknowledgement of a *remnant*, and this implies that the "many" were given up. There had been, as it were, the trial of jealousy and the woman was found guilty. She is definitely judged (@Revelation 2: 22, 23) and a remnant formally owned. We can, I think, easily see that what is thus judged cannot be owned as the candlestick. Henceforth it is a remnant, and this means that that of which it was a remnant had failed, and so *something else* must now come in to maintain the testimony -- that is, the *public* kingdom (chapter 2: 27 - 29). In Sardis the Lord simply *has* the stars. It does say He holds them in His right hand. But He has the seven Spirits of God -- the seven lamps are not now seen. The seven Spirits are the perfection of power -- His "right hand", as we may say -- but this power is in view of *another* order of things now (compare chapter 4: 5). There is still light on earth, thank God (Philadelphia), but this is not the candlestick.
I have been hearing of Mrs. Stewart's affliction in the severe illness of her sister, Mrs. Thornton. I understand that Mrs. Thornton is having a victorious end, and I thank God for this. By this time she may be with the Lord and this will be a happy release for her. I trust the circumstances may be blessed to her husband.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- The understanding of Revelation is largely the forming of a spiritual judgment of the facts presented.
{112}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
June 2nd, 1913.
Mr. J. Henderson.
My Dear Mr. Henderson, -- I am in receipt of your two letters written from Hull.
The news of dear Mr. Pellatt's departure from our midst had already come, but as your letter contained most particulars it was read to the saints assembled at Plainfield. I need not speak of my deep sorrow in the loss of one known so intimately during almost the whole of my Christian life. I know of no one who loved the truth more than he did, and I never knew him to flinch when *it* was involved.
When we consider the great ability he had to present it, and his long and varied experience in dealing with souls, the loss occasioned by his removal from amongst us is much more than may be assumed by most. But clearly *his* work was done, and to the heart of anyone who seeks to serve Christ it is most encouraging to note His gracious ways with our dear brother before taking him to Himself. Had he been taken before going to England, a cloud would have remained in the minds of many as to his real character and worth, which (now that they have had opportunity to see and hear him) must have altogether disappeared. His best ministry was, I believe, on your side; and, in supporting him thus, the Lord honoured His servant, and showed that, whatever others may have thought, *He* knew that he loved Him.
Mr. Sinclair was greatly attached to Mr. Pellatt, and with many of us, feels keenly our great loss, but we are all greatly comforted by the consideration shown him by the Lord. As yet we have received no word of the funeral, but no doubt this will soon come to hand. I am wondering if you returned to London to attend it. I hope you did.
Mr. Sinclair and myself were wondering whatever notes may be available of our dear brother's *late* ministry should not be collected, and perhaps a selection could be made and revised and published, which would represent what the Lord was pleased to give through him at the close of his service. I am sure that any labour thus spent would be more than repaid.
The meetings at Plainfield were good on the whole. The attendance was larger than I have seen at any time in this country, and a remarkably good interest and spirit throughout. There may not have been the same definiteness in the line of things before us as on previous occasions, but through the
{113}
Lord's good hand upon us, all was for profit and edification.
We considered Hebrews (suggested by Mr. Jerrard) at the readings. I felt there was special help as we dwelt on chapters 7 and 10. There was considerable difference of judgment as to the priesthood, and a good deal of discussion at one meeting; but as the Lord's grace was upon all, I believe it was perhaps the best meeting of all.
There were two 'open meetings;' at the first Dr. Venkata, Gill and Lock spoke in the order given; at the second, W. Johnson, Steven and Truan spoke. On Lord's day afternoon, Mr. Jerrard spoke, and Gill preached in the evening.
Dr. Venkata is now staying with me, and will remain ten days or so. He preached in Brooklyn last night; we did not remain in Plainfield for the preaching.
Mr. Johnson's ministry here is very helpful to many. He has some thought of going to Toronto, and I hope he will, as I believe ministry is what they need most perhaps.
We had a good voyage across through mercy, and I found all well.
Mr. Jerrard and myself have been speaking freely together as to matters on your side, and I trust good may come out of it. I hope to write more later. Much love,
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 27th, 1914.
Mr. J. Gresswell.
My Dear Brother, -- I am very sorry to have delayed so long in replying to yours of January 11th. I have been some-what poorly for some time with a bad cold; besides, my hands have been more than full with work.
As to the application of Old Testament types, I think we have to carefully compare New Testament light as to the subject that may be in question. The first epistle to the Corinthians is, so to speak, the law of the house. There 'the flesh had worked' and 'was working', and yet the apostle does not intimate that anyone going there would be defiled. Of course, if the evil were not judged, *all* would be defiled, but the epistle shows that there may be evil in a meeting, and yet all not be regarded as defiled. Many in the meeting may have judged it, but through weakness have not been able to deal with it
{114}
according to God. They are waiting on God in patience.
God owns this, and they are morally clean, or clear on the matter. The epistle says that there must needs be divisions (or sects) that the "approved may be made manifest among you". The *approved* are not unclean, surely. God would make them manifest through divisions, and it is for the saints to recognise this.
In the type you refer to (@Leviticus 14) it is said that *God would put* leprosy in a house; but in 'shutting up a meeting', as we speak, we do not assume that leprosy is there; the Spirit of Christ would lead us to hope for the best, and it is not just to assume that evil exists until the proof of it is established. Grace would assume the contrary, and certainly, if there are those in the locality whom God approved, *they* are not leprous. Therefore I do not see that brethren elsewhere should ask saints in a locality to cease breaking bread unless *known evil* is there, except as a *precautionary* measure. It must be, to some extent, a matter of mutual agreement, resorted to in *wisdom;* for Scripture does not warrant the refusal of fellowship to saints, unless they are committed to evil.
Saints at Boston or Toronto are not to be regarded as unclean, their position is simply precautionary, as they are not committed to evil.
Much more could be said on this point, but I cannot proceed further, as I wish to catch the mail. I hope to be on your side in April, and I may have opportunity of having a word with you. My wife joins in love to you and all in your house.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board S.S. Imperator.
March 24th, 1914.
Mr. H. W. Selby.
My Dear Brother, -- Please pardon my delay in answering yours of January 30th. I have been greatly pressed for time and so put off writing until now.
I do not know what letter you quoted from, but the quotation itself I hardly recognise.
I hold to the principle contended for in the Glanton controversy that the Lord has rights in each locality where His people are gathered and these were interfered with by Glanton at Alnwick, and would be interfered with by any similar action.
{115}
But what I see is this, that unless we can prove that evil exists and is countenanced in a meeting, those elsewhere cannot *demand* that they cease to break bread. To *suggest* that they should do so is another matter as this would be placing things on another basis, namely that of wisdom, a resort to precaution to a good end.
But the persons who thus cease to break bread are not thereby out of fellowship, nor rendered unclean. Therefore if one of them went elsewhere and he was requested to refrain from breaking bread it would be on the same ground. It is all provisional, and based on wisdom and love, a love which admits of forbearance. We do not assume that the person is unclean and unfit for fellowship.
Whatever I may have said in my letter that you refer to above, this is what I meant.
You will see that I am on my way to your side, and I hope to land at Southampton on Friday.
Love to your wife and yourself.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board S.S. Imperator.
March 24th, 1914.
Mr. Arthur J. H. Brown.
My Dear Brother, -- Both my wife and I were very pleased to get your letter of February 7th and we read it with much interest. I took you at your word, and did not answer at once! I am always much pressed for time, like yourself.
I like all you say as to Luke. We looked at this gospel at special meetings at Indianapolis in connection with the Lord's humanity, and found much profit.
I am not so sure as to what you say about the "treasure" and "pearl" in @Matthew 13. I think both refer exclusively to the church, as is usually understood. First, the teaching of the chapter in a general way confirms me in the thought. Second, the fact that the Lord alludes to them in *the house* as distinct phases of the kingdom also suggests that they refer to the church. Then, the emphasis laid on them as of the greatest comparative value would also direct the mind to the church. The merchant was looking for goodly *pearls*, but having found *one* of *great* value he sold *all* and bought it. The mind is so directed to *one* thing of great value, that it seems to me
{116}
that nothing but the church could answer to it. I will be glad if you will write further on the point -- or perhaps I may see you *somewhere*. I am on my way to your side, as you can see. I hope to arrive in Southampton on Friday, and will D.V., spend the weekend at Barnet. Then I go, D.V., to Belfast, and then to Scotland. I hope to be in London the weekend of April 18 - 19th.
My wife and I were very glad to hear your school was full. We can be thankful for the prosperity that God thus gives, as we are set for his interests. He withholds no good thing from those who walk uprightly.
Very glad to hear of Mr. Moody, but sorry to hear of his wife's illness. I trust God will be merciful to her. Give them my love, also give my love in Christ to Mrs. Brown.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- Thanks for your invitation to Bexhill -- but I do not see how I can go. My time is very limited, and I have made promises to go to *more needy* places. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
July 20th, 1915.
My Dear Brother, -- Please pardon my delay in answering yours of May 14th. My wife and I have been away for a visiting tour in the South and West. We had an enjoyable time -- two weeks of meetings. My sister-in-law was with us. Previous to that we had the special meetings here at the end of May -- so my hands have been more than full.
I am glad to have word of your time in Manchester which I am sure was helpful.
It does not seem that we have been mutually helpful in our correspondence over @Matthew 13. I go with you as to the kingdom running on to the millennium; but I think you *generalise* too much, and overlook the ecclesiastical (or "church") feature of Matthew. It is the most ecclesiastical of all the gospels. Chapter 13 is a new *beginning* by the Lord, and it is by the sea-side -- it is outside the narrow limits of Judaism. It is the world-wide proclamation of the word of the kingdom, and the public results. In view of this -- that it is the kingdom,
{117}
as specially seen in the present dispensation -- it is inconceivable to me that the Lord could have anything else than the church in His mind when He spoke of the "treasure" and the "pearl". The idea of a remnant was not new -- although ever precious to God -- but the treasure and pearl suggest something unusual. The "merchant man" was seeking *pearls*, but he found "*one* pearl of great price". It seems to me that the tenor of Scripture as to the church makes it perfectly clear that it is alluded to in the pearl. "He ... went and sold all that he had" would indicate that the Lord gave up His Jewish rights (so to speak) for the church. I fear I am not saying much more than I said in my last letter, but I have weighed the matter, and I am assured that I am not misinterpreting the chapter.
My wife joins in Christian love.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board R.M.S. Adriatic.
December 2nd, 1915.
Mr. C. A. Coates.
Beloved Brother, -- It was a pity you were unable to come to Bristol to attend the special meetings. It would have been a comfort if you were even present in the city without attending the meetings! But the will of the Lord be done. I am sure we had your prayers.
I was so glad to have had the little time with you -- I remember it with pleasure. I trust you feel fairly well through God's great mercy. I am thankful to have heard further from yourself as to your bodily ailments -- one can pray more intelligently.
I found much cheer during my visit to your side. We had readings on Mark in Belfast -- chapters 1 to 9. These I have just revised for publication. In Glasgow there was a good season. There is a most distinct work of God there. Four or five who take the lead are especially set for Christ and His interests. Several have returned from Glanton lately.
The Bristol meetings were good, to say the least. I trust "much fruit" may result. The way the Lord is keeping His hand over His people and interests is most affecting, and gives every assurance that He will preserve a light to Himself "in Jerusalem" till the end. I was particularly thankful that the
{118}
necessity for keeping the feast of unleavened bread was prominent at Bristol. It is quite clear that if we do not keep *that* feast, we cannot hope to enjoy together the precious things of Pentecost -- the things of the Spirit.
I trust you will be helped in bringing round the notes on Leviticus. They are needed.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
April, 1916.
My Dear Brother, -- I am glad to have D.L.H.¬s paper, which seems right on the whole.
The remarks on the believer's body need guarding lest it might be assumed that the 'title of the State to them' is *absolute*.
Caesar's image and superscription is not (or should not be) on the believer's body, but rather God's image and superscription.
The State therefore cannot claim it rightly in an absolute way. It is indwelt by the Holy Spirit, and cannot be allowed under other control, it must be ever held subject to the *will of God*. But, of course, @Romans 13 is the will of God governing the body in relation to the powers that be.
The State may lay claim, and I submit to a point, but it ever remains true that we *must* obey God rather than man.
In giving money in the way of tribute there is a difference, for *it* comes under the absolute control of the State.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
April 5th, 1916.
Mr. R. Besley.
My Dear Brother, -- I am glad to have your letter and your little book. Both are interesting indeed. I like the little book, and I may say I quite go with what you say in it. I have felt a danger existed of laying down a rule, written or unwritten, for the young men which would tend to bring about bondage. What helps, I think, is to make principles that should guide clear, so that each one should be exercised before God, and so act in his own faith before Him. There is such general weakness
{119}
that burdens should not be imposed that some are not able to bear. The Lord's people are found in so many circumstances that are objectionable to the spiritual mind, and yet seemingly unavoidable, that one feels the safe course, and the course in which the Lord is best served, is to go on himself with what is right, and seek to enlighten all with the truth according to one's apprehension of it, and let God work. Otherwise there will be a tendency to set up a rule 'what brethren hold' calculated to govern the saints in a given connection which is sure to be narrower than the truth, and which will tend to sectarianism and bondage.
It is true that I made a remark at Bristol as to the difference between one's body and one's money, that the former does not belong to Caesar. This is clearly right, but at the same time I am not prepared to say that a brother should not obey the Government when it requires him to do something that in itself may not be wrong or harmful. There does not seem much difference between such service and that of a slave in the early days of Christianity. Volunteering is another matter. If a brother wishes to volunteer, the Word says, "ye have been bought with a price, do not be the bondmen of men".
As to the actual taking of life, I think the Christian should stop there. It seems to me that God's hand should be gratefully recognised in the provision made in the Parliament Act for the conscientious objector. In this, I believe, Satan was defeated. There can be no doubt that he is specially set against the young men. How important, therefore, that they should have right principles before them, and a right understanding with an exercised conscience.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
May 3rd, 1916.
Mr. J. G. Deck.
My Dear Mr. Deck, -- I am very pleased indeed to have a letter from you. I thank you for it and for the numbers of your little serial. I have read all with much interest. The manager of the tract depot here is thankful that you are free to give his address for helpful ministry.
Mr. Hornsby mentioned in a recent letter having spent a
{120}
little holiday with you, which was mutually enjoyable. My wife is his niece, as you may know.
As to the matter of closing the meeting *formally*, my objection to this is that it is not in keeping with the Lord's right there. It is true the meeting has to end, for the saints have to return to their ordinary duties, etc., but I believe that the principle and dignity of the assembly as convened, and the Lord's supremacy in it, should be before us on Lord's Day morning, and this precludes a brother *formally* closing the meeting. Two meetings are alluded to in @John 20, O. but the termination of either is not referred to -- although we know the first must have come to an end, or there could not be a second on the following eighth day.
I am not quite sure that your remarks as to older brethren maintaining she meeting in the event of too long pauses, etc., would not be keeping up appearance and hiding the real state of those composing it. I am sure it is right and safer for each to be before the Lord in his soul and participate according to the intelligence and grace he may have. This makes room for the Lord's guidance and the action of the Spirit.
The Lord cheers us in these parts. We are having good readings in Samuel. We hope to have special meetings here at the end of May.
With love in Christ, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
June 17th, 1916.
Mr. J. S. Giles.
My Dear Brother, -- I am glad to have your letter of May 30th, which came two days ago. In view of your explanations I believe further correspondence may be of mutual help.
As said in my previous letters, my objection has been to the published statement on page 316 of December *Mutual Comfort*, and I regret to have to say that my difficulty still remains, notwithstanding that you have altered it. The altered statement reads: 'If the church (having been set up in the position of a responsible witness on earth) had not failed it *could* not have been translated (for its translation would have been *inconsistent with the ways of God*, as seen in Adam, Noah, Israel, the priesthood, David's house, and Nebuchadnezzar)'.
{121}
In spite of the modifying parenthesis, I have to say that the statement is not the truth. 'Could not have been translated' cannot be supported by Scripture, I am confident: indeed it is contrary to the plain teaching of the Word, as I have said in former letters. The fact that it was made in other connections is no justification for a statement that is contrary to any given scripture or scriptures, as this is to @John 14 and @1 Thessalonians 4.
But I know you hold to John 14 and 1 Thessalonians 4, hence I am free to speak plainly as to your *words*, which are contrary to these scriptures. Indeed you strongly disclaim any thought of connecting your statement with these scriptures. I quote from your letter: 'The sentence in question you say is contrary to John 14 and 1 Thessalonians 4. I agree if it had been so used'. Here the question arises as to whether any scriptural subject can be dealt with unless the passages that deal with it are allowed to speak. If so, the establishment of error is an easy matter. Whatever the context of a scripture it is well to remember the Lord's words, "the scripture cannot be broken". On the other hand it is true that if contexts are ignored the Scriptures themselves at times seem contradictory, but where is the scripture that says, or even seems to say that the church, as set up in responsibility, could not be translated had it not failed?
In all I have said your contention that the church's position of responsibility on earth is not found in the scriptures mentioned has been assumed. But as far as I understand John 14, the assembly's responsibility on earth during the Lord's absence is very distinctly taught there. Indeed that whole section of the gospel (chapters 13 to 17) has in view the preparation of the saints for this very thing. Judas¬ betrayal and Peter's denial of the Lord undoubtedly point to certain church history -- history found in @Revelation 2. Such would cause a troubled heart. The Lord would assure His own and establish them in confidence in Himself "Believe also on me" implies responsibility. This is confirmed in verse 12, for the Lord says further, "He that believes on me the works that I do shall he do", and so elsewhere in the chapter. It is in this connection we have, "I am coming again and shall receive you unto myself". Then as to 1 Thessalonians, it would be hard to show that the church's responsibility in some measure is not found there, and even in the very context in which the 'rapture' appears.
{122}
As to the church's tenure of witness-bearing on earth, this would necessarily end at the coming of the Lord. There is no thought of the church continuing indefinitely -- "till I come" was to be the limit. The Lord's coming was not contingent on the church's failure. Besides her position was essentially different from those who witnessed before her (Adam, Noah, Israel, etc.); they were indigenous to their environment; she is an exotic. She belongs to heaven and must go to heaven. It is true that the Lord's coming is a necessity now on account of the church's failure, but this does not set aside His primary announced thought of coming for her and she reigning with Him.
I have heard from Mr. Henderson that you were in Yorkshire. I am glad you had cheer. We had a good season at our meetings here. We read in Ephesians. I hope to go to Hamilton, Ontario, for meetings in July. R.S.S. and perhaps F.L. are going to Knoxville.
You may have heard of the trouble in the firm of M------ and G------. The president had taken a large sum of money as a loan and used same for private enterprise, and this crippled the firm. A reorganisation is likely.
My wife joins in love to Mrs. Giles and yourself.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
*Letter from Mr. C. A. Coates*
Teignmouth.
July 22nd, 1916.
Mr. James Taylor.
Beloved Brother, -- It was with much pleasure I had your letter this afternoon. I am glad to know of your good time in Edinburgh. I have seen and enjoyed some brief notes of what came before you.
Since seeing you I have had letters from J. S. Giles and Mr. Henderson. They both take the ground of @James 2: 10 as proving that the fulfilment of responsibility is an impossibility, for 'one flaw spoils all'.
I have written pointing out that the standard set up by them is pure law, and that all Christian responsibility is under grace -- that we are judged by "the law of liberty". Their standard is a yoke of bondage.
{123}
I think this controversy will do good. I have felt for a long time that saints have been so habituated to connect the thought of responsibility with law and with man in the flesh, that it is difficult for them to entertain the thought of a new character of responsibility as under grace and a man renewed in mind so that he answers to it.
J. S. Giles asks in reference to @Romans 8: 4, 'Where does Scripture express the thought, even characteristically, of saints doing it?'!! I have asked him, 'When does Scripture express the thought of saints in normal Christian condition *not* doing it?'
I just mention this to show what is working. I have written to J. Henderson very plainly as to the elementary features of Christian responsibility, and I am awaiting with confidence (not altogether unmixed with anxiety) his reply.
I think it will be well for you to see J. S. Giles *alone* if possible. I do not believe he really holds what is conveyed and involved in his statements. But in his anxiety to maintain the statement in December *Mutual Comfort*, he is saying things more grave, and apparently without being conscious of it.
Miss Brown and the others are out or I am sure they would send love.
With much love in the Lord,
Yours affectionately in Him,
Charles A. Coates.
<hr>
*Letter from Mr. C. A. Coates*
Teignmouth.
October 13th, 1916.
Mr. James Taylor.
My Dear Brother, -- I have been very unwell during the last two months or more, and so tried in my head that I have had to refrain from all writing that could be deferred. Otherwise you would have had a line of reply to your last welcome letter long before now.
I was most thankful to have your letter and to know of the satisfactory nature of your interview with Mr. Giles. I have been anxious about it, lest there might be something at work which would not be helpful to the saints, but your letter was a great comfort to me.
Very soon after I received it Mr. Giles came down to
{124}
Paignton on account of Mrs. G.¬s health, and Dr. Wells and he came over to see me one day and we had about three hours¬ conversation. I think we were quite free together and in a happy spirit, and I do not think that as to *substance* there was much difference between us at the end. The point that I was anxious about was that the grace and work of God should be recognised as giving character to the responsible life and service of the saint, and in so far as it does there is not failure but the fruit of righteousness by Jesus Christ to God's glory and praise. I would go fully with Mr. Giles that practically all have failed in responsibility save One, but I would not wish to insist upon this to the point of obscuring what the saint is as viewed in responsibility according to God -- i.e. as in Romans. So far as I could judge there was no desire to do the latter, so that one would leave the adjustment of expressions to the Lord.
Mr. Giles has written a paper entitled 'Responsibility, Obligation, and Faithfulness', which I have had opportunity of seeing in MSS. It did not appear to me that there was anything in this paper to which one would take exception, so that I hope the exercise will yield profit and instruction and not become any further cause of difference.
We have had Miss Elwood staying in the house with Mrs. Pilkington for three weeks. It has been good to see something of the dear old sister again. She is wonderfully vigorous in every way considering her age.
Mrs. Ramsden from Bath has also been staying here and left today. The loss of her son Amherst is a very heavy blow to her, but the Lord sustains her, and her one desire is to get spiritual gain through sorrow.
We have had an unusual influx of visitors all this summer, partly occasioned by the perils on the east coast which have inclined many to come westward for their holiday.
There has been much happy intercourse and fellowship, and I am thankful to have been able to get to all the local meetings even though often under pressure of bodily weakness. Timothy's "frequent illnesses" often comfort me.
With very much love in the Lord to Mrs. Taylor and yourself,
Yours very affectionately,
Charles A. Coates.
{125}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 23rd, 1916.
Mr. W. Stanford.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of August 17th remains unanswered. I am afraid I have counted on your indulgence! It is fortunate that one whose spare time is very limited can do so. I was glad to get your telephone message at Plymouth. We had a cheering time there, as at other points, during the last visit.
I am interested in all the remarks you make as to ministry. I fear some think that what is coming before us is lacking of the element of exhortation. There may be truth in this; but I believe that if Christ's rights (the rights of love) over His people are brought home to them, and if there is a response, there will be a corresponding walk. I know that my own exercises are on this line. I have been greatly interested lately in 1 Kings -- we have it in our weekly readings here. As the responsible element (David) was about to ebb out, the priestly and prophetic exercise brought about the overthrow of antichrist (typically) and the enthronement of Christ. This, I believe, is going on at the present time.
There was a thought of another visit to your side this month, but I doubt that I will go now till March, I am sure my way will be more clear. I hear the brethren are reading Ephesians in London, but I have not heard much more save that the first reading was good. I trust the Lord will help much. It is a critical time. We are reading Leviticus in our monthly meetings, and find help from the Lord.
With love in Christ, I am,
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 12th, 1917.
Mr. J. S. Giles.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter in answer to mine came this week. On reading it over I felt that we were as far apart as ever as to the matter in question, but as I proceeded I found that you state what I have been seeking to maintain. On page 5 You say, 'The measure in which responsibility is fulfilled God will recognise'. This sentence implies what almost the whole of your letter inveighs against -- viz. 'fulfilled
{126}
responsibility'. It is true that the words are in the reverse order but this does not alter the fact that their value is the same as they would be if transposed. You may reply that the word 'measure' makes a difference, but here difficulty (from the standpoint of your letter) would increase, for on page 6 you will not allow the idea of 'in measure' to be connected with 'fulfilled responsibility'. You say: 'If you add to' fulfilled responsibility '' not completely of course 'then you show your expression is wrong, for if it is fulfilled it is fulfilled'. The fact is, dear brother, that you know the truth so well that you cannot help stating it, but having allowed your mind to run in a line of thought that is not according to the truth you fall into inevitable inconsistencies. But the evident presence of the truth in your soul is what encourages me in spite of the many things in your letter (and other papers) with which I cannot agree; so I ask you to bear with me in the same brotherly spirit that you have shown heretofore as I restate my exercises as to these things.
First, as regards the word 'faithfulness', what I commented on as far as I remember (I have not a copy of my letter) was the respective meanings of the *English words* 'faithfulness' and 'responsibility' -- neither of which is found in the New Testament -- the former not in Scripture. You will therefore see, that your remarks as to the Greek word translated faithful are beside the mark. As to the English word 'faithful' the ordinary meaning is that one is trustworthy and true in the fulfilment of duty. In this I say again that faithfulness is seen in the carrying out of a given responsibility. The word has minor meanings, it is true, but the above is the *general* one. Hence in view of the ordinary meaning of the English words it is quite wrong to deny that faithfulness is the measure in which duty, or obligation, is fulfilled. I agree that the word translated 'faithful' is from the word translated 'faith', and that it sometimes means that one has faith, etc.; but I cannot agree that it is the *general* meaning of the word in the Scriptures. It is generally used according to the ordinary meaning of the word 'faithful' in English. It is so used of God, Christ and the saints.
On page 3 you say: 'You quote Moses being spoken of as faithful as though it could only be said of him and a few others'. I have no recollection of limiting faithfulness to Moses and a few others, and I have no such thought; for I know that whole
{127}
companies of saints are addressed as "faithful in Christ". I spoke of Moses¬ faithfulness as set down alongside that of the Lord Jesus -- "as also Moses". This is worthy of note. God honours His servant in this reference to Him, but your remarks cast a shadow on this; they also ignore that some are called faithful in the New Testament because they are specially marked by fidelity to Christ and the truth. "Faithful men" (@2 Timothy 2) means something more than that all saints may be regarded as faithful.
On this same page you quote from a letter of mine: 'The church did fulfil its responsibility at the beginning', and then proceed to say, 'The first word that the Spirit has to say to the church set up in responsibility is: "Thou art fallen"'. The first word spoken *of* the church according to Scripture contains this commendatory tribute: "They continued steadfastly in the apostles¬ doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers" (@Acts 2: 42), also the remaining verse of the chapter. This is a very different word from "Thou art fallen". It is simply futile to say this was not the church in responsibility; it *was* the church in responsibility. The Spirit records these things of the saints. They were responsible to continue in the apostles¬ doctrine, for instance, and they did. They were so according to the mind of God in their ways that the Lord added such as should be saved to them -- the assembly. What you say as to God demonstrating His presence by the Spirit as He had done in the tabernacle is blessedly true: but there is more than this presented to us in @Acts 2 -- the "greater and more perfect tabernacle" was there in principle *in the saints*. The *subjective* effect of the presence of the Spirit consequent on redemption is in evidence. All was in the power of the Holy Spirit (the only and all-sufficient power for the fulfilment of Christian responsibility) but what is presented is *accredited to the saints*. The church as set up in the power of the Spirit, as the responsible witness for Christ, is before us. The light, for the time at least, was undimmed. To say, as you do, that speaking of the church thus is exalting her instead of her Builder is as unfair as it can be. It glorifies Him, for she is His handiwork. The sin of Ananias was serious but it is *not presented* as the failure of the church in its responsibility. It was an attack of Satan on the Holy Spirit as in the church, but it was summarily dealt with -- the holiness of God's house was maintained. It is quite clear that latent evil shall
{128}
exist in the millennium; the outbreak at the end proves this, a sinner may be there (@Isaiah 65: 20); these things do not show that Christ's kingdom fails. Your remarks legitimately followed would imply the opposite, and would make Judas¬ failure reflect on the Lord Himself.
You refer to the church at Ephesus in @Revelation 2 as the 'first word' of the Spirit to the church in responsibility. Surely you do not mean to assert that Paul's letter to the saints at Ephesus was later, or that this letter did not regard the church in responsibility. To say either would be utterly false. The epistles to the Corinthians regard the church in responsibility, as indeed do all the epistles. I will not give expression to my feelings but your remarks are inconsistent with the plain teaching and facts of Scripture. Even if it were admitted (which is impossible) that the letter to Ephesus in @Revelation 2 is the first communication of the Spirit to the church in responsibility, the *first word* is not "Thou art fallen;" the first word as to herself is commendation, as is well known. Besides the sense of the passage is not exactly "Thou art fallen", but "*from whence* thou art fallen". The candlestick is still there, though it would be removed if there were not repentance.
On page 4 you speak of the *saints¬ righteousnesses* -- that these are produced in them through the service of Christ and their walking in the Spirit while they are here in responsibility; and that thus the Lord can, in grace, speak as though they had entirely done with themselves. Here again you show how the truth is really in your heart, for this is just what I understand to be the teaching of the word as to Christian responsibility. But you turn aside immediately to say that 'responsibility in Scripture stands in contrast to preservation by God in His sovereignty through a condition being maintained which is the result of a divinely given state'. You had been remarking about God triumphing on the 'responsible line', and that things done by the saints here in responsibility are credited to them. If the saints work righteousness by God's grace through the Spirit on the responsible line what is this but that they are preserved by Him in a 'divinely given state'. This is indeed the truth. We are created by Him in Christ Jesus for good works which were ordained that we should walk in them. We are preserved by Him and kept by His power, He working in us for His own will and pleasure. According to your remarks at the bottom of page 4, responsibility is in contrast to all this,
{129}
whereas responsibility is bound up with it according to what you say in the former part. There is some truth in your remarks as to the angels who fell and those who did not, but the whole truth is not there; certainly if you carry the thought forward you will arrive at the error; you will suggest that the Lord, being elect, was not tested in responsibility. You clearly imply that the elect angels are not tested, for you set responsibility in contrast to their being preserved sovereignly. I am not prepared to say much as to the elect angels, but certainly the solemn charge to Timothy *before them* as to his responsibility would show that they know what it is to be under a charge. I believe, too, that they were tested and stood (compare @Jude 9) being preserved by God, as you say. And it is quite certain that elect among men are tested in responsibility. The elect are seen as responsible in @Colossians 3. As regards 'no responsibility in Christ', you will please remember what I have remarked many times to you that my exercise was to preserve the authority of Scripture as to it. It is of all importance to let Scripture speak for itself. It speaks of living godly in Christ Jesus, created in Christ Jesus for good works, approved in Christ, etc., so that I accept the expression only in a modified way. Scripture is wiser than we are, and if we bow to it we shall be preserved from dogmatism. There is a region in which all things are of God -- where 'one' did not know whether he was in the body or out of it; here responsibility has no place. But as here on earth I am in Christ, and my responsibility flows from this. As J.N.D. says, 'Christian responsibility is the responsibility of being a Christian, that is, of walking, because we are in Christ, as Christ walked, through Christ dwelling in us' (Collected Writings, Volume 17, p. 452).
As to your remark that nothing connected with responsibility goes into heaven, I repeat that it is not true. As I have said, the Lord was connected with responsibility; He is in heaven; the church is connected with responsibility and she goes to heaven. You say that I do not prove J.B.S.¬s statement incorrect. I do not wish to. I accept it as he meant it. I did not refer to it at all, as far as I can remember.
Concerning the judgment seat of Christ I only called attention to a remark of yours (I am speaking from memory) that God cannot judge His own work -- that this did not quite tally with the facts presented. Scripture sets forth the principle of
{130}
God passing judgment on or appraising His own work (see @Genesis 1). At the judgment seat of Christ good and bad works are judged. Good works are prepared of God that we should walk in them. The King came in to see the guests. Certainly some of the apostle's works were directly God's works. I only refer to this point so that there might be a balance.
In conclusion I would state that I have no such thought as that anyone could fulfil his responsibility as Christ did; nor do I know anyone who has. Scripture says that "in many things we offend all" (@James 3: 2). "Christ was in all points tested as we are, yet without sin". Hence the contrast. He was infinitely perfect in everything.
My exercise has been to get an understanding of the way Scripture looks at responsibility -- especially Christian responsibility. Scripture says that I "offend often" and at the same time insists that I fulfil my responsibility (see James); it is quite clear therefore that I am not disqualified for the fulfilment of responsibility, even though I offend. Paul came short of Christ's standard as we learn from Acts, but he says, "Be ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ". Scripture says that Paul was a follower of Christ and so was a model for others; hence it teaches that he fulfilled responsibility in this respect. Mark failed but "afterward repented and went". He was not disqualified by his failure for the resumption of a servant's responsibility.
But there is a deeper consideration than isolated cases so clearly presented; the character of the dispensation is involved. Has there been a corresponding response in Christianity to the light presented by Christ? There has. To deny this is casting a shade on the mission of the Holy Spirit - to sin against Him. I have mentioned Paul, but I would cite his teaching as being more to the point (compare @Romans 5: 1 - 5; @Romans 8: 35 - 39; @Acts 1 - 4; @1 John 5: 18;@1 John 3: 6).
@Romans 8 is of special importance as showing the triumph of God through the gospel in regard to the law. There can be no question about the "righteous requirement of the law" involving responsibility. A 'requirement' is surely what is demanded as a duty or responsibility. It is fulfilled (note the word) in those who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. I observe your comment that it is not 'by us' but 'in us', but it does not weigh much with me, because 'walk' is *action* and hence involves 'by'. @Romans 13 enlarges on this:
{131}
"He that loveth another hath fulfilled the law", verse 8. Here the fulfilment of the law is by *what is done*.
I am glad to have seen your tract, 'Responsibility, Faithfulness, and Obligation', because it contains statements, such as 'every privilege must bring its corresponding responsibility or obligation', which show that you really hold the truth, as I have already remarked. But one thing that strikes me as peculiar is the publication of a paper to give a definition of three English words, two of which (as far as concordances show) are not employed in the translation of the Bible, and the third not in the New Testament. You admit that the word 'responsibility' is not used by the Spirit, but that the thought is necessarily connected with the creature. For *your* idea of the 'thought' I must go to the *English word you use*. Turning to a good dictionary, I find responsibility means, 1st, 'The state of being responsible, answerable or accountable;' 2nd, 'That for which one is answerable, a duty, trust or obligation'. Here I am blocked, for I cannot tell what you mean by the word you use, for you make it differ from 'obligation' whereas the dictionary makes obligation a meaning of responsibility. Again I find in the tract 'responsibility or obligation' as if you admit that the words are synonyms. This is only an example of many inconsistencies. In writing or speaking we should use words according to their ordinary meaning, otherwise we confuse our readers and hearers.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 24th, 1917.
Mr. C. A. Coates.
Beloved Brother, -- Lately I heard that you had a fall and were poorly, but no particulars. I trust you have recovered by this time.
It was a cheer to get your letter in December. Since then I have been to Indianapolis and Chicago and Detroit. We had a very good season in Indianapolis. We had four readings in the early chapters of 1 Kings. The principal thought at the outset was to see how the responsible element (David), having been reduced to great weakness, was resuscitated, and how the prophetic ministry, etc., was used to bring about the establishment of the true king to the confusion and overthrow of the
{132}
false one -- antichrist. The Lord helped us. Our brother Mr. George Ware was with us and contributed, also our brother Mr. Gill. Mr. Ware has gone to the West Indies.
I had a *long* letter from J.S.G. lately. It distressed me very much. He speaks of responsibility fulfilled in measures and yet attacks this very thing in others with all his might. In this respect the confusion is pitiable. It is indeed very humbling as in a brother one has loved and valued. He says the *first* 'word' to the church *in responsibility* was 'thou art fallen', as if the Acts and epistles did not regard the church in responsibility. He tries to make capital out of the word 'in' in @Romans 8: 4 -- that the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled *in* us, not *by* us. There is really nothing in his point -- for fulfilment must be in the sense of *by*. Love is the fulfilling of the law (chapter 13), and this is in the sense of by. "Done away in Christ" (@2 Corinthians 3: 14) is similar in the sense of *in*, and, of course, this involves what Christ *did*. I have answered his letter at length, and I trust the Lord will use what I have sought to put before our brother. As a matter of fact, the character of the dispensation is involved in what he has said, and I have a strong suspicion that the enemy is endeavouring to bolster up the recent public assumption that Christianity is a failure -- of course dear J. S. Giles does not *mean* this, although his *words* imply it.
I also had a letter this month from J. Henderson and one from Miss Elwood -- both of a kind with J. S. Giles¬. They seem to be of one mind, possibly they confer a good deal. To me it is all most sad; but I am assured the Lord will come in for them and for us all. It would be especially distressing if dear J.H. and Miss E. came under a cloud in any permanent way.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 29th, 1917.
My Dear Brother, -- I am glad to have your letter of the 13th inst.
As to a 'Christian fulfilling his responsibilities' I believe my thoughts are the same as your own -- the same as are generally held among the saints. Of one thing I am sure and
{133}
this is that "we all offend often", that whatever marked the saints at the beginning, the church has utterly failed in her responsibility. I am certain too that in Christ only do we see absolute perfection in the path of responsibility. Of Him only could it be said that He did *always* those things that pleased God.
But as regards Christian responsibility -- whether it may be said to have been fulfilled in any sense -- it is obvious that our enquiry should be 'How does Scripture view it?' As the English word 'responsibility' is not in the Bible, we simply employ it as many other words to express thoughts in Scripture which correspond with its ordinary meaning. It means -- 'The state of being responsible, answerable or accountable; that for which one is answerable, a duty, trust or obligation'. Does Scripture affirm or afford evidence that what is thus expressed found an answer in others than the Lord Himself? Unquestionably it does. Instances of it are too many to enumerate. I give a few: @2 Timothy 4: 7; @Philippians 3: 17; @Ephesians 1: 1, 15; @Acts 2: 14 - 47. A notable illustration is @Acts 14: 26: "The work which they had fulfilled". The Holy Spirit had called them to this work (@Acts 13: 2) and they had *fulfilled* it. The apostles were responsible (compare @1 Corinthians 9: 16, 17) for this work and they fulfilled it (compare @Romans 15:18 - 28). Here then is an instance of *fulfilled responsibility* according to Scripture, and this is in spite of the fact that *one* of these associates with the apostles (Mark) had failed!
But the question of fulfilled responsibility goes deeper than isolated cases -- it involves what Christianity is -- the character of the dispensation. The teaching of Romans shows that God has triumphed through the gospel not only in being able in righteousness to justify the believer, but that the believer having the Holy Spirit *answers to God's requirements* -- "That the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit" (@Romans 8: 4). "Requirement" is, of course, what is demanded in the law (@Deuteronomy 10: 12) and hence responsibility. It is said to be *fulfilled* (note the word) in us who walk not according to flesh but according to Spirit. Note: it is not said 'who *should* walk', but 'who *walk*' -- that is, it is presented abstractly, but, of course "us" refers to persons known to Paul including himself. A point has been made here that "fulfilled" refers to 'in' not 'by' but if it fails a
{134}
fulfilment *must* involve 'by'. It is required that I should love God and the brethren -- love involves *by* (see @2 Corinthians 3: 14 for a similar use of the word 'in' -- "done away *in* Christ"). This also involves *by* -- the Lord's death. Then there is the responsibility flowing from the relations in which we are set and the calling with which we are called. Colossians and Ephesians treat of these. Fulfilment of responsibility in measure is recognised in both. The saints are called faithful and they are said to have *love* for all other saints. These epistles teach the responsibilities flowing from our position in Christ (see @Ephesians 2: 10 and @Colossians 2: 6).
As to the *church's* responsibility there is scarcely need to affirm that it has failed in it for I do not suppose that any Christian holds the contrary. There is not only "from whence thou art fallen" now but the "depths of Satan". We cannot take this too much to heart. But how refreshing to revert to the 'former days' in which there was an answer in the church to the light and privilege vouchsafed (@Acts 2: 5; compare @Hebrews 10: 32 - 34). There was a *continuing steadfastly* in certain things involving responsibility. The righteous requirement of the law was there fulfilled (@Acts 2).
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
*Letter from Mr. C. A. Coates*
Teignmouth.
March 8th, 1917.
Mr. James Taylor.
My Dear Brother, -- I was very glad to have your letter of January 24th, and to hear of the good season in Indianapolis, and of your visits to Chicago and Detroit. I saw a letter from Mr. Geo. Ware the other day in which he spoke very happily of the time at Indianapolis.
On -this side 1 think matters are, on the whole, a little more encouraging as to things that have been in controversy. I must say that I began to be apprehensive as to the course which some of our dear brethren were pursuing. But there seems to be a general impression that at the last meeting at Kennington there was a different tone, and a certain degree of modification of the positions taken up. Mr. E. J. McBride, and others, have written encouragingly as to it, so that I trust the strong
{135}
line of agitation may be dropped and there may be a greater disposition to learn how Scripture puts things.
I heard of the letter which J.S.G. wrote to you. He sent copies of it to several brethren, some of whom wrote him plainly as to the spirit of it.
You are quite right in concluding that J.S.G., J.H. and Miss E. are very much in touch with each other. Miss Elwood has been strong on certain remarks of F.E.R.¬s in Volume 14 as to "in Christ" being outside responsibility. But since I called her attention to what F.E.R. says in Volume 18, where he plainly distinguishes between the two distinct usages of the term which are obvious in Scripture, she has not said any more on that line.
I think the root of the trouble is that certain expressions of J.N.D.¬s and F.E.R.¬s have been taken up without sufficient exercise, and without weighing spiritually what was in the minds of these beloved and honoured servants. J.N.D. habitually uses the term 'the responsible man' as synonymous with 'man in the flesh', and speaks of the cross as the end of responsibility. But one would have thought that it was obvious what he meant. How could the cross be the end of *Christian* responsibility?
I think the Lord has put His finger on a weak spot, but we may be sure that *He* intends to bring in strength at that very point. Sober and exercised brethren generally (so far as I hear) are getting help, and I judge the result will be better establishment in a sense of the truth and the kingdom of God.
I suppose the conditions which obtain just now will make your next visit to this side somewhat uncertain?
With much love in the Lord to Mrs. Taylor and yourself and Stella.
Yours affectionately in Him,
Charles A. Coates.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 20th, 1917.
Mr. A. M. Hayward.
My Dear Brother, -- I was very pleased to receive your letter and enclosure (first letter to Mr. F------ ), I need not say that both were of much interest to me.
I have looked through the letter you have enclosed and it commends itself to me. It is remarkable that this exercise,
{136}
having begun with certain remarks about the rapture, should now turn on the teaching of Romans. I am thankful that Romans is coming into evidence for I believe that, although the enemy is seeking to deprive us of what we may have gained, the exercise will result in the better understanding of the epistle. This will be real gain indeed. Only lately my attention has been called to an address of F.E.R.¬s ('Helps', October, 1915), which is helpful as to the matter before us. He says among other things 'The demand of the law and the righteousness of many are fulfilled in all the children of wisdom', quoting @Romans 8: 4.
The moral element is very strong in Romans. I have always thought it a very fine phase of Moses¬ history when he interceded for Israel that Jehovah should not destroy the people and make of himself (Moses) a great generation. Moses had a moral triumph in view, and this is what Romans presents to us. Man is recovered consistently with God's righteousness. It is not one race destroyed and another created; the 'ungodly' man is justified. It is the *same individual* who had an ungodly history that is now justified. He has the Spirit; he reckons himself dead to sin, but alive to God in Christ. His body is an instrument of righteousness for God. He is not under the law, but fulfils the righteous requirement of the law as walking in the Spirit; he is more than a conqueror. It is a complete moral triumph for God where there has been complete outward defeat. The same moral idea appears in the fact that as sin and death came in by one man, righteousness and life came in by one Man, Christ Jesus. In Him we have a Head. All this is in the wilderness. New creation has Canaan in view.
It is peculiar to me that several brothers have written me to withdraw the expression 'fulfilled responsibility' and they say nothing as to the occasion of my exercise and that of many others, to what Mr. Giles has said. It seems to me the 'moral' element is lacking here.
I believe Romans is the test for us at the present time, and I earnestly pray and trust that the Lord will preserve amongst His people what He has graciously recovered for them.
Our practical safety lies in being righteous, in fulfilling our obligations. Intimating that no one but Christ can do this is a poor way of bringing it about. It is virtually saying that Scripture enjoins impossibilities.
But I am assured that the Lord is helping the brethren
{137}
through all this exercise, and that He will preserve us all and the truth with us.
My wife joins in love to yourself and Mrs Hayward; we are very sorry to hear of her illness and we trust she is better.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 31st, 1917.
Mr. C. A. Coates.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of March 8th was duly received and it has been a great source of encouragement. That you were enabled to take such a hopeful view of conditions on your side is the occasion of much thankfulness in my heart. Certain letters I received lately would confirm this.
I am sorry I did not send you a copy of the correspondence with J.S.G., but I note that you have seen his letter. Possibly you have seen my reply by this time. I have lately received a reply to my letter to Mr. G. It is of such character as to preclude any further correspondence in detail. I am disposed to let the matter rest with my letter of January 12th to him. The Lord is evidently working as your letter shows, and one is assured the truth will stand. I also received a letter from J.H. and one from Miss E. almost by the same mail as that by which Mr. G.¬s arrived. They are all written in the same tone. Mr. H. says a good deal about party spirit and extreme views built upon things I have said. He seems to place the onus of what confusion there may be on your side on certain remarks of mine. What strikes me is the absence of any concern upon his part that possibly his remarks and those of J.S.G.¬s may have contributed to the confusion. There is no strife on this side of the Atlantic that I know of as to those things, or any party feeling. But it is not to be wondered at that difficulty exists on your side when statements such as those which appeared in *Mutual Comfort* have been made and contended in a public reading and spread broadcast in print.
Several have requested me to withdraw the expression 'fulfilled responsibility'. Of course I have no desire to contend for a word and if any better word than 'responsibility' is found to express its meaning, I have no objection to its being used. I cannot myself see much difficulty between a fulfilled
{138}
'work' and a fulfilled 'responsibility'. The former is literally scriptural, and the latter is substantially scriptural. I have been noticing how the response which God seeks from the saints in answer to the light and grace vouchsafed in Christ is, in the epistles, not only enjoined but also assumed to *exist*. Sometimes it is spoken of in an abstract way, and other times presented concretely, as in Paul. This resolves itself into what has often been insisted on, viz. That at the outset the testimony was supported in a living expression of it. As I write, the thought presses upon me, that for the last thirty or more years the usual object of attack has been the Spirit and the result of His operations here. From the outset of this controversy it was clear that (however unconsciously) a shade, to say the least, was being cast over the Spirit and His work in the saints. To follow the trend of the remarks no one who did not know better could escape the conclusion that there was a discrepancy between the work of the Holy Spirit in the saints and the light presented in Christ. In answering such a comment, Mr. G. and those who supported him, usually assumed that it was held that individual Christians in their mixed condition could fulfil responsibility as Christ did; whereas there was no such thought held. What was insisted on was that the language of Scripture, and the facts presented therein, whether in an abstract or concrete way, proved the perfection of the Spirit's work. John's epistles are a notable illustration of this.
We heard with regret some time ago that you had been very poorly, but evidently you are somewhat better. You are constantly remembered here and I trust the Lord supports you in every way. At present I have given up the thought of crossing to your side. My responsibility in my place of business has been greatly increased and so I am more needed on this side at present but I am waiting on the Lord as to a possible visit.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
May 11th, 1917.
Mr. D. L. Higgins.
Beloved Brother, -- Yours of April 18th was duly received, and I am sorry indeed to see by it that my letter was disappointing to you. I had hoped that it would meet your exercises.
{139}
I made it clear (as in all my other letters) that no one but the Lord answered to the mind of God *fully* in *practice*. This, being equivalent to 'responsibility in measure' would, I was assured, be satisfactory to you. I pointed out that I had not introduced the expression or taken it up in any dogmatic way. You say 'your expression', but it is not mine -- others use it: you do yourself in substance. When it is said that no one but the Lord fulfilled responsibility, I objected because the statement was not scriptural. I pointed out in numerous quotations from Scripture (in letters to J.S.G. and others) that responsibility is regarded in the Word as fulfilled, sometimes in detail, and sometimes in the general course, in others beside the Lord. I find that you admit that Scripture (Romans) speaks of the fulfilment of responsibility in Christians, indeed you enlarge on the fact. I fail, therefore, to see the consistency of the complaint you make.
My exercise has been to preserve the authority of Scripture on the one hand, and to guard the truth on the other. I found that statements made on your side as to the 'rapture' and 'responsibility' did not agree with Scripture, so I objected. I found further that these statements involved a line of thought which tended to weaken the foundations of Christianity, from the subjective side. I pointed this out as simply and as clearly as I could. I have nothing special to advocate except the truth as it has been delivered to us. My attitude has been a defensive one as to the truth, and it remains this. If anything can be shown to be unscriptural in what I have said or written, I will gladly judge and withdraw it. I take the liberty of writing all this so that you may rightly estimate my position as to the matter.
Referring to the substance of your letter, I may say that I am *most thankful* for your presentation of Christian responsibility. In the third paragraph of your letter you outline substantially what I understand to be the truth taught in Romans in this respect. It cheers me to read it from you, and I hope many of the saints may see it. I think it worth quoting, 'as regards the point of responsibility I have no doubt that in the divine system of things, which we speak of as Christianity, we have an answer to this as the fruit of the abounding grace of God. In Romans where man in responsibility is treated of as a result of the introduction of this system, the Spirit is able to say "but now being made free from sin, and become
{140}
servants to bondmen to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life" (@Romans 6: 22). There is further the point in the 8th chapter that the intent of "God sending his own Son" was that "the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit" (@Romans 8: 4). The recovery of men for the pleasure of God is found therefore on this line, and it is an important part of Christianity. But it is recovery in Christ and in the Spirit's power by God and for God. It does not stand to the credit of men but to the glory of God. Just so far as we reckon ourselves dead indeed unto sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus and just so far as we walk in the Spirit (which is the only proper Christian walk) is this result obtained, but it is all to the glory of God, "for of him, and through him, and to him, are all things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen" (@Romans 11: 36)'. You see, therefore, that I am gladly with you when you are unfolding the truth of the gospel and I hope that the Lord will enable you to enlarge upon this great subject.
But in the paragraphs that follow I find a drop from this healthy atmosphere. There is labour to show that someone is wrong and there is no light or help. You say that there is 'fear that in your expressions honour is put on the creature that belongs to God alone'. What expression? I have said many times that Scripture teaches that responsibility was fulfilled in others besides the Lord Jesus. That may be called my expression, but it is the truth. It is really yours substantially as well as mine, as any unbiased person will admit who reads the paragraph from your letter which I have quoted. I do not see how anyone who knows and loves the truth can deny what it conveys. It is no question of the walk and ways of others being perfect as Christ's were (as I have said constantly), but of the authority and accuracy of Scripture and of the truth resulting from the presence of the Holy Spirit in the saints. I hold that to deny that there was fulfilled responsibility in the church as taught in Romans and as seen in fact in the Acts (in passages I quoted in my last letter) is undermining Christianity. This is a very real exercise in my soul, and I hope you will bear with me in stating it in this way. I do not think for an instant that J.S.G. or those who think as he does, hold in their soul what their expressions convey, but wrong expressions can be used of the enemy to damage others, even though those who uttered them are themselves right.
{141}
I wish now to say a few words as to the things said at the meeting at Mrs. P------¬s to which you refer. It was said that the Lord's reference to the disciples, "They have kept thy word" was not a question of their fulfilled responsibility, but one of 'fidelity', as chosen vessels, to the Father's name. 'Fidelity' according to the dictionary means 'faithfulness in the discharge of duty or obligation' and so implies fulfilled responsibility according to the measure of it in any given instance. Besides the words which the Lord uses would mean in ordinary human affairs that responsibility had been fulfilled. If I am responsible to do something and I do it and another says that I have done it, he means that I have fulfilled responsibility. Why should we deny this meaning to the Lord's words? Such handling of His sacred words leaves the impression on a simple mind that the Lord should have used different words. It is really (without intent, of course) undermining the authority of Scripture -- the Lord's own words. Of course the disciples were weak and failed in many ways as we all do, alas, and whatever they did that the Lord could commend was done by God's help. No true Christian would deny this. But the Lord must be allowed to speak in His own way, and His word in @John 17 has the *same authority as it will have at the judgment seat*.
You further say as to Paul's statement, "I have kept the faith" that responsibility did not seem to be the point, that Paul protests elsewhere that he would not be justified in judging himself. What is overlooked here is that @2 Timothy 4: 7 is an *inspired utterance*. It is not simply Paul as a responsible person passing judgment on himself. The Spirit of God causes the words to be written, and the words plainly say that a certain responsibility was fulfilled, who am I that I should deny it? The matter is really serious. Of course, there is more than fulfilled responsibility in the verse, as you very justly say. The fact that there had been no breakdown in the testimony committed to Paul is the chief thought. But this only emphasises that he fulfilled responsibility. He is, however, speaking of his services and the crown that would be his as given by the righteous Judge. As to the work given to Barnabas and Paul (@Acts 13 and 14) you set verse 27 of chapter 14 over against verse 26. There is beautiful moral order in the verses. The Holy Spirit in writing the history says the apostles fulfilled the work, but they tell the assembly "all that God had done with them". This is as it should be, and is very beautiful.
{142}
But did not the Holy Spirit select the right words in verse 26? Did He mean what the words convey? Surely He did, and this notwithstanding that one of the number that had gone to the work had signally failed. So that while (as you justly insist and I heartily join you in this) the glory all belongs to God, He is pleased *to honour His servants*. Let us not deprive Him of this right. It is part of His glory. As to @Acts 2 you speak of your soul not resting in the manner of the saints fulfilling responsibility, but on the fact that divine grace and power kept them in unity. It is right that you should rest in this, dear Mr. Higgins, and I seek to do so myself. Surely it is in what God is and does that our souls should rest. But then we must think of what He rests in also. This should appeal to our hearts. It involves reconciliation. There were the wave sheaf (Christ) and the loaves (the saints) (see @Leviticus 23). Both were *waved before Him*. The loaves refer to Pentecost. They were brought out of the peoples¬ houses, baked with leaven. The saints, as having the Spirit and exercised individually and bearing fruit in their ways and walk, are typified here. Hence while we enlarge on God's grace, and the power of the Spirit underlying all, we gladly allow the blessed God the right to speak as He pleases, He is pleased to enlarge on what the saints said and did. They are not eulogising themselves, the Spirit of God is writing their history. Let us not turn aside the meaning of His words. All was the fruit of divine grace surely, but it worked out through human hearts, minds, hands, feet, etc., and God is pleased to accredit to them the precious results seen in His children. Every item of responsibility fulfilled in them is to His glory, but He is pleased to speak of them as doing it. To say that this is giving to the creature, glory that belongs to God is to impugn Scripture. It may have the semblance of piety, but it really tends to deprive God of His glory. See, for instance, in @1 Thessalonians 1, how He accredits the saints with their "work of faith and labour of love, and enduring constancy of hope of our Lord Jesus Christ, *before our God and Father*". To use a figure, we do not honour a father of a well-behaved family by persisting to speak well of him while we ignore his children. He would speak of them (compare @Isaiah 8: 18).
This leads me to say a word about John's epistle where the children of God are brought into view. And here I would remark that the saints are looked at as a *generation* down here
{143}
born of God. They correspond with Christ. I quote the following: "If ye know that he is righteous, know that every one who practices righteousness is begotten of him" (@1 John 2: 29). "Every one that hath this hope in him purifies himself even as he is pure" (@1 John 3: 3). "Whoever abides in him, does not sin" (@1 John 3: 6). "He that practises righteousness is righteous, even as *he* is righteous" (@1 John 3: 7). "Even as *he* is, *we* also are in this world" (@1 John 4: 17). "Everyone begotten of God does not sin, but he that has been begotten of God keeps himself" (@1 John 5: 18). I quote these passages as showing the side of the truth presented. The Spirit is recognised, and all that is subjective is the fruit of His work, but a generation or family is before us. It is a question of what one of this family does -- he practises righteousness. To deny that there is fulfilled responsibility implied here is perfectly futile. And to say, that the assertion of this carrying out of the obligation in the practice of righteousness is depriving God of His glory, is still more so. The saints glorify Him of whom they are begotten by the reflection of His nature down here.
As regards my letter to J.S.G., it is true that I approved his statement, as you say, and that I accredited him with holding the truth. This is my mind still. If his letter had on the whole supported that statement or had been in general agreement with it, there would be nothing for me to do but to thank God. But his letter was very far from this, as any one can see who reads it. I feel, therefore, that you did not state the case rightly when you make the difference between him and me a matter of form of expression.
I regret that my letter has lengthened so much. Please pardon this. I trust you will consider that the subject justifies it. My firm belief is that God will bring blessing out of all this exercise for His people.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
May 12th, 1917.
Mr. A. M. Hayward.
My Dear Brother, -- I have to thank you for two letters. I am very glad to have them and enclosures. It is good of you to write me so fully, giving so much valuable information. I am very thankful for your letter to Mr. Henderson. The Lord will surely bless you in respecting the age and experience and
{144}
past faithfulness of one whom, for these reasons, we all respect. I have long regarded him, as you know, as one who stood for the interests of the Lord Jesus in London in a special way.
I trust the Lord will enable him to recover himself, for his attitude towards many and especially towards the truth, has been the occasion for some time of sorrowful exercise to me.
I have been told that those who do not agree with Mr. Giles¬ view are regarded as in a 'young men's movement'. This does not seem quite just; at any rate, young men should defend the truth. But it is evident that any discrepancy of age should be made up by sobriety. The letters that I have seen do not lead me to suppose that there is any want in this respect, but I feel for myself the word to Timothy "let no man despise thy youth". I apprehend that this is to be by godly sobriety and spiritual power.
Mr. F. Lock has written an outline of the history of this matter and I have no doubt that you will see a copy.
Mr. Higgins wrote me lately and I am sending him a reply. Perhaps, if you will make request, he will let you see the correspondence.
We are sorry Mrs. Hayward is making so little progress. I trust the warm weather will help her. My wife joins in love to you both.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- I am greatly interested in what you write as to recovery, resurrection, etc. I wish I had time to speak a little of these great and precious subjects. There is great danger of God's victory in recovery being obscured. I am constantly looking to the Lord that He may give grace and ability and fidelity so that the truth may be set forth clearly and that it may stand in the hearts of the saints. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
May 19th, 1917.
Mr. Albert E. Cakebread.
My Dear Brother, -- I am glad to have your letter of April 16th. It is very interesting to me, especially as the remarks you make as to the truth commend themselves to me fully.
These questions relating to 'responsibility' and the
{145}
'rapture' of the saints, while they have disclosed a serious difference of judgment in certain quarters, will at the same time lead to a better understanding of the truth. As your letter states briefly what I understand to be correct as to the truth of Christian responsibility, I need not enlarge on the subject save to repeat that I am in agreement with you, as said above.
What seems to me to be overlooked is, that God has brought in, through and in Christ, an order of man in which He finds pleasure. This was announced at the birth of Christ: "Good pleasure in men". In contrast to men in the flesh, these men in whom God has good pleasure, fulfilled in the power of the Spirit, the righteous requirement of the law. The law was in Christ's heart and shall be written in the minds and hearts of men in the millennial day. Its righteous requirement (referring to Deuteronomy) is fulfilled in Christians now. Some have spoken of this as glorifying the creature rather than the Creator which is unaccountable in any brother of spiritual intelligence and consistency. It surely is to the glory of God that He has recovered man consistently with His own majesty through the death of Christ, and that the being thus recovered practises righteousness as God is righteous. It is a great moral triumph for God. Then there is the thought of the "new man" which is said to be "according to God is created in truthful righteousness and holiness" (@Ephesians 4: 24). That man thus created should fulfil responsibility in the discharge of obligations is surely to be expected. Indeed he is "created in Christ Jesus for good works". Scripture speaks of the Christians¬ good works and therefore we are entitled to speak of them. In speaking of them as Scripture does, no true Christian has the thought of glorifying the creature instead of the Creator. It is rather that through the believers¬ good works, God is glorified (see @1 Peter 2: 12).
It must not be overlooked that while we insist that everything is of God and for Him, that the glory is to be His, that He too glorifies His people. Scriptures which speak of this are too numerous to mention, but it is important that they should be borne in mind so that there may be a right balance of the truth maintained in our souls. We read of men "whose praise" is of God; Paul praised the Corinthians; he also speaks of the Thessalonians being His crown of boasting before our Lord Jesus at His coming. All this sets forth the mind of God as to any measure of the fulfilment of divine requirement in the
{146}
saints down here. To introduce the idea of the creature being glorified rather than the Creator as an objection to these things is not only altogether beside the mark, but denotes a peculiar bias in the mind in favour of some pet thought.
There is further involved in connection with these things the truth connected with the children of God in John's epistle. They are seen to correspond with Christ in the practice of righteousness, etc. As regards 'recovery', there is nothing set out more clearly in Scripture than this principle. "David recovered all". I need not enlarge on the subject as your letter speaks clearly and definitely about it. @Luke 15: 32 is very pointed: "Thy brother was dead and has come to life again, and was lost and has been found". On this account "it was right to make merry and rejoice". I trust the Lord will bless you in your exercise and that you will reap of the 'spoil' that is sure to be available.
My wife joins in love to Mrs. Cakebread and yourself.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
June 13th, 1917.
Mr. C. A. Coates.
Beloved Brother, -- I trust your health is much improved through God's mercy to you and us all. We pray for you much.
The Lord helped at our special meetings last month. We read @1 Kings 17 and @2 Kings 4, connecting the ministries of Elijah and Elisha and linking all with Romans. It was a very interesting time indeed.
Letters received from your side show that the Lord is helping as to the recent exercises, and that good is accruing to the saints. One is concerned as to the dear brethren who introduced the new thoughts -- whether they will see wherein they departed from Scripture. They will suffer great loss if they do not, I am sure. It has been a great encouragement that the Lord has enabled you to perceive the drift of the movement from the outset. I sent you last month a copy of a letter I wrote to Mr. Higgins in answer to one from him. I hope it reached you. Mails are very uncertain. D. L. Higgins says the crux of the matter is as to whether God is to have the glory or man. I have seen nothing to indicate that anyone is according to man (or the 'creature' ) glory that belongs to God. Glory
{147}
all belongs to God surely; but what strikes one is the way certain features of the truth are ignored. God is pleased to attribute glory to His saints -- this is surely not subtracted from His! Paul speaks of the Thessalonians being his glory. He *praised* the Corinthians too. His light affliction worked glory for him.
My wife joins in much Christian love -- we are both very sorry to know of your late illness, but we trust you are better through mercy.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
July 21st, 1917.
Mr. P. R. Morford.
My Dear Brother, -- I thank you for your letter of June 28th which came this week. I appreciate the spirit of your letter and I will try and convey briefly, as well as I can, my understanding of the features of the truth you mention.
(1) 'The centering of all God's purposes in the Second Man (morally the First) and not attaching to Adam'. This, to my mind, answers itself. All God's purposes surely centre in Christ. Adam can have no place save that of a sinner saved by grace (which I believe him to be) like the rest of us.
(2) 'The fall and its irretrievable character as far as man is concerned'. The 'fall' involved utter and irretrievable ruin for man according to nature. He was *lost*. As to anything in himself, he must disappear under the judgment of God. But God had His own thoughts and these centre in man -- the Second Man, of whom Adam was only a figure, but nevertheless Man. We cannot suggest anything as to God finding a way of introducing Christ as Man other than the one He designed; but had He introduced man in Christ otherwise and destroyed Adam and Eve when they sinned, there would have been no idea of 'lost and found' or recovery. The judgment of God against sin (although not as at the cross) would be in evidence, but not His rights in mercy. Hence He immediately speaks of the woman's seed. Instead of destruction there was clothing for Adam and Eve. Typically, man is covered by God (accounted righteous), but through the death of another. This, of course, introduces Romans, where the 'ungodly' is said to be justified. Adam was a man after he was clothed as
{148}
before, but how different morally! I refer, of course, to Romans. The point in that epistle is not that God destroys the sinner and creates a righteous man in his stead (although new creation as an all-important truth has its place elsewhere), but that the sinner having judged his sin, is justified by faith, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. He judges himself, sin and the world in the light of Christ's death, as receiving the Holy Spirit. Although unchanged as to identity, and still a man, he is morally another man; he is after the order of Christ; he reckons himself alive in Christ; he has eternal life in Christ; as walking in the Spirit, he fulfils the righteous requirements of the law; he pleases God. In him is seen in this world the triumph of God where outward defeat had been. Underlying all is the new birth, for that which is born of the flesh is flesh, and it profits nothing.
What I have been saying refers to the triumph of God where Satan seemed to have had his way. It takes place in time -- the millennium being on the same line, having a like end in view, that is, God's victory in regard of Israel and the nations. New creation has more reference to heaven and the eternal state of things. As to new birth, it is to be noted that the man or person is born anew, not simply something in him.
(3) 'Recovery, or re-instatement. How far recovery goes and is it wholly outside the man that we speak of as gone in judgment'. This is largely covered in what is said above. As to recovery, @Luke 15 admits of no doubt. Of course the young man is different as back in his father's house from what he had been. The moral change is seen in, "Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee; I am no more worthy to be called thy son". All that follows refers to Christ, and it involves that the prodigal was changed into a new order of man. All in the house is according to Christ. The man born after the flesh has no portion in it -- indeed he desires no part in it, as seen in the "elder son". As to 're-instatement', I would use it in the sense that man (that order of being in contrast with the angels) which was lost for God through Adam's fall is seen again before God in Christ. For since "by man came death, by man also resurrection of those that are dead" -- the same order of being (as compared with angels, as I said) but not the same order of *man*. One was made of dust and sinful, the other the Son of God out of heaven, a quickening Spirit; but each was a man. We see God's
{149}
triumph here again -- He holding to the order of *being* that He had purposed in whom to carry out His will.
(4) 'Going to heaven; the ground of going there. The bearing or not of Enoch's walk or our walk on this'. @Ephesians 2 teaches that we are raised up and seated in heavenly places on account of God's rich mercy and great love. It also tells us that we are created in Christ Jesus -- we are God's workman-ship. We are thus fitted for our great place. Although we could not be in heaven save through Christ's death, yet our position there is in connection with God's sovereign counsel and love. This epistle also shows that the church is formed down here subjectively according to its great calling. It is inconceivable that God would have it otherwise, so He works in us for the willing and the working according to His good pleasure. See also @Ephesians 5: 21 - 27 for Christ's work with the same end in view. Enoch, being a type of the church, had *before his* translation, the testimony that he pleased God. F.E.R. says, 'God wrought in Enoch that he might be for God's pleasure, and hence God translated him..'. God says, 'I will produce that upon earth that shall be for my pleasure, and will translate what pleases me'. (Readings and Addresses in U.S.A. and Canada, 1898, page 401).
(5) 'The right of a creature to predicate fulfilled responsibility of any other creature'. This is a very peculiar query. What was said last year was that 'fulfilled responsibility' could not be predicated of any one save the Lord. To this others and myself strenuously objected. Now the contention is that no creature can predicate it of another! In a recent letter an elder brother asserted this, and at the same time he spoke of certain brethren who had been standing *earnestly* and *faithfully* for the truth of Christianity before I was born, and were continuing to do so. They were responsible to do this and were doing it 'earnestly' and 'faithfully', and so were fulfilling their responsibility 'in measure'. Of course these brothers are creatures as well as the brother who wrote! And in a recent article of yours ('The Measure of a man' ) you refer to the angels fulfilling responsibility as maintained by God. Of course inspired statements are ruled out, seeing it is one creature speaking of another, but surely if a brother is faithful and fears God above many I am at liberty to refer to these things as Nehemiah did. The Spirit speaks of Dorcas being full of "good works", but then the "widows" showed
{150}
the garments which she had made. Instances of this kind can be multiplied. As to @Luke 17: 10, I apprehend "we are unprofitable servants" refers to one's judgment of *one's own* service. As a bondman the Lord has bought me, and I am sure I do not yield a full return for what He has expended on me. I do not see that "unprofitable servants" can be rightly used to set aside the thought of a believer fulfilling responsibility, for the Lord's words state that the bondman may do what he is ordered to do (that is, fulfil literally his responsibility, it seems to me) but nevertheless is to regard himself unprofitable.
As to @Colossians 1: 12, I understand it to mean that the Father has made us suited in *every way* for the sharing of the portion of the saints in light. It is like the prodigal being robed, etc., and brought into the house. In closing I may make reference to @1 Corinthians 4: 1 - 3. I apprehend that this passage refers rather to motives than to overt things. The latter surely become the occasion of judgment. We are to judge those that are within and to judge what may be said in ministry. Indeed it were impossible to maintain the discipline suitable to the house of God without this principle.
I am glad to hear that you are all well through God's mercy. Many thanks for copies of *Mutual Comfort* just received.
With love in Christ, I am,
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 6th, 1917.
Mr. C. A. Coates.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of July 1st was duly received. I am sorry you were unable to undertake to look over the Notes on Leviticus, as the help you would afford would be greatly valued. I can, however, well understand the difficulties on account of your health. Those who do not suffer from nervous disability can little appreciate what those who do, have to endure. I regret I have been unable to do anything with the Notes since I wrote you last. Some of the readings were badly reported, and this occasions extra work, as you know. I stopped working on them so as to prepare for the press the notes of the readings held here recently. I hope to have these
{151}
readings ready soon, and I am looking to the Lord that they may be useful at this juncture.
The Leviticus notes are somewhat voluminous for one book, so that the work of preparation will be tedious, especially as my time is very limited. Having to take over additional responsibility in my place of business, my spare time has been more limited than ever lately. This exercises me much and I am waiting on the Lord about it. The question often arises why one's best time, as it were, should be devoted to secular things. The need everywhere among the Lord's people is very great, and it is very exercising to see time go by rapidly and little done for the Lord. On the other hand, as has often been remarked, there is more to be done *in* us than *by* us. This also is exercising and humbling.
I am thankful that you are able to say that things are quieting down on your side. I have other evidence that this is so, and I am thankful to the Lord for it. Since I wrote you last I have had another letter from D.L.H., which I have not thought well to reply to. I feel that the truth involved in this controversy has, through one and another, been stated clearly. It can therefore be left in the Lord's hands. He is, I believe, maintaining it and the saints with it. I am sorry for J.H. and J.S.G. and will rejoice to hear that they have been enabled of the Lord to adjust themselves in regard of the truth in question and in regard of their brethren generally; for this we pray much. I trust you keep well as we all here through mercy.
My wife joins in love to you and all the friends.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
October 3rd, 1917.
Mr. W. G. Hardwick.
Beloved Brother, -- I can well understand the difficulty our dear young brethren have to face just now, as I have had to do with it in Great Britain, and more recently I have gone through it with my eldest son Allen, who was 'called'. The most objectionable feature is the requirement that the claimant for exemption from conscription on conscientious grounds must belong to a religions sect or organisation.
In facing the problem the Christian should weigh all the facts of the present situation. It is clear that the government is not to be regarded as identical with the ruling power with
{152}
which the godly remnant shall have to do in the future, @Revelation 13; it is not specially acting against Christianity. We are to regard it as ordained by God and pray for those who administer it. We should, I think, take the words or terms they use in the spirit of them rather than in the letter. They evidently wish to exempt those who have had genuine conscientious religious objections to the taking of human life, and so make a provision which seems to them will ensure this; that is, the objector must show that he is a genuine case by proving that he belongs to such a sect or organisation as they mention. It seems to me therefore that as followers of Christ we should avoid being (or seeming to be) unreasonable, and so endeavour to follow their formal requirements as far as we can, taking them, as I said, in the spirit of them rather than the letter. Of course, no true enlightened Christian can admit that he belongs to a sect, but he cannot control what others call him. Paul said, "In the way *they call* sect, so serve I my father's God".
In going through the matter with my son, I advised him to fill out the required form, bracketing the objectionable parts and adding notes explaining the scriptural exercises he had -- these notes outlining the principles held by himself and those with whom he walked in Christian fellowship, saying that they could not in the light of Scripture regard themselves as a sect. Appearing before the government representative another brother and myself explained more fully -- all with the result that exemption is so far granted.
As regards 'non-combatant' service, I see no scriptural objection to it, and I doubt that one will get God's support in refusing the claim of the government to this extent. I believe those who have submitted to this service in Great Britain have found the Lord's sympathy and help. There is a great evidence of this. They have enjoyed the sympathy and support of their brethren, too.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 17th, 1917.
Mr. E. J. Hemmings.
My Dear Brother, -- It is a good while since your letter of July 7th came to hand but I assure you it was a pleasure to receive it. Both the brethren and myself read with the keenest
{153}
interest the details of the experiences of our brethren doing non-combatant service in France. You are constantly remembered in our prayers here.
We are glad that the malted milk serves such a good purpose. It is but a small matter for the brethren to help in this way, and I hope they will continue to let divine love express itself thus.
It is a time of extraordinary pressure for all men, but the terrible upheaval is under divine control and will be made to work out its all wise designs. Many precious souls are being saved through it. There is abundant evidence of this from many quarters. It is surely a small thing for us Christians to endure hardships with the rest of mankind if the common sorrow becomes the means of salvation for some; besides there is always the precious word that "all things work together for good to those that love God", etc. There is evidence, too, that the pressure is being used to help the Lord's people generally. It is so in this country and there is good evidence of it in England and elsewhere.
Here we find much cheer. New York has always been a difficult place for the people of God, but considerable headway has been made in late years, and many are being added. We have periodical meetings in different parts of this country and Canada and the Lord usually helps in these meetings so that there is mutual gain.
With love to you and all the dear brethren with you, I am,
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 12th, 1918.
Mr. H. Waldron.
My Dear Brother, -- I was very glad indeed to get yours of December 6th. I note that you are now in the government's service. We *continue* to remember you in prayer in your trying circumstances. I note, too, the critical time through which your dear wife passed. I am thankful that both she and the dear baby boy are well through God's mercy. It is a sore trial for her, I am sure, to be deprived of her husband, but evidently God is sustaining her. The whole world is in sorrow and trial, but those who are of it are without solace and hope, whereas *we* have both in an abiding way.
{154}
As regards @Luke 15 there cannot be a doubt that the generally accepted view is that the "younger son" represents the Gentiles, as having deliberately turned away from God -- the elder son being the Jew. Luke recognises man as being primarily in relation with God -- "Adam, of God" (@Luke 3: 38), see also @Acts 17: 28. God had allowed man to take his course of self-will -- "having overlooked the times of ignorance". @Romans 1 and @Ephesians 2: 11 - 22 are also confirmatory. The Jews were "nigh" and the Gentiles were "afar off". As to the difficulty raised as to the 'Father's house', it should be noted that the house is not mentioned until the prodigal had returned. The elder son refused to go in. This surely points to the opposition of the Jews to the reception of the Gentiles as seen in the Acts. The similarity of the action of the prodigal's father in @Luke 15: 20 and that of the Holy Spirit in @Acts 10: 44, is worthy of special notice. The original for "fell" is the same in each -- denoting, not a dead fall, but energetic action of love.
Concerning @Luke 22: 14, I do not see that it shows that the Lord is first at the Supper. Primarily it was the *passover* that was in view. The Lord sat down to partake of *that* -- the Supper being introduced *afterwards*. The Lord did not partake of the Supper; it was for the disciples; it was to be a remembrance of Him, as you say. We do not need to remember one who is present with us.
On this side we are now under pressure on account of the war, especially the young brothers, but the Lord is helping. Where His hand is seen there is no room for discouragement. I was at Chicago for special meetings. There was a cheering time.
With love in Christ to you and Mrs. Waldron and the dear brethren with you, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
April 17th, 1918.
Mr. E. J. Hemmings.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of March 26th came today. I wish to thank you most heartily for your kind thought in writing me about Arthur. The news is indeed interesting. I am sure he would have enjoyed seeing the dear brethren in
{155}
your company. His letters lately have been very cheering. Of course, we are most anxious about him now in view of the fact that in his last letter he spoke of having to take part in the dreadful battle now on. Our confidence as to him is in God, who has preserved hitherto.
We often think of you, dear brother, and those with you in your trying circumstances. You have a large place in our prayers. I am sorry your previous letter has remained so long unanswered, but the pressure here is very great. There are a good many meetings to attend (thank God!) and these with family and business affairs and correspondence leave no spare time. But it is well yea happy, to be engaged in that which is profitable to others. "The night cometh", says the Lord, "when no man can work". What a time of pressure it is! But, the pressure is not specially for us just now -- it is for the poor world. We share it, of course, but it seems to me the war is helping the testimony. In the day that is coming (@Revelation 12, 13) the saints shall be the special objects of attack. I sometimes feel ashamed that I suffer so little. But in speaking thus I am not overlooking the peculiar circumstances of our dear N. C. C. brethren. There is a limit, I am sure, to the present sorrow. I often think of the word, "For the elect's sake these days shall be shortened", and another, "There shall not a hair of your head perish". But a special word for us is, "In your patience possess ye your souls".
We have much cheer here, with a good deal of discipline arising from the war; besides several of our numbers have gone to be with the Lord, blessed for them but we feel the loss. Our usual special meetings in May are to be held in Rochester this year instead of New York. They are to be held on May 31st, June 1st and 2nd, D.V.
My wife wishes to join in love in Christ to you and all the brethren with you.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
May 5th, 1918.
Mr. J. McKay.
My Dear Brother, -- I have to thank you for your letter of April 1st. I was glad to get it. Letters from our dear brethren situated as you are occasion much interest here and our prayers go up for you all.
{156}
The consequences of the war have come home to us here now as several of our young brothers are being taken into military service, and some have already gone to your side. I cannot however give you any addresses as I have not got any yet. I have a son in France, too, in the 16th Irish Rifles. Our dear brother Hemmings, who is stationed at Havre, met him and wrote me very cheerfully of him.
It is a time of great pressure and sorrow for all mankind, and it is not for us, who have the light of the "habitable world to come" to complain, but rather to accept the will of God which is ever good, acceptable and perfect. Righteousness is suffering now, presently it shall be reigning, in the new heavens and new earth it shall dwell.
But even now sufferings are limited, they are turned into discipline in view of gain for us. "The God of all grace ... when ye have suffered for a little while, himself shall make perfect, stablish, strengthen, ground" (@1 Peter 5: 10; see also @2 Corinthians 4: 17, 18). Here we find much encouragement.
There has been help in reading through Ezra, Nehemiah and Esther. The last book is most interesting as showing that God's eye is never withdrawn from His people, and that He protects them although their circumstances may be such as to forbid His openly identifying Himself with them.
With love in Christ to you and the dear brethren with you, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
May 15th, 1918.
My Dear Brother, -- There can be no doubt that 2 Timothy is the 'gate' at which we enter *now* and that in dealing with evil the principle is withdrawal or avoidance, but in this epistle the value of "every scripture" is spoken of, and surely 1 Corinthians is included.
Indeed, it being in a specific way the "commandment" of the Lord, it is a test (@John 14; @1 Corinthians 14) as containing the principles by which we are to be regulated as seeking to walk together in the last days. Ezra and Nehemiah show that recovery from the world is marked by very humiliating circumstances for the people of God, but as we humbly accept them,
{157}
bowing to the discipline of God, the land is before us. We see that in Nehemiah's time, blessing was reached exceeding anything since Joshua's time -- spiritual intelligence, however, would keep us from regarding a few Christians walking together as the "assembly of God" in a locality, or that we should "put away" a wicked person as being such (the assembly). We would take humbler ground, but at the same time we would hold to the *truth* of the assembly, and we would not judge sin any the less by withdrawing from it or the guilty person rather than by 'putting him away'. "Love of the truth" includes 1 Corinthians, and hence the truth taught in this epistle will be practised as far as possible by those who are spiritual. Those who love the truth even if conditions hinder our acting literally according to the instructions we treasure them for their own sake being 'truth' and maintain them in principle.
Affectionately yours in Christ.
James Taylor.
<hr>
May 24th, 1918.
My Dear Brother, -- As regards the mode of putting away, I have a letter from G. F. MacKay which I replied to. I think @2 Timothy plainly indicates that *withdrawal* is the *principle* now. What you remark about the impossibility of putting outside Christendom (the corrupt expansion of the Christian circle) is very important. We cannot go outside of it, and we have not the power to put one outside it, hence separation from the evil in it is the obligation resting on every one who names the name of the Lord. Of course, those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart (@2 Timothy 2: 22) are not so many separated individuals -- they are members of one another, they are to be governed by "every scripture" and hence 1 Corinthians has its place with them. It is part of the *truth* which they *love* especially as being as we may say the "law of the house". It is "my commandments" which every lover of Christ keeps. Ezra and Nehemiah (which we have been reading here lately with much profit) show how the ordinances through Moses and David were made to apply in a day of ruin. Conditions prevented the application of some, but all Scripture would be treasured by every true Israelite -- Ezra, for instance, who was
{158}
instructed in the law. Conditions now prevent our acting literally on @1 Corinthians 5 (there can be no question about the Supper -- for conditions warrant it -- besides we must eat) yet in withdrawing from a wicked person we act in the spirit of it -- we are judging the evil with *authority* (which righteousness ever does) for so we are "commanded".
The difference lies in *how* it is done and this involves the acknowledgement of the general failure. As regards administration I think this remains while love remains. Love does what it can -- it gives.
I suppose calling on the name of the Lord makes room for Him and for the Spirit -- so that the principle of the table of shewbread remains. All, however, is in humility, acknowledgement of the general sorrowful condition is maintained.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
June 10th, 1918.
Mr. J. G. Deck.
My Dear Brother, -- It was good to get your letter of April 6th and enclosure. All the contents are very interesting. I had heard of the difficulty at the Timaru meetings. It is but a repetition of what one has met with in America and Great Britain. Under these circumstances (Timaru) saints are apt to bite and devour one another, and so what enters their mouths and stomachs is anything but nourishing! What is needed is priestly service. There is need for isolation until the occasion of the sorrow is judged before God, but it is doubtful that this can take place unless some nourishment is *introduced*. The eating of even the sin offering nourishes. What the poor saints need undoubtedly is a ministry of Christ so that, as built up in their souls, they may be able to turn away from, as judging them, the wretched things that have occupied them. It is evident therefore that anyone who can help the saints at Timaru should be free to visit them so as to render a ministry of Christ.
The discrepancies which you observe in current ministry are regrettable. There can be no doubt, however, that in spite of them the Lord is meeting the needs of His people, and
{159}
this is what should engage us. There is great weakness, and this will continue, but at the same time the Lord is sustaining, and will sustain His people. Faith sees what He does and is sustained. I was struck today with the prominence given to *unbelief* in @Mark 16.
As regards the matter of 'putting away' I think it is well to bear in mind that what was addressed as the "assembly of God" at Corinth has now expanded into what we know as Christendom -- a corrupt state of things -- alluded to as a "great house" in @2 Timothy. As distinct from Judaism and heathendom, it contains all the real and unreal professors, or callers on the name of the Lord, and no one can get outside it except by apostasy. *Strictly* 'putting away' would mean putting outside the professing sphere, and we cannot undertake this! The principle taught in @2 Timothy as to sin is *withdrawal* from it or those who practise it. I need not quote the passages. But this in no wise negatives @1 Corinthians which epistle is, as it were, "the law of the house". Indeed it is remarkable that @2 Timothy insists on the authority of all Scripture. Those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart value 1 Corinthians, only they humbly accept that conditions have changed, and so while they insist on the holiness and order of the house of God, they act according to the instructions in 2 Timothy, reinforced by the instructions (1 Corinthians) that governed the house at the beginning. The principle is the same, only the saints seek to rightly divide the word of truth and act wisely. In taking the ground of 'putting away' I am afraid of the danger of assuming that there is a special circle of fellowship (which would be within a fellowship), with assembly prerogatives. There is but one true fellowship which is Christian fellowship, and I would not like to assume that all 'outside' those with whom we walk are unfit for this. In judging sin in a person we judge it in the light of (indeed for) the whole church. That person is not fit for the society of true Christians, and so we cannot walk with him. But I must not say more now.
I thank you much for the printed paper 'Choice Gleanings'. I hope you will not delay so long again in writing.
With love,
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
{160}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
August 6th, 1918.
Mr. Potter.
Beloved Brother, -- These letters and papers [Received from New Zealand relative to current exercises there -- Editor] indicate two lines of thought as to the principles which should govern Christians at the present time, the church having failed. A good spirit is manifest in the papers, and so one is encouraged to believe that God will come in and grant light and blessing through the exercise.
There is, however, a measure of extremeness on both sides, if matters are pushed further on either there will, it seems to me, be danger of damage to the truth, or rather to those who may go to such a length.
On the one hand our collective privileges will be set aside, and on the other, the collective features will be pressed so far that the failure of the church will be ignored. It is to prevent these possible results, and to preserve a balance in the truth involved, that the following remarks are made.
First, it must be said that 2 Timothy is the special word intended to guide and govern the believer now -- evil being admitted within the sphere of Christian profession. This has been recognised by those through whom the word of God came and also by those who have received it in these last days. But it is well to remember that this is the very epistle that asserts the inspiration and profitableness of 'all Scripture' and that "the word of truth" should be rightly divided. It seems to me that this is to guard against any scripture being overlooked in the circumstances contemplated.
It is clear that while @2 Timothy is specially the believer's guide as he awakes to evil in the association in which he may be found, it reminds him that he needs **Scripture, and this, of course, involves the truth of the assembly. Thus those with whom he is to follow in righteousness, peace, and love are members with him of the same body -- the body of Christ. He learns this in 1 Corinthians and other Scriptures. Those walking together may be but a few of the whole, but still they are of the body, and so linked with each other in a vital way by the Holy Spirit. On this account they are dependent on one another and so kept from individual independence. In a word they walk and act in the light or recognition of the truth of the assembly. They are governed by the principles taught by the Lord and the apostles as to fellowship, etc. They
{161}
partake of the Lord's supper -- they recognise the temple and also the gifts given of Christ that may be available, making room for them according to the order prescribed in @1 Corinthians 14. It is evident, however, that while the instructions are accepted in their full authority as "the commandment of the Lord" (compare @1 Corinthians 14: 37 and @John 14: 21), their application is modified and limited on account of the conditions occasioned by the failure of the professing body; that indeed in some instances there can be no application at all, for instance, the appointment of elders and deacons.
In the exercise of discipline too, it is clear that the general conditions must occasion modification, although the holiness due to the house of God must ever be the standard; @1 Corinthians 5 is the law of the house, so to speak, in respect of this, but it is obvious that verses 4 and 5 cannot apply *literally* now. It may be said, however, that verse 13 applies to any number of Christians under any circumstances; but the chapter is one whole and "yourselves" of verse 13, "ye" (verse 2), those "gathered together" (verse 4) refer to the same company -- addressed in the epistle as "the assembly of God which is in Corinth". To use these expressions now in an absolute way as *not including all Christians* in a given locality would be dangerously misleading. It is true that the "wicked person" is regarded in @1 Corinthians 5 as distinct from "yourselves", or the assembly (although really a believer as the sequel showed), but we cannot assume now that all believers not breaking bread are wicked persons. They are *brethren*, and we claim them as such, as belonging to the circle, and so we must include them, at least in principle, in any terms such as these mentioned which we may use. It seems to me therefore, that an act of discipline carried out formally on @1 Corinthians 5: 13 is not in keeping with the humbling conditions in which we find ourselves today.
2 Timothy is, I believe, the alternative, and it accords with the exercise of one truly humbled by the evil now manifest in the sphere of Christian profession. The principle there, is withdrawal from evil or those who practise it. This, of course, does not mean that each individual in the company would act separately in dealing with evil that might arise amongst them. As following righteousness *together*, they would necessarily act against evil together. The ground taken by each and all would be that sin must be refused, and so they refuse to walk
{162}
with any one guilty of it. It may be said that it is only a matter of words; that the end reached is the same. The end reached may indeed be the same, but a right form of words is important, especially when the truth of the assembly and (also) its failure in testimony are involved. Although, with some, no harm may accrue in the use of incorrect form, with others, serious error may be found. I have seen a letter addressed to "the assembly of God" in a locality; and I have seen it stated by a company of Christians who "put away" a brother, that, as put away, he was outside the assembly of God on earth.
I have remarked that in dealing with evil according to @2 Timothy saints do not necessarily act on individual grounds. They follow righteousness together, and in dealing with evil they would have @1 Corinthians 5 in view -- both as regards the holiness of the house of God and the power that is available to maintain it. The Lord will be with His people in grappling with evil as they humbly own and accept the changed conditions. I believe @Matthew 18 applies.
Turning to the papers received; these by Mr. Budd show much thoughtfulness and they suggest much that is helpful, but I feel assured that the individual line is carried too far. This I believe he will see himself in time, through the Lord's help. Indeed I judge from his letters that he would admit that two or more Christians as agreed may act *together*. For he says 'These may be together in such a way that it is possible to preach and act individually in the light of the assembly and carry out every divine principle'. To be of one mind in the Lord, to endeavour to keep the unity of the Spirit, to agree as touching any difficulty and pray about it are divine principles, and as Mr. Budd's statement says, that all may be carried out by the believer, he must surely admit that saints may and do act together in the things of God. But this is not in keeping with his statement: 'In my judgment one can only act in the light of the assembly for oneself', and hence the danger, that I have referred to, of pushing the individual line too far. If this statement means that saints cannot in any sense enjoy the things of God or act jointly, it would rob them of much that the relationships in which we are set affords and which, through grace, we cherish as a most precious privilege. It is true indeed that each one has to judge iniquity for himself and forsake it, and as in the great house separate from vessels of dishonour purging himself thus, but as following righteousness
{163}
*with* those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart, he necessarily acts with them in judging evil if it arises, as already remarked. Then he breaks bread with them. This is necessarily a collective act, for it is "the bread which *we* break". The *breaking* refers to the act of the brother who gives thanks for the bread; and so it is necessarily collective. Besides, the loaf represents our oneness (as Scripture states).
Mr. Budd's 'suggestions' as to the breaking of bread do not seem to arise from Scripture. The paper suggests that the breaking of bread is *now* connected with the testimony, whereas in the early days it was connected with the local assembly -- at Corinth. What may be remarked is, that the Supper is a remembrance of Christ while He is absent. It was instituted by Himself and left with the disciples. It was afterwards received from Him by Paul who delivered it to the saints at Corinth, and of course to other assemblies. That it was connected with the 'testimony' and the 'local assembly' at the beginning and that it is connected with the testimony now (as the suggestions intimate) is true; but why it should not be connected with the local assembly *now* it is difficult to see. Is there a local assembly now? The 'suggestions' admit there is, but 'it cannot be convened'. But how are we to regard saints in a locality who do convene 'in the light of the assembly'? They are not the assembly surely, as already shown, but they are of it, and the 'local responsibility' attaching to it has to be accepted by them; the addresses to the "seven assemblies" teach us this in the true sense, not only a testimony in the place.
In principle, therefore, the Lord's supper is connected with the assembly now as at the beginning. The great sorrow is that all the saints in a given locality do not avail themselves of the privilege of partaking of it. Indeed the truth of the unity of the assembly is ever present in the Supper, for the loaf speaks of the body. The cup too, I believe, speaks of the unity of the Spirit, for there can be no doubt that the word "drink" in @1 Corinthians 12: 13 refers to it.
As regards Mr. Capper's letter, and others which say that we can now act formally on @1 Corinthians 5: 13, more need not be added to what has been said at the outset. It is said by Mr. Capper. 'An assembly or company comes into view which can act upon church truth previously given without assuming to be the church of God'. Such a company is, Mr. Capper
{164}
says, 'to put away from among themselves a wicked person'. The danger here lies in the fact that you have a company or assembly which is admittedly not the church of God, *acting formally as the church of God*. Whatever the disclaimers made, this is the fact presented in a case of discipline. This can only lead to the extremes already referred to.
Mr. Capper rightly says that @1 Corinthians is addressed not only to the church of God, but also to those that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. It seems, however, that in the latter designation *the whole Christian profession at the time* was in view. The epistle was catholic as well as local. To make the address apply to a company such as is indicated in @2 Timothy 2: 22 is hardly correct, for these do not include the whole profession.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
August 28th, 1918.
Mr. D. L. Higgins.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of August 1st and enclosure did not reach me till the 22nd inst. Your paper condemning the article in *Mutual Comfort* of July, 1915, came as a surprise, especially because you went so far back in your criticism. Your letter indicates that you did not read the article at the time it appeared, but I would remind you that the line of thought in it came before us at the conference at Kennington in 1914; you were present on that occasion, and, as far as I remember, you raised no objection; nor, indeed, did anyone else. If you have a copy of the Notes printed of these meetings at Kennington, please look at pages 5 and 11. Having to return to America immediately, I had no part in the revision of these Notes. I do not mention all this as justifying what you criticise; I do so to call attention to a moral feature for you to consider.
Since receiving your letter I have looked over the article you refer to, and I am assured that there is nothing in it contrary to sound doctrine, and that it was sincerely intended to help the Lord's people. I believe too (and I trust I say this in a humble spirit) that it *was* helpful generally to those who read it. There has been nothing said about it but what was commendatory save by one brother (whose name I forget) who objected to the interpretation placed on the word 'abroad'
{165}
in @Romans 5. I pointed out to him that the best authorities (J.N.D. and the late revisers as well as the authorised version) give "shed abroad" (differing from @Titus 3: 6), and that I thought it safer to follow them than one whose critical knowledge of the original text was uncertain. One of the latest and most exhaustive concordances gives "shed abroad" as a meaning of the word. But the matter is of minor importance, and I am not assured as to it. That the Holy Spirit has been given to the Gentiles is true, thank God.
Turning now to your paper, I will seek to examine it as well as the article in question in the light of Scripture. I am prepared, I trust, for what there may be to learn or unlearn.
First, I note that while you condemn the idea of a bond, as applying to the Christian, in the article, you accept it as taught in @Romans 7 (page 4). You affirm, therefore, as the truth of Scripture, what you deny to be true in what another says. Your explanation that this is a marriage bond is of no value in this respect; if it is a bond in which a Christian has part (and the marriage figure certainly involves this, as you say) then your paper fails in its object -- it asserts what it condemns. As a matter of fact, @Romans 7: 5, 6 teaches the very thing that the article was intended to impress the saints with -- nearness to God and to Christ in intelligent affection, service in "newness" of spirit and fruit for God. The reference in the passage (Romans 7) is to @Exodus 19 - 20. The article, however, did not treat the latter chapters as presenting the law itself as the first husband; it was viewed according to 'the spirit'. God would have the people near Him in a definite known relationship, which is referred to in the prophets as the marriage bond (compare @Jeremiah 2; @Ezekiel 16).
But I return to the earlier part of your paper, and I will quote what you write as expressing the matter to be considered: 'The question is on what principle the scripture places the fulfilment of these (Christian) responsibilities, whether that is, it is by the Spirit on the ground of pure grace and faith, where the God, whose love has reached us when we were yet sinners, is alone and ever before the soul, or whether it is on the ground of a contract or covenant, which a Christian has undertaken as one party to it, the other being the blessed God Himself'. What I would remark first is that the subject of the paper is 'Covenant relationships and family relationships'. Relationship, in the sense in which it is treated in the paper, means a
{166}
position in which persons are set; each has *part* in it. The point in the article is that the Christian should recognise this, and seek on his side, to enter into the blessed relationships in which it has pleased God to set him with Himself This is surely an important matter; any effort, however imperfect, to induce the saints to draw near to God is of Him and will be blessed of Him. The use of the words 'bond', 'contract', 'covenant' was simply to enforce the main thought in the reading, as mentioned above. I quote from the article: 'God's thought is that, as delivered, there should be an understanding between Him and us, and not only so, but a definite bond to which He has committed Himself to begin with, and to which we also have to commit ourselves, because it is in the committal to it that the conscience is brought into play. This chapter (Romans 7) shows, in the experience of at least one man, Paul, that he had found it a profitable bond' (pages 171, 172). Laying aside the principle of legal requirement (which the article does, as you admit), is this not a just statement of the matter -- at least in Paul's case? Was there not with him a definite understanding with God -- an apprehension of the relationship in which God had set him and an acceptance of the consequent obligations? Surely there was. At his conversion he enquired, "What shall I do, Lord?" This question was not rebuked, but carefully answered by the Lord. He was to learn in Damascus what he was to do. This question was the acknowledgement of the convert's *allegiance to Christ* -- a fact abundantly testified to in after years. It arose from the heart of one who afterwards said he delighted in the law of God after the inward man, with the mind served it, and, having received the Holy Spirit, fulfilled its righteous requirements. Was he under bondage to the law in a legal sense? Far from it, he was happy in his soul as in known relationship with God and with Christ and as "legitimately subject", as he says, "to Christ".
To enlarge on this somewhat I will refer to Romans. The connection between @Romans 5, 6 and 7 and @Exodus 19 is quite obvious. The quotation I have made from your paper says that the fulfilment of Christian responsibility is by the Spirit on the ground of pure grace and faith, where God is alone and ever before the soul. This is *so far* true, but it is not the whole truth. It leaves out the exercise in the believer which leads him to accept his obligations to God, as revealed
{167}
to him -- his obedience "from the heart" of the form of doctrine delivered to him.
The gospel was for obedience of faith among the nations; it was announced "on the principle of faith to faith". The necessity for the subjective state that *answers to God* is seen from the beginning, of which Paul is an illustration, as I have said. We see it also in @Acts 2: 37 and 16: 30. The principle you lay down corresponds, in measure, with @Romans 5, but it really ignores chapter 6. The teaching of the latter chapter is *substantially* what the article insists on; it is based on baptism. Baptism, although necessarily administered by another, is nevertheless, a *committal* of the person baptised *to Christ;* he is baptised to Christ, and so to His death. The Ethiopian eunuch is an illustration of the correspondence between the believer's normal exercise and baptism. The believer undertakes it with a definite understanding of its bearing as to his path in this world. It is something to which he is committed (in principle, a bond) with which he is to be consistent. Hence "we *should* walk in newness of life". But while there is the acceptance of the obligation, the soul is not in legal bondage, for the obligation is not to the law, but to God. He is a bondman (this surely involves a bond) to God, and yields his members as instruments of righteousness to God. He has *his* fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.
Then in chapter 7 the believer is absolved from the claim of the first husband through Christ's death, to be married to another, to Him who is raised from the dead. Here is another feature of a bond -- the passage supposes a definite relationship established, which in Scripture involved a bond or contract between two parties. Doubtless this refers to the Christian's initial recognition of the marital relation between Christ and himself, but it results in fruit for God, and it lays the groundwork for the full position of the church as united to Christ. Elsewhere we are told that the saints were *espoused* as a chaste virgin to Christ. So that we have here clearly taught the principle which you contend against in the body of your paper, as already said, and which you admit at the end. It in no sense implies that Christian responsibilities are to be fulfilled on the principle of legal requirements; whether he is in relation of a bondman with God or, so to speak, a wife to Christ the responsibilities are carried out in the *liberty of love*. @Romans 8,
{168}
I need not say, treats of the Spirit as the power by whom the believer answers to all this in his walk down here.
It may be remarked here that Christian practice goes beyond the fulfilment of the righteous requirement of the law, although this is included in it as Romans 8 teaches. He is sanctified to "the obedience ... of Jesus Christ" (@1 Peter 1: 2). In view of this, and of what I have said previously, it is perfectly clear that the believer's relationship with God and with Christ involves definite acceptance of obligation, which he is to fulfil by the power of the Holy Spirit. To deny that there is a bond, *in this sense*, between our souls and God is destructive of practical Christianity. It is pure antinomianism.
As regards Galatians, it will be quite clear from what I have said that the effort to place the article in company with the error the apostle combated there is entirely without justification. There is not the slightest evidence in the article that it was held by the speaker that the Christian's relationship with God is on any other ground than that of faith.
This subject is not *dwelt* upon in the article, for in such a small space every truth cannot be included, but it is *assumed*, as the '*believer*' is before the mind; a *believer* is one who has faith in God.
You say, 'The soul is seen as having died through law to the whole principle of what it can do'. What does this mean? Is there no principle of doing in Christianity? James says, "Faith without works is dead". True, thank God! My justification and relationship with Him are on the principle of faith, but Scripture insists on good works in the Christian. These works are accomplished by faith through the Spirit (faith working by love and not by the flesh) but they are viewed as the believer's works. Have I died to this principle of doing?
The whole of page three of your paper seems to sound well, intensive pious expressions being employed, and in the main acceptable, *as far as it goes;* but as usual throughout the paper, *the responsible element in the believer is weakened*. You say, 'If I know anything of myself I would say, Christ is the Son of God and His love to me is an all-powerful object, and the Spirit of God is an almighty power within, but do not put me on a ground where I figure as undertaking anything, but let me remain on that of the faith of the Son of God'. If you are regarding yourself as in the flesh or merely in your own strength, you are certainly out of court as regards doing
{169}
anything for God; but if as a professed Christian you refuse to accept obligation from God -- to do His will here (by His grace and strength, of course) -- you are very far from being true to your profession or consistent with your baptism. If Paul says, "Bear one another's burdens, and thus fulfil the law of Christ" (@Galatians 6: 2), you would answer (according to your paper), 'I cannot undertake anything in the way of doing!' James says, "Be ye *doers* of the word". You answer him in like manner! How different it is with Paul! He says, "I was *not disobedient* to the heavenly vision". ... "Necessity" was "laid upon" him, and it would be "woe" to him if he did not accept and carry out his commission. It was a matter of *obedience*. There is no idea of *figuring* in a fleshly way as doing something. Whatever words we may use to express it, obedience to God is imperative; it was so with Adam and with Israel, but now that redemption is accomplished, Christ glorified and the Holy Spirit here in the believer, he thus being born of God, it is now a possibility in him. This, in brief, is presenting the subjective Christianity of the New Testament, and it is incumbent on each of us to see that it is maintained in him; otherwise the Lord will not be with us and the truth will slip away from us.
In conclusion I would say that I am far from contending for perfection in the expressions and form in which the truth was presented in the article in question. It was the substance of a reading at Glasgow in which, naturally, several took part; it was not revised by me, but I accept the entire responsibility of it.
I have not mentioned the thought of fellowship, which is a marked feature in Christianity. It is spoken of both as regards the apostles with the Father and the Son, and the saints with each other. I need not say that this involves a bond; sometimes the idea of partnership is conveyed. "The right hand of fellowship" is mentioned. There is nothing in the article about 'striking' hands as you allege -- this is too familiar. There is the thought of extending the hand in the way of committal. Laying on of hands or giving the hand is a well recognised form in Scripture.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
{170}
Boston, Mass.
September 13th, 1918.
Mr. Arthur J. H. Brown.
My Dear Brother, -- My wife sent on a letter from Mrs. Frowde from which I learn that your dear boy is reported 'missing'. I hasten to send a line to express the deep sympathy of my wife and myself, with Mrs. Brown and you in this your great sorrow. That your son has not been reported killed is no doubt regarded by you as a basis of hope that he is alive as a prisoner in Germany. Although this would be dreadful, yet you would take it as a mercy from God, trusting that He may see fit to rescue him and restore your dear one to you both alive. In the meantime, however, you shall have to give him up, going through the severe ordeal with God. You may be assured of our prayers that you may be supported of Him in this bitter trial. The poor worldlings are going through like sufferings in unprecedented measure, but there is no light for them -- how different with us, who believe! All is assured to us in Christ -- our dear ones shall be raised up in the "last day", and in the walk to it we have the company and sympathy of Jesus -- our great High Priest. No doubt you are assured that your dear boy is the Lord's.
We have good news of our boy, Arthur, so far thank God. He has been in France for a long time, but his last letter says that he is now in Gt. Britain for a course of training.
Although my wife is not here, I may say that she joins in much love to you both.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 12th, 1918.
Mr. J. G. Deck.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of August 26th came very lately and I am glad to have it and the correspondence enclosed. Possibly you have seen, by this time, some remarks of mine written to Mr. Potter regarding these matters of Mr. Budd. If so, you will already know something of my exercises.
I had correspondence with Mr. Budd previously and generally enjoyed what he wrote, not suspecting that he was working out some special line of things; but letters and papers which I have seen lately show that this is what he is doing. My earnest hope is that he can be helped and so I have not regarded him
{171}
as committed definitely to error; in writing I have sought to take account of what I thought good while pointing out the error. B. has evidently followed F.E.R. in what he has given out in @2 Timothy, but he has pushed things so far as to make them erroneous. On the other hand, what has been advanced against him, being largely out of agreement with F.E.R., could only confirm him in what he held. It is quite true that 1 Corinthians is "the commandment of the Lord" that should govern us as seeking to walk together even now, but then as children of wisdom we should see that certain conditions preclude our acting in a formal outward way as if we are the assembly.
Partaking of the Lord's supper was when the saints came together in assembly, but it being the expression of Christ's love to us and our remembrance of Him it *must* go on. It is not like @1 Corinthians 5 which involves *assembly prerogative and administration*. 1 Corinthians 5 speaks of delivering the wicked man to Satan, and of removing him "from amongst yourselves", but then the "*assembly of God*" was addressed. If sin occurs in a company of Christians now, they learn from @1 Corinthians 5 that it *has* to be dealt with, for they *cannot go on with it;* but they are humbled on account of the ruin of things and so act becomingly. They are cast on the Lord, as the Corinthians *should have been*, and look to Him, and ultimately (all effort for recovery having failed) they tell the wicked person that they cannot walk with him, that he is unfit for Christian fellowship -- as calling on the Lord they refuse to go on with him. While the Lord is with the saints, as in humility they thus seek to maintain the holiness of God's house, and makes effectual what they do (indeed I believe their action is bound in heaven), yet there is no pretence, either in word or act, to be the assembly. In this way His commandments are kept, and love to Him is thus attested (@John 14: 21), and at the same time the failure of the church as the candlestick is acknowledged.
Now while this guards the truth involved in the present situation it in no way endorses L.D.B.¬s ideas. As I said, he bases them on F.E.R., but he runs wide afield in saying that J.N.D.¬s time was marked by church position in contrast to the present time, when gathering is to the testimony! What he means by the testimony cannot be gathered from the letters or papers I have seen; but certainly it should not exclude the
{172}
truth of the church, whereas Mr. B. writes as if it does. The church was a great feature of what Paul calls "my doctrine" and unquestionably part of the testimony. Mr. B. says, 'church position and practices are perhaps done away' (letter 16th July 1918). Absurd! The breaking of bread is a church practice, and Mr. B. has part in this practice evidently as often as he can. How many other things that we do weekly that are *distinctively* church practices I need not mention. He says further (letter 19th March 1918), 'The existence of the local church at Corinth or elsewhere did not, to my mind, depend so much on every saint within certain geographical limits being present, but depended on the *absence* of any rival body on the same ground in the locality'. This is an unusually extraordinary statement, and as unfounded and wanting of spiritual intelligence as it is extraordinary. Think of the existence of the assembly of God at Corinth being made to depend on the non-existence of a rival company *on the same ground*! How can *rival* companies be on 'the same ground'? Besides the existence of the assembly does not depend on a negative -- it is a living organism -- Christ's body. Of course, our brother knows this, and would assert it as strongly as anyone, no doubt, but I write as above to point out the folly of some of his statements.
Then he goes on to say that in J.N.D.¬s day there was no rival in Plymouth to the assembly as having come 'together to enjoy its privileges, prerogatives and responsibilities'. He admits that Romanists, Protestants and others were there, 'but they did not set forth the true ground of the church of God'. But Rome and the church of England *claim* church ground, and so are rivals to the true. But the inference here is that the parties formed since 1848 do set forth church ground -- but do they? There is imitation, but there is no virtue in this. J.N.D. separated first at Plymouth on account of clericalism -- what he left was little different in his mind from the sects around. In truth *another sect* was added to the number already in the locality, only with more guilt attaching to it than the others. Bethesda was no different; it was hardly an imitation of church ground, for independency and indifference to Christ's glory marked it. *Morally* there is no difference between the independent parties and the so-called 'denominations'.
In truth there is no difference *in principle* between J.N.D.¬s
{173}
day and ours -- there was ruin then as there is now, only, of course, it is more accentuated now. As then, so now, the saints come together and break bread because they love the Lord Jesus, and wish to call Him to mind, according to His request. They pray and read the Scriptures together, as of old, recognising that they are members one of another as of Christ's body. They do not assume to be the church, but they cherish the light of it as part of the testimony; they hold and cherish in their souls all that is presented to them in the "*gospel*" and in the "mystery" -- the *testimony* in its varied features. It is true that the ark went before the Israelites "*to search out a resting place for them*". It did not change its place in principle, for it *returned*. When it rested Moses said, "Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel". (This refers to its place in the holiest -- its normal place). It is a touching reference to the love of Christ in going before His people. Indeed, I think His *death* is involved in @Numbers 10: 35, 36. Having scattered His enemies He returned, as it were, to the thousands of Israel on the day of His resurrection.
As regards the analogy of Old Testament times, it should be noted that at the end the Annas and Simeons were found identified with the temple. The same thing marks every true saint *now*. At the end the Spirit and the *bride* say "Come".
With love in Christ, I am
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
*Letter from Mr. A. M. Hayward*
January 24th, 1919.
My Dear Brother, -- I may say at once that the meeting with Mr. Taylor and others at Park Street on Thursday, January 23rd, eased the situation considerably and that it was so clear that Mr. Taylor held nothing in the way of error that Mr. Higgins asked him at the end and before all whether he could give an address at Park Street if Mr. Binney were agreeable, which he was.
With all that was said, Mr. Taylor held quietly and firmly to his ground, showing that there was no wrong thought expressed, or any word that needed to be withdrawn in the
{174}
Reading on Covenant Relationships, 1914, as evidently at the time, all was quite understood. His manner was very quiet and sober. Not once did he show any heat or irritation, but I was struck with the way he always saw when there was a tendency to overbalance anything, and, whilst agreeing with all he could, he did not, on any occasion, let himself into allowing anything untrue to pass. I was so struck with this, because even in small things he just adhered to the truth. For instance, Mr. Giles kept saying, 'the covenant is entirely subjective -- the work of God', and he would say in his quiet way each time, 'Not entirely. There is forgiveness of sins, that is objective, and though it is God who works, you must allow for the persons¬ exercises'. I only mention this, because it was so marked the way in which he always seemed to be concerned that the whole truth should have place.
The matter was virtually over after the first half-hour, though we had two meetings, each of about two and one-half hours¬ length -- 10:30 to 12:50 and 2:30 to 5:00. Mr. Binney prayed very nicely at the beginning, after which D. L. Higgins stated the object of the meeting. Mr. Taylor asked Mr. Higgins to read an extract from his (D.L.H.¬s) own address just before the Glanton trouble on 'Fellowship'. In this address he speaks about the bond pretty freely, and Mr. Taylor said that what he (D.L.H.) expressed there in connection with the bond was exactly what he sought to express in this Reading in connection with contract. D.L.H. said that if that were so there was nothing between them, for he firmly adhered to what he said there. This went a long way, as you may imagine, to finish the difficulty; but some had great trouble over the word 'contract' and begged Mr. Taylor to withdraw it. He said he could not do that, as it had been clearly understood by a great many brethren and in its setting it was guarded and introduced merely to enforce the point of committal, which he felt was so important. Some reasoned that contract meant terms on both sides -- a bargaining, but Mr. Taylor said *he* did not use it so, and did not so understand a contract. All the *terms* were settled by God and we only had to ratify them in committing ourselves to them in a contract (to his mind), the terms were already settled and you then merely put your hand to it. He could not say that the word as used there was wrong and he did not wish in any way to weaken what he had said, but that he had not used the word before,
{175}
or since, so far as he could remember, and would not use it again if brethren understood something different by it from what he did, but felt it was due to brethren who had received help by the reading not to withdraw it. He referred to a marriage contract and said all the terms were well understood before ever the contract was entered upon. He was very definite that all the terms were on *God's* side. He was pressed for a scripture in the New Testament to support the thought of putting your hand to the covenant. He referred to @1 Corinthians 10 -- the cup, and that the result of not being true to the covenant was that the judgments spoken of in connection with Israel at the beginning of chapter 10 would come upon those who likewise sinned -- "All were baptised", etc., "but with the most of them God was not well pleased, for they were overthrown in the wilderness". It was pressed you could not apply that, but he maintained you must include all christendom in your thoughts and that it was written to *us* as warning.
Mr. Giles could not at all see that you put your hand to the covenant in chapter 10 because there the covenant is not mentioned and in chapter 11 the committal side is not presented. Mr. Taylor replied that in chapter 10 it is the cup of blessing which we bless and we are committed to that, i.e., to the fellowship of His death and also that for the covenant thought you are right to consider *all* scriptures on it. He just kept to the thought of the cup as enough to establish the point and enlarged on the "cup of blessing", what that is, and left it there.
Mr. Giles pressed the work of God in connection with the covenant. "*I* will write, etc.", all of which Mr. Taylor agreed with, but he said, '*You* must commit yourself to it, there must be your side of exercise'. This Mr. Giles sometimes allowed and sometimes denied in *terms*, so that if one followed out his line, the legitimate sequence would be that a person who goes into the world or perishes in the wilderness does so because God does not work. Mr. Taylor agreed it was the work of God in us that led us to commit ourselves, but that we have to commit ourselves -- that is our side and God does not do *that* for us. This, surely, applies in every step of soul history.
Another great difficulty raised was, Could we 'covenant with God?' Mr. Taylor had again and again to point out that he never suggested our *covenanting* with God. Some
{176}
seemed to see no difference between entering into a covenant with God and 'covenanting with God', which latter term Mr. Giles frequently used. Mr. Taylor said he would not use that term, though before condemning anyone else for using it (as it was said others did), he would want to know what they meant by it. To him it had the thought of bargaining in it and he would not entertain that, but he did not wish by any remark of his to weaken what he had set forth in that reading as to entering into covenant relationships.
'Fulfilled responsibility' was brought up, but not much said about it. Some quotations were read where he is made to say that 'to go into privilege *according to God* you must discharge every obligation first', and again 'he has discharged every obligation down here and so is free to rise'. He said those statements needed guarding and had he edited the notes he would have done so, but he never saw them before publication. You would only do that, of course, by self-judgment and we would not rise to God unless all that was not positively discharged was dealt with in self-judgment. All he was pressing was that Romans must precede Ephesians in our soul history.
Mr. Henderson tried to give a series of serious practical evils as the result of this teaching of Mr. Taylor and spoke of certain alleged effects on the young brothers, but that was left without comment.
In the afternoon, the first half was mostly between Mr. Giles and Mr. Taylor, the former pressing the evils of 'covenanting with God' and Mr. Taylor saying he did not go with it. The latter half of the meeting was given over to the consideration of the question of 'putting away'. Mr. Taylor's thoughts were asked for on it and whilst he quite refused the extreme thoughts set out by Mr. Budd and others, he drew attention to the fact that we are in the "great house" and that "put away from among yourselves" in Corinthians, meant outside all that professed the name of Christ, as there is only Jew and Gentile and church of God recognised there. To his mind, we needed not only to be unpretentious in our thoughts, but also in our words, and he would feel happier in eating the sin offering within, judging all *within* in the light of @1 Corinthians 5 and naming the sin there, judging the wicked person as one unsuitable for any Christian fellowship; but before the world he felt we needed to act humbly and remember the broken condition
{177}
and so avoid any language which is unsuitable to our present position. No agreement was come to.
One more thing, indicating again Mr. Taylor's regard for the truth, I must mention. At about the end of the second meeting some said it had been reported that the older brethren had made an attack on Mr. Taylor, which 'of course', they said, 'is quite untrue'. One brother then said to Mr. Taylor, 'I hope *you* don't think it was an attack'. His reply was, 'I would not use that language exactly; no, I would not put it that way, but Mr. Higgins¬ letter to me was very strong; indeed, it was such a letter as one would write only to a heretic'. This he said twice.
It was also said that Mr. Taylor's teaching had been stated to be subversive of the gospel, but it was agreed that that was not so.
Mr. Taylor was himself encouraged and says it will sink into the consciences of brethren, and it is *there* after all that things are worked out.
Mr. S.H. stated that what J.T. was seeking to press as to covenant relationships was what we all should insist upon.
Yours affectionately,
A.M. Hayward.
<hr>
On Board R.M.S. Mauretania.
June 18th, 1919.
My Dear Brother, -- I duly received your letter of April 14th, but being so pressed I was hindered in replying; and as I expected to cross to your side, I put off writing until I got on board ship.
As regards @Mark 8, I think the imperfection of sight after the first touch is in accord with general experience. The Lord's work was perfect as far as it went, but a second transaction was necessary so that the man should see *all things clearly*. New birth, for instance, is not enough; one needs the Spirit in order to be free and see clearly. Besides, although the divine work is ever perfect, the *effect* of it varies; the end in view is the same in each case, but in some a longer time is required to reach it. I have no doubt that the teaching in the passage in Mark is one, and that the end is that one knows Christ and has Him alone before his soul.
{178}
As to @Romans 5 I understand that grace reigns *now* -- Christians have a *throne* of grace. The idea of a throne in Scripture is that it is *absolute*. But grace reigns *through* righteousness. The contrast is sin reigning unto *death;* grace reigning to *eternal life*. I do not understand that the contrast is between the dispensations.
I was sorry to miss you last winter, being so *near* to you. I hope I may see you somewhere this time, although I hardly expect to be in your parts. My wife is not along this visit.
With love in Christ, I am
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 10th, 1919.
My Dear Brother, -- While I was on your side of the Atlantic, your father mentioned that you and Miss ------ were to be married soon, but I did not have time to write you. I judge your marriage has already taken place, and so my wife and I join in a line to send you both our congratulations and much love in the Lord. As we are so far away it is difficult to secure anything suitable to send as a token of our interest, so we enclose a cheque with the request that you accept it with our love, and that you will procure something for it on our behalf. You will be better judges of what to get than we.
I trust you both will find the Lord's help and blessing in your union and that you will be found ever ranged on His side and devoted to His interests. The opportunity for young believers generally is very great, and those who are married especially, for they can use hospitality and this is of peculiar value to the people of God. Where the husband aims at headship as seen in Christ, and the wife reflects this in her place, there is an extension of the area in which the Lord's influence is felt, and so an increase of the domain of His glory. This shows the great importance of marriage "in the Lord" and how essential it is that the husband and wife should occupy their respective positions in dependence and subjection.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
{179}
Zittau, Germany.
October 28th, 1919.
My Dear Jim, -- I am glad of an opportunity of sending you a line. I came here last night via Berlin. I went to France with Mr. Lyon ten days ago and we had a cheering time with the N.C.C. brethren. Then I came to Germany via Belgium and Holland. Mr. Pugh joined me in Amsterdam, and we journeyed to Berlin together. We had a good day with the dear saints there on Lord's Day. We had three meetings and tea together in the room. I think the saints in Berlin have made progress since I saw them in 1914. Mr. Pugh went to Dresden and Leipzig yesterday and I came on here. As I have been delayed long in travelling on the Continent we shall not be able to sail on November 15th, so I am arranging to sail by the *Carmania* on November 29th, please God. Mother has been staying with Mr. and Mrs. Frowde and at Teignmouth while I am away. I hope to get back to London on November 4th.
Affectionately,
Father.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 14th, 1920.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of January 24th has just come, and I am glad to have it. I am sorry you could not manage a meeting when I was on your side, as you say.
The question you bring up is one that has often exercised me, and I know it has been an exercise to many others. I see no difficulty in having the Lord's supper under the circumstances you mention, providing there is already a permanent local connection -- that is, one or more in fellowship residing there. But in the places you have in mind this is not the case, and hence you can hardly have what answers to the local assembly. But I am sure the Lord would value the thought of the brethren in coming together to wait on Him, and He would not disappoint their hearts as they come together. He would undoubtedly manifest Himself to them. In France last October, Mr. P. Lyon and myself met with a number of the dear N.C.C. brethren in this way and we were distinctly encouraged.
The great importance of being simple in such matters is
{180}
obvious. The more we are acquainted with the Lord the more we will reckon on Him under *all* circumstances. As we study the gospels we get understanding as to how He acted in connection with the various contingencies He encountered. In this way we arrive at "the pattern showed to thee in the mount".
I trust the Lord will greatly bless you and those with you in all your exercises and service for Him.
With love to yourself and the brethren, I am,
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
July 2nd, 1920.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of March 15th did not reach me until the end of May, as I was in Great Britain when it arrived here; otherwise it would have been answered earlier.
I have not your previous letter by me to refer to, but evidently I misunderstood you in assuming that you regarded the assembly at Corinth to correspond with the "great house". I am sorry for this, but I am glad you recognise that the saints there, notwithstanding the sin which existed in certain individuals, were addressed and treated by the apostle as the assembly of God.
As regards the body of your letter, it is possible that you have, since writing it, seen some account of certain meetings in London in March; if so, you will be aware that it came out, and was accepted generally as according to Scripture, that in dealing with cases of discipline now we act *publicly* according to @2 Timothy and privately and before God we take the ground that we are of the church (though not *it*) and so @1 Corinthians 5 is necessarily before us, as the "law", so to speak, "of the house". In our public attitude and statements we do not assume to be the church (in any given locality); but as bearing the Lord's name, we cannot walk with persons guilty of unjudged sin, and we say so as we refuse to go on with anyone found in that sad case. This is becoming, for outwardly all is ruin, and although we seek to be true to the Lord, we cannot disclaim responsibility for the ruin. In view of this it is utterly unseemly, and indeed quite wrong, for any company of Christians to assume *by the formula they use* to be an assembly.
{181}
On the other hand, we know the precious fact that we are of the assembly; we recognise this, knowing the reality of it by the Holy Spirit -- all this necessarily enters into our dealing with one who may have sinned. We act together as before God in the light of the church, and this power (in measure at least) is with us, and thus discipline is made effective. But if a company of saints 'puts persons away' from itself and 'receives' to itself it is assuming by this (especially by the formal announcements made) that it is a church. This does not set aside the blessed fact, however, that a number of saints described in @2 Timothy 2: 22 may enjoy church privileges. They may be clothed with *church* thoughts, so to speak; but this would be as before God -- not that the company is *a* church, but *of* it, as I said before. The Supper is, of course, public; but it does not involve administration, and there is no pretension in a few saints responding in this way to their Lord's request. It involves the church, for the loaf symbolises all, but it is not administration, as I said, and the absence of so many in any locality speaks of the ruin. There can be no question that the Supper is in order for those who love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.
With love in Him, I am
Yours affectionately,
James Taylor.
<hr>
August 19th, 1920.
Beloved Brother, -- I wish I could be of more service to you than I feel I can be in regard of this very great subject. I would say, however, that *mediatorship* must appear in John, for revelation required it. God being what He is, a Spirit and dwelling in light unapproachable whom no one can see, can be declared only by One in another -- human, seeing men are in view -- condition. "The only begotten Son" refers to our Lord as Man; that is, there is One great enough personally to make the declaration, and being a Man, what is declared is intelligible *to* men. But on God's side He is declaring, mediating -- as I may say. Later men are brought to God as we see in chapter 20 (see also chapter 17). There was One who could lay His hand upon us both. One who was with God and who is God became flesh and dwelt among us. As in flesh He is
{182}
contemplated as an only begotten with a Father; then as the only begotten Son in the bosom of the Father, He declared Him. All this necessarily underlies @1 Timothy 2: 5. As regards the designation "only begotten Son", F.E.R.¬s thought was that to connect both terms of relationship with our Lord before incarnation is going beyond Scripture. I have always accepted this, while reluctant to say much about it, the subject being so great. To apply to Him as in the form of God without restriction, terms that Scripture applied to Him as Man is obviously not right. Of course personally He remains what He ever was but as become Man He takes a place *relatively* lower to carry out the will of God -- to become the Mediator. The only begotten Son is given and sent -- these are not expressions that apply to Him as in the form of God. Compare @Mark 13: 32 and indeed the whole tenor of Scripture. Without meaning it, the full thought of Deity is often obscured (to say the very least) by the habit of using terms carelessly, applying without modification to Christ when He was in the form of God, terms that Scripture applies to Him in manhood. Perhaps the above will indicate what I had in mind at Croydon -- as I said the subject is very great -- the greatest indeed and so one treads lightly, knowing, I trust, one's limitations.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 1st, 1920.
Mr. H. F. Nunnerley.
My Dear Brother, -- I am glad to have your letter of September 15th. I had already heard of the objection by J. S. Giles to the Notes on page 194 Of July *Believer's Friend*, although his actual criticism has not reached me. The statement that the Lord's 'burial is part of His vicarious work' may seem more than should be said at first sight, but if the *meaning* of the word 'vicarious' is fully taken into account, its literal truthfulness cannot, I think, be denied. The general significance of the word is that one acts for, or takes the place of, another or others, and, of course, it is true that the Lord was in the grave *for us;* to say that He was there in any other sense would be serious indeed. In the passage under consideration at the reading reported (@1 Corinthians 15: 1 - 4) the apostle states the glad tidings he had preached to the Corinthians and by which they were saved unless they had believed
{183}
in vain: that Christ died for our sins; that He was buried; and that He was raised. Surely if the burial of Christ is thus formally presented as part of the gospel announcement by the apostle, its significance should be recognised; and if we compare the passages with others which treat of the Lord's burial, or entrance into the earth, we will see that He was in the grave, having died for others, on *their account*, not, in any sense, on His own. He was to be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth as a sign -- a sign surely of what was due to men, on whose account (He being the sinless One and immune from death) He was there. It was due to God that the One who became a substitute for men to atone for their sins on the cross and to end their sinful histories judicially should be buried for a definite period -- three days. The cross witnessed the awful penalty; the burial of Christ is the testimony that those for whom He suffered (believers) have disappeared judicially from God's sight.
Of course, the actual forsaking by God was while our Lord was alive on the cross, but there could be no atonement without His death, for without shedding of blood there was no remission; hence when He said, "It is finished" He necessarily included (anticipatively) His actual death. Indeed His burial and resurrection, as integrally bound up with the great work of redemption, were included in these precious words. The "corn of wheat" had to fall into the ground and die; the Son of man should be in the *heart of the earth;* He descended into the lower parts of *the earth*. The fact is that the cross, the actual death of Christ, and His burial are generally treated as one great event in Scripture, and hence His burial has to be regarded as connected with His vicarious work. Of course, if the word 'vicarious' is made to mean that the Lord was enduring the wrath of God while in the grave, I can see how the statement referred to would be regarded as error. It may be that the word is used theologically in this sense, and if so it may be well to insert a note in a number of *Believer's Friend* explaining that no such thought was meant to be conveyed. But the import of our Lord's burial should not be weakened. Perhaps you will let me know what you and others may think as to how the word is used, etc. I will gladly do anything to save the saints from difficulty, providing the truth is not in any way obscured or weakened in their minds.
I have heard that the words 'the going down refers to
{184}
what displeases' have been condemned, but it is quite obvious that if the Lord entered into death vicariously (our burial in baptism is said to be in the *likeness of His death*), 'displeases' referred not to Him (the thought that it could in any sense refer to Him personally is so far from the context that it is distressing that it should be even hinted at) but to *those He represented*. 'Buried in His grave we lay ..'.
It will be my privilege to pray for the dear London brethren in connection with these meetings. My wife joins in love in Christ to Mrs. Nunnerley and yourself. Give our love also to Mr. and Mrs. Long.
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 2nd, 1920.
Mr. F. W. Jerrard.
My Dear Brother, -- I am thankful to you for writing and enclosing Mr. J. S. Giles¬ serious statements in regard of the Notes on @1 Corinthians 15. Mr. Sinclair had mentioned this matter to me, and others on your side wrote, but I had not seen what Mr. Giles had actually said. I am distressed that he should attribute such dreadful thoughts to one he knows so well. Indeed, I am persuaded that he knows that I am wholly innocent of such shocking thoughts. Were I in his position I should recoil from the very thought of a brother holding such things until I had given him opportunity of explaining. I can see that more care should have been used in regard of so delicate a matter, and I am sorry accordingly, but I was assured that the word 'vicarious' guarded the Lord's Person -- which indeed it does, for anyone wishing only to know the truth. I quite accept your suggestion that, if the passage objected to had read 'the going down refers to what (the state of those whom the Lord represented in His death) displeases;' the guard against any misapprehension would be stronger. But this is what is meant, as the statement following ('Hence His burial is part of the vicarious work' ) shows. What was before us at the reading was @1 Corinthians 15, and we were dwelling on the terms of the gospel which the apostle had, preached at Corinth, among which was the fact that the Lord was buried. The import of this was remarked on, and other scriptures bearing on it were introduced. Surely His burial
{185}
has a meaning. That He was infinitely delightful personally to God, is true here as ever (and I am assured that I hold this as firmly as Mr. G.); but, why was He in the grave? It is true that loving hands placed Him there, and that He was not 'with the wicked' as intended; but the solemn fact that the Son of God lay in a grave has its own voice. It speaks of the state and guilt of those for whom He died. The Lord speaks of His being in the heart of the earth three days and three nights, as a sign to a wicked and adulterous generation (@Matthew 12: 39, 40). Note that He does not refer to His literal death here, but to His burial. Besides, in baptism we are *buried with Christ* and we are said to be thus planted in the *likeness* of His death. So that burial is, as it were, an integral part of His death. Indeed the forsaking of God, the Lord's actual death and His burial are all treated as one thing, one great event, in Scripture. The wrath of God was endured on the cross; but for redemption, the life in which the Lord bore our sins had to be laid down, for without shedding of blood there can be no remission. Mr. Giles seems to think that the Lord's vicariousness ended with the forsaking of God. But this would make him hold that the Lord actually died otherwise than vicariously. This would be as bad as the error he attributes to me, but I do not accuse him of it, although his words imply it. Mr. Giles says 'Before He expired, all the claims of God's holy nature had been satisfied and glorified'. This sounds well, but it is not the whole truth, nor the truth at all; for He had not yet died, and the holy nature of God required that actual death should take place -- His blood had to be shed. It is true that He said "It is finished" before He died, but this embraces His entire work, and so His actual death; it was in part anticipative. The constant references of Scripture as to atonement, is to the Lord's death; of course we know that this included the forsaking of God. But to say atonement was complete before the Lord actually laid down His life is not true. Mr. Giles¬ words imply that our Lord's actual death and burial were not vicarious; and so he exposes himself to the charge (which I do not make) that he holds that the Lord died for personal reasons. I mention this as showing that, in seeking to fix evil on another, one may fall into it himself, or expose himself to a charge like that he would make. There is not the least suggestion in the Notes (God forbid that there should be) that there was anything displeasurable to God in
{186}
our Lord's blessed body as dead and buried, but as taking the sinner's place, it was due to God that He should not only be forsaken, but *die;* as it is said, "Christ *died* for our sins ... and that he was buried and that he was raised". "He was delivered for our offences and was raised again for our justification". This involves His burial; and I would say that all was vicarious. In baptism the believer is buried with Christ and this shows that His burial was part of the filling out of His work for us. It was due to God that the man that sinned (whom Christ represented in death) should disappear entirely. Adam as having sinned was to return into the ground! The Lord descended into the lower parts of the earth. He bore the wrath of God on the way down, as we may say; but He went into the lower parts of the earth -- why did He descend there? Surely not because of anything in Him; it was on account of us.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board S.S. Olympic.
December 20th, 1920.
Mr. J. L. Lory.
My Dear Brother, -- Mr. Morford sent me your letter of August 15th, so that I might send you a line in reply.
The subject you mention is so infinitely precious and delicate that I hesitate to say much. I remember corresponding with Mr. W------ some years ago on it. What I fear is the danger of undertaking to define the Lord's relationships *before* He became Man. He is said to have been in the "form of God". His personal distinctness is, however, recognised, for the Word is said to have been *with* God. He speaks, too, Himself of the glory He had *with* the Father before the world was. But what can we say about these things, save to bow and worship, taking off our shoes, as it were? But He took Man's form and so came within the range of our apprehension, and yet He says that no one knows the Son, but the Father. This passage, I judge, refers to the inscrutableness of His Person; whereas the "Son of God" is to be known, His manhood being contemplated in this.
As I understand the truth, the Lord having become Man, the names or titles by which He is designated as in the past, present or future are such as applied to Him primarily as in this condition -- in manhood. The "Word" is said to have been
{187}
*God*, but it will not do to say that this designation applied to Him *then*, i.e. when in the form of God. It refers to Him as expressing the mind of God, or revealing Him, and so must strictly apply to Him as Man. The same remarks apply to the title "Only begotten Son". "Begotten" implies His manhood, I apprehend. Note -- it is "*is* in the bosom of the Father", not "*was*". The "Word" *was* God, etc. I understand the preposition "in", too, has the force *somewhat* of having 'come into'. This would bear out that the designation refers to the Lord as Man as indeed the context does. "This is my beloved Son, in whom I *have found* my delight" would correspond. What He was as loved of the Father as in the Godhead we can say nothing of (save as intimated, that He was God), but we can understand that as *Man* He became beloved -- no other *man* had His place. This is quite compatible with the love that always existed between divine Persons -- "*have* found" would hardly do as to this latter. The Lord speaks of the Son of man ascending to *where He was* before -- it would not do to draw from this that He was Son of man before He became Man; and yet the Son of man come from heaven, and He said of Himself when here that He was in heaven. His divine Personality is in view in these two well-known passages, but it would be wrong to say that because the Lord speaks of Himself as Son of man ascending to where He was before that this designation applied to Him before He took man's form.
If we hold the truth of His blessed Person in our souls we will be jealous lest we should go beyond Scripture in speaking of Him; at the same time, we will be free to employ titles which were expressed in Him as Man, as Scripture does, in referring to the Lord either as in the form of God or the form of man.
With love in Christ, I am
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 4th, 1921.
Mr. C. A. Coates.
Beloved Brother, -- Having just returned from the Indianapolis meetings, I take the first opportunity to send you a line as to them. There had been much prayer as to these meetings and you will be glad to know that the Lord answered the
{188}
exercises and desires of many in graciously helping us as we came together. Our brothers R.S.S., F.L., H.G., J.D., W.H.F., and several others whose names you would know, were present, besides a representative number of saints from different parts.
There was a private meeting to consider matters of difference that had arisen in connection with certain statements made by J.D., especially at the meetings in Winnipeg of 1918, in the book entitled 'Life', and in the meetings at Chicago in 1920. Attention was called to a statement in the former that Christ could hardly be said to be eternal life as a Babe. J.D. said he had in his mind that He was not the expression of it and remarked that he had understood that when the apostles referred to Christ they referred to Him as they knew Him, and that this was not till after the Holy Spirit came upon Him. It was pointed out, however, that John in his gospel says, "The Word became flesh ..". and that this covered His incarnation from the outset. This was admitted to be the truth, and J.D. said that he would not make such a remark again. It was pointed out that the Lord spoke about being cast upon God from the outset. I would have been glad if D. had more readily acknowledged the truth as to the Lord's Person in this respect, as I strongly fear there had been a defect in his mind as to it. The Notes referred to were largely based on the assumption that Christ was presented as eternal life only after the Spirit came upon Him, and that the Holy Spirit in Him was the spring of eternal life as He is in us. In this line of thought I consider there is a grave defect. Although Christ is not said formally to be eternal life as a Babe, He is spoken of as "Saviour which is Christ the Lord", however, as a Babe. Besides, John states that "in Him was life" and we cannot limit this to any particular part of His incarnation. Negatives in this respect are the dangerous features.
As to the Notes of last year in which it was stated that the 'position' is 'intensely individual', and that no *company* can be said to be following righteousness, and that "faithful men" are the temple, J.D. and H.G. did not fully recognise the need of balancing these one-sided statements with the collective side of the truth. They did, however, admit the latter, to some extent, and as the Notes are not to be published, the matter was left, with the hope that things would not be again presented in this extreme way.
{189}
At the readings we looked at @Acts 11 - 15 inclusive. There was marked interest and general unity. The object in the readings was to show how the parts of the tabernacle, so to speak, were linked up at the beginning. We were helped in seeing that divine wisdom and grace in the apostles and others overcame sectional and personal feeling, so that the work in various localities was linked together and co-ordinated, so that God had His portion and general unity was maintained. The correlation between authority, as presented in the apostles, and the free action of the Spirit in the saints generally came helpfully before us. The bearing of all this, as you can understand, was that the movements of the Spirit, at the present time, in different parts of the world, should not be isolated or sectional, but should be linked up and all set up in relation to Christ who rules over the *whole* house of God.
H.G. gave an interesting address and F.L. was distinctly helped in a gospel address. J.D. gave an address in which certain statements were made which caused additional anxiety, but the address was otherwise good. He seemed open to reconsider the objectionable statements. In private conversation one had much liberty with J.D. and H.G., and there can be no doubt that the Lord's hand was over us in this respect. If each one can move on in his path and service with the Lord and not rely on special friends and supporters, there can be no doubt that there will be help from the Lord in every way.
I will not write more now. I trust that through mercy you keep fairly well.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 25th, 1921.
Mr. P. R. Morford.
Beloved Brother, -- Your remarks as to the great and blessed subject of our Lord's sonship were most interesting. My mind has travelled on similar lines as yours has in regard of what F.E.R. said at different times. I was present at the reading to which you refer. My recollection is that our beloved brother
{190}
hesitated to apply the title of "Son" to the Lord, before incarnation, but I do not think he was dogmatic on the point, and I remember him dwelling on @John 17: 5. "The glory which I had with thee before the world was". As far as I am able to say, my understanding of the subject has been governed by what I learned through F.E.R.
In view of @Mark 13: 32, I am unable to connect the term "Son" with our Lord as "in the form of God". It seems to me that it refers to Him only as having become Man. He was thus in the place of obedience and dependence, and hence one can understand that He could say that the Son did not know of the day or hour referred to. On the other hand, @Hebrews 1: 2 speaks of the Lord as a divine Person under this title, and then He acted as one might say, mediatorially, *before* incarnation, that is, God made the worlds *by* Him. My mind is satisfied, however, that as in many other instances, the term "Son" here is employed by the Spirit to designate the Person who had then become Man. The Lord says elsewhere "What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before" (@John 6: 62): this does not mean that the title "Son of man" refers to Him before He became Man. But whilst the title "Son" refers to Him as Man, it is generally intended to indicate His deity rather than His humanity; that is to say, it is not employed historically or as denoting a person among others, here on earth, like "Jesus". It usually indicates, as I said, the Lord's deity or dignity.
On the whole, I think the simple and safe attitude of mind to take up in regard of this immensely important subject is that one cannot undertake to speak *definitely* of the relationships that existed between divine Persons as viewed absolutely in the Godhead, or apply names that would designate these relationships.
I used to think that revelation was simply the unveiling of what had existed, that is, Father, Son and Holy Spirit; but subsequently came to see revelation was of God or the Father, as to His nature and attributes. The Lord formally states that no one knows the Son but the Father (@Matthew 11: 27). The thought of revelation applies only to the Father in this passage. The knowledge of the "Son of God" would refer to Him as Man, whereas @Matthew 11 refers to His eternal Being.
I cannot lay my hands on the F.E.R. papers to which you
{191}
refer. I am doubtful that the "form of God" admits of a relationship that implies obedience and subjection.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- I do not think it would be wise to publish my letter on this subject.
[Mr. Taylor evidently did not consider it wise to publish at that time. See letters in 1929. -- Editor]
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 9th, 1922.
Mr. W. G. Hardwick.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of February 15th was received in due time and I thank you for writing. The brethren at Berkeley are much on my mind in view of what has developed among them and I am much cast on the Lord as to you all.
I have seen the paper Mr. W. Edwards has sent out, but I have not been able to go over it critically. I have no copy of it now so I cannot refer to it in detail. I have also seen Mr. Gill's letter to W. Edwards, for which I am most thankful. I have no doubt H. G.¬s words shall have more weight than any I could write.
The question that arises in my mind in considering what W.E. has written is this -- has he the Father and the Son? I do not doubt that he is a Christian. I refer to what he professes to hold. I use the word 'professes', for I doubt that he *really* believes in his heart that God will *cease* to be Father in eternity or that Christ will cease to be Son. Possibly W.E. would object to the word 'cease', but this is what his paper implies, as I understand it. We are told that the *Son* shall be placed in subjection to God, having delivered up the kingdom to Him who is God and Father. What relation shall Christ be in to God then? Obviously He remains a Man, for He shall be in subjection -- is W.E.¬s thought that He is just a Man (divine, however) but having no other relationship? Is God just *God* to Him, having given up the relationship of Father? If I go by Scripture the *Son* is to be in subjection, and the kingdom is given up to Him who is God *and Father*. Mr. Edwards¬ thought is in direct variance with @1 Corinthians 15: 24 - 28.
{192}
It seems as if the passage was written to rebuke such an error as Mr. Edwards¬.
But to view the matter in a broader way, Mr. Edwards¬ thought sets the revelation of God in its most blessed bearing and eternal import aside. The scriptural presentation of revelation is that God, in shining out in His attributes, is seen in the relationship of Father to Man in Christ and to believers through redemption. This relationship was the subject of counsel before the world was, and so was no after-thought with God (@Ephesians 1: 4 - 6). In it we are before Him in love in Christ, as associated with Him, as His brethren. As foreknown we were predestinated to be conformed to the image of God's *Son* (@Romans 8: 29) -- "so that", as it is said, "he should be the firstborn among many *brethren*". Mr. Edwards would, I understand by his paper, make all this a matter of 'recovery;' recovery is involved, as the less in the greater; the greater is that we are brought into what men even in innocency did not have -- which was, as I said, the subject of eternal counsel. For Mr. Edwards this precious blessing and favour that believers are brought into in Christ shall itself terminate, whereas, the Christian *normally* cherishes it as his greatest privilege, and this is how Scripture presents it. Besides, Mr. Edwards would deny to God throughout eternity what He must cherish supremely -- the affections of a Father reciprocated in the Son and the sons associated with Him.
May God deliver our brother from his errors, and may He enable you all at Berkeley to help the erring one. With love in Christ to you all, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
My wife also sends Christian love.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 24th, 1922.
Mr. W. G. Hardwick.
My Dear Brother, -- I am glad to have your letter of the 16th. First I wish to say that I am very sorry to know that Mrs. Hardwick is in poor health and I earnestly hope she is steadily recovering and that she will soon, through God's mercy, be able to resume her place in, your house again. The people of God have been much afflicted during the past year through
{193}
sickness and evidently you are coming in for your share. I trust Mrs. Hardwick and you all may gain through the exercise. I have been laid up myself for a while, but I am better, thank God. My wife also keeps well.
As regards J.D. I can understand your exercises, but I think he should not be in any way hindered in his ministry. As you will remember, I had considerable intercourse with our brother last year. We talked over matters of difference freely and he told me that he saw where he had given occasion for complaint and that he was willing to submit to the judgment of his brethren and was ready to profit by their counsel. In view of all this I saw that our brother could be left in the Lord's hands. I have not heard anything from him directly since, but I know of nothing to change my view. My fear throughout has been that certain ones in his vicinity would make J.D. more than he wished to be, and this, to say the most, can but hinder and becloud both themselves and him. But undue severity as to a brother is not far removed from undue admiration.
I hear nothing of W. Edwards now. Just this week, however, I saw a letter from our brother Coulson (if I spell his name correctly) saying that about ten sympathise with him and that some of the younger ones are drifting into the sects, and that he (C.) was standing alone. There was no evidence of any sorrow. Thus the enemy's advantage through W. Edwards¬ error. May the Lord deliver them all!
My wife joins in love in the Lord to you and your family and the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 25th, 1922.
Mr. W. Stanford.
Beloved Brother, -- I have to thank you for two letters.
I was quite interested in all you wrote, especially your reference to the love of Christ as seen in the marriage types. There is a certain freshness about Genesis, and this appears nowhere more than in those passages which treat of parental and marital relation. In the former the love of *God* for the family is presented, or rather foreshadowed, and in the latter the love of Christ for the church.
{194}
There is encouragement in this country, although meetings are small and few comparatively. We had a good season here lately at our monthly fellowship meeting, reading @Hebrews 1. The *inherited* name came specially before us as, drawn from the Psalms. It is Christ viewed as among the saints, One exalted, "chosen out of the people". I hope to attend special meetings in Toronto at the end of next week.
Dear R. D------¬s journey's end caused great sorrow here. His ministry in New Zealand and Australia bore marks of striking ability and so such circumstances at the end cause the more serious exercises. I am waiting on the Lord about it.
With love in Christ to you and your family, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 22nd, 1922.
Mr. P. R. Morford.
Beloved Brother, -- Months have elapsed since I saw you, but I have to thank you for copies of *Mutual Comfort* which I have enjoyed reading; and I pray continually for you. I earnestly hope you are keeping fairly well, through God's great mercy to you. Now that dear E.L.B. has been taken from us our editors are fewer and one's eyes turn more than ever to yourself and dear R.B. I trust the Lord will continue to bless you both in the service you are rendering to His people. The constant stream of beloved ones going to be with the Lord reminds us of the tabernacle period of him who wrote @Psalm 90.
Dear R. D------¬s departure -- the circumstances being such -- caused great distress. There is undoubtedly a voice in it for us all. I trust it shall be heard. "Whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth" may be well noted.
I am enclosing notes of an address at Toronto lately, which you may be able to use. If so, perhaps you will find time to look over and make needed verbal corrections.
Our brother Cakebread of Sydenham sent me some notes of an address at Edinburgh last May and these I have returned to him with the request that he send them to you. Perhaps you can use also.
{195}
There is cheer on this side in many ways, especially in this district. There was a fair time at Toronto. Yorke Long was with us. We are about to open another meeting room in Brooklyn, which I trust God will bless. Remember us in this.
My wife joins in warm love to Mrs. Morford and you all.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board R.M.S. Andania.
March 24th, 1923.
Mr. W. Stanford.
Beloved Brother, -- There is time to send you a line. You will see that I am on my way to your side; my wife is with me.
I wish to thank you for yours of February 28th containing so much of interest. What you say of certain brothers interests me. 'Weighing' our brethren needs great care. In @Leviticus 27 Moses and "the priest" were to do the estimating. The Lord knows the *value* of each and in due time each of us obtains his own worth in the minds and hearts of the saints. I am very glad to have your remarks as to those mentioned.
We left Boston on the 17th inst. and hope to arrive in Liverpool on the 27th inst., going at once to Belfast, God willing, where we intend to remain until about April 15th.
Mr. Gill was in New York as we left. He was staying with us for a few days. The Lord helped him in ministry -- I will not say more now -- I hope to see you soon. Love in Christ to you and your household.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 1st, 1923.
My Dear Brother, -- -- Pardon my delay in acknowledging yours, as I have been much pressed.
I am very interested in the enquiry you raise, that of service to the young. There can be no doubt that God was in the effectual protest made some years ago against the extremes to which it had been carried by some; a regular system, corresponding with what was current in the 'nations' around, had developed. This was of a piece with the so-called evangelical activity, which at that period had taken the form of a 'special
{196}
interest' with certain ones; the tendency of all being to becloud or ignore the assembly and what Christ was ministering to it. But God came in for His people and brought about deliverance. Since then the truth of the house of God has been much before us, and in connection with this the truth governing the believer's household. There is scarcely a brother in fellowship now who does not recognise the obligation to the Lord to baptise his household, and correspondingly, the proportion of the children of the saints who turn to the Lord and accept the fellowship of His death is, I believe, much larger than it was in earlier years. Thus we can see that God is helping His people on lines in accordance with His truth and I am sure you will agree that we all should be strenuously on our guard lest we should be diverted or tend to divert others in any way. As for myself, I am wary lest I should say anything that would lead anyone to build again what he once destroyed as not according to God.
But at the same time Scripture remains as our infallible guide, and as we meditate upon it, in dependence on God, ready for adjustment, which we always need, we shall be adjusted, for movement in a rut is always to be avoided, and I do not see why any brother who has ability and exercise to serve the young, should not do so, in subjection to the Lord and his brethren.
The Lord took little children in His arms, and laying His hands on them, blessed them (@Mark 10: 13 - 16). He treated them as a class in ordinary growth or development, and He was indignant with those who sought to prevent them coming to Him. Then in raising the son of the widow of Nain and Jairus¬ daughter, He used terms denoting that He took account of their age, as young persons. The apostle John wrote to the several grades of the family, as children, young men and fathers. Other scriptures too would show that gradations in age may be recognised in ministry, such as @Ecclesiastes 12, and as a matter of fact, every brother who ministers assumes this, for we continually hear the young appealed to, in addresses given by Christians. From what I have written, you can easily decide what my exercises are as to your enquiry and I trust my remarks may be of service to you.
With love in the Lord, I am,
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
{197}
July 1st, 1924.
Beloved Brother, -- The voyage has been fairly good -- although rather rough for this time of year. We have been reading the Psalms and Romans; the latter in the morning and the former in the evening.
I have been revising a good many notes of the meetings which I trust shall be helpful to the Lord's people as published. One felt the Lord's support during this visit in a peculiar way and I think it was due somewhat to increased interest among the dear saints; but particularly to Christ's love for the church in view of the end. We are living in a remarkable time, dear brother. The Lord would give us a sense of this and fit us for the testimony He would have rendered. I am sure He would have us go more into the region of Tyre and Sidon to get *fresh* material; also that others should be gathered besides those who are gathered (@Isaiah 56). During the voyage we have been noting how in 2 Chronicles, Hezekiah went beyond Judah in his invitation to keep the passover; this involved reproach, but nevertheless some from Ephraim and Manasseh humbled themselves and came. It was worth while!
We constantly recall the great kindness you *all* showed us.
Yours affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
July 26th, 1924.
Mr. H. Hardwick.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received yours of the 10th inst. and enclosure, notes of a Belfast reading. I return the latter; they were very poorly taken. Still you can *gather* from them what passed.
The thought was that as elders were appointed in cities ("established elders in each city, as I had ordered thee") any so appointed would have jurisdiction in the *entire* city in which he was, however many meetings there may have been in it; all the saints would thus come under his (or their) rule and get the benefit of his wisdom and experience. Hence in matters pertaining to the government of the assembly in a city, *all* the elders there should be taken into account. This was to correct
{198}
a custom which made each local company judge its own affairs and *notify* the other meetings of their decisions, so as to maintain unity of action in the city. It was pointed out that this custom shut out from each meeting the help the brothers of experience in the other meetings afforded and which indeed God had graciously provided for all in the city.
@Matthew 18 shows that the Lord is with brethren as they come together in this way to 'consider the matter', and that He would give effect to their decisions in the *assembly;* ratification must be there (@Acts 15). The act of discipline is there according to @1 Corinthians 5. I believe discipline is much more effective when all the saints come together to administer it.
London presents a great difficulty on account of the unusual number of meetings (thank God for them); but at the same time I firmly believe what I have said above conveys the principle which Scripture indicates should govern saints in cities where several meetings exist. We have acted on it in New York for twenty-five years, or more, and we have found the Lord's help continually.
I am,
Yours affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
September 6th, 1924.
My Dear Brother, -- I now send a line in answer to your remarks as to the Lord's supper. I understand that @1 Corinthians 10 is the bearing of the thing on our walk, relations to each other, etc., and that chapter 11 is the order or 'manner' of it, also that it is a memorial of Christ and a testimony to His death -- "the death of the Lord". The *memorial* is evidently connected with the breaking of the bread and blessing of the cup, and the communion and public testimony with the eating and drinking. When the Lord said, "Do this" He referred to what *He* did, and it was by this He was to be remembered; *He* did not eat or drink -- of course He partook of the *passover*. The *eating and drinking is connected* with the testimony, *not* breaking of the bread. You speak of the latter as the 'public act;' of course it is public as being a physical action, but as I said, the public feature in the Lord's supper is said to be the eating and drinking, whereas the breaking of the bread is said
{199}
to call the Lord to mind. It is for *our* minds as a remembrance, not for those outside as a testimony. The Lord's death was public and our eating and drinking, being *fellowship* in it, is a testimony.
The breaking of bread is, of course, included in the Lord's supper, but where it is spoken of by itself and connected with the first day of the week, as in @Acts 20, I think it has an *inward* bearing; as we are reminded of Christ in it thus the way is open into all that the *first* day suggests. The designation "Lord's supper" is used only in @1 Corinthians 11, and obviously stands connected with the Lord's authority and testimony in the assembly. Thus we have "ye do *show* the Lord's death".
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 27th, 1924.
Beloved Brother, -- Please pardon delay in answering your letter of July 29th, I have been unduly pressed for time.
The thought before us at the reading you refer to was that, as Scripture recognises only one assembly in a city the saints in a given city or town should not only assent to this, but should act together in a most practical way. As elders are said to be ordained for *cities*, an elder's jurisdiction would extend to the whole city in which he lived, although there might have been several meetings in it. Thus his wisdom and experience would be available to all the saints in the place. This would work out to the advantage particularly in cases of discipline, which might be difficult otherwise. As regards all the saints coming together in one place, I do not at all see that this ("one place") refers to the *locality;* the saints were addressed as at Corinth and if they came together it would, of course, be there. The form of expression and context precludes entirely it seems to me, that the city merely is referred to. In @1 Corinthians 14: 23 the "whole assembly" is contemplated as coming together in one place, and a simple person *entering in* -- surely this does not refer to him entering into the city. I note your remarks as to the unlikelihood of rooms or halls sufficiently large to accommodate all being available, which are interesting; but I do not see that we should assume that there was not such accommodation
{200}
Paul used the school of Tyrannus for two years; a school would be commodious, and doubtless there were many of them in the Greek world.
@Romans 16 shows that there may be several meetings in a city, but 1 Corinthians and @Acts 15 indicate that under certain circumstances all would come together in one place. In general, matters relative to each meeting are wisely left with it -- whatever is thought wise there is accepted without question as a matter of confidence in the care meeting and by all, but matters involving mature judgment should be dealt with by all the brethren in the city if discipline is to be administered, I believe. @1 Corinthians 5 indicates that all the saints should come together for this. *All* Israel were to stone Achan. Of course, I am only seeking to show the scriptural principles governing the saints who reside in cities; I am aware that in the working out of these, advantages may be taken by brothers who might seek to dominate; but if we act on the principles because they are of God, trusting in Him, He will not fail us.
I am very interested in what you wrote as to the "wood" in @Genesis 22. No doubt it refers to Christ's manhood -- the condition to which, as He took *our* place, judgment could apply. He was made in the likeness of "flesh of sin".
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 18th, 1924.
Mr. W. Stanford.
Beloved Brother, -- It is a good while since I received yours of August 8th, but having, as usual, much on hand, I have been unable to send a line in reply.
I appreciate all your kind interest, and I am glad to have the expression of your exercises as to current matters. Indifference as to His interests in any of us is nauseating to the Lord, whereas concern about them causes Him pleasure: we thus come into the current of His mind and have understanding of the times and "know what Israel ought to do".
I note your remarks about 'district' meetings. As children of wisdom we should know what to do, but love will always be the governing motive in those who have it; so that there should be no territorial limitation save those occasioned by lack of physical accommodation. Unless love controls in this matter there is likely to be a parochial and even diocesan
{201}
development which will tend to nullify the bearing of the truth of the house of God.
There is considerable encouragement on this side of the Atlantic, especially in this district. You may have heard that W. Magowan and his wife have returned from 'Glanton'. There are also a good few others in different places similarly exercised and are seeking restoration to fellowship. There is also an interesting movement in the western part of this State, where some twenty have separated from the 'denominations', among them an ex-Methodist clergyman.
My wife and I were very glad of the opportunity of seeing you and Mrs. Stanford in your own quarters, also your dear children. We appreciated your hospitality.
We have our brother Grimsdick in these parts, and the Lord helps him in his service.
My wife joins in love to you all.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 20th, 1924.
Beloved Brother, -- I am interested in all you write as to @1 Corinthians 11: 20; @1 Corinthians 14: 23, etc. It suggests to me afresh the importance of reading Scripture in its context. Keeping this in view there can be no question that J.N.D. and the A.V. are justified in rendering the Greek "in one place". If we render it "together" here as in @Matthew 22: 34, we should have a redundancy -- "the whole assembly come together". In Matthew 22 the preceding Greek word is rendered "were gathered". In @1 Corinthians 14 the idea of place is evident in that one is supposed to *come in*. @Acts 4 is no doubt quoted from the LXX, the purpose of the gathering is emphasised. A different Greek form is employed in verse 27 for gathering together. Even if we admit that the Greek referred to in 1 Corinthians 14 should be translated "together", we cannot get rid of the idea of place, for the apostle is dealing with order in the assembly, not with its motives in assembling; one comes in or one is sitting there; the others judge, etc. "The whole assembly" has come together -- it was not in the air, nor even in the 'open', for one could come *in*.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
{202}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 20th, 1924.
Beloved Brother, -- As to @Ephesians 2: 8, 9, I believe with you, *all* is on the principle of gift. "This" might be taken to refer to "faith", the last mentioned, but I think "not on the principle of works" refers to salvation, indeed it governs the whole.
The "key of David", I understand, refers to the power of *administration* in the hands of Christ. Philadelphia would understand this.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 22nd, 1924.
Beloved Brother, -- I was pleased to receive your letter of October 22nd.
I believe Numbers indicates how a Christian should take up his responsibility, first by the standard of his father's house, and then widening out to his special group of tribes and to the whole camp. From the outset he is set in relation to the tabernacle which would be the great governing thought. But in seeking to act according to the above, the great exercise should be to do so in a *spiritual* way, otherwise we become geographical and parochial. Indeed I believe a danger exists in the latter connection, I mean the recent custom of grouping certain meetings together, and regarding them as 'a district' involving 'district exercises'. This is just parochialism, and, in time, will work mischief. That you, as in Lewisham, should be *specially* concerned about meetings adjacent (north, south, east and west) is right, and the more you are with the Lord the wider your area will become, but to mark off a certain number of your neighbouring meetings, and regard them as your 'district' has no scriptural warrant that I can see.
Christians are characteristically children of wisdom, and much is left to us in detail; wise arrangements, may, therefore, be made for general convenience and profit. But to prevent brethren outside any given 'district' from attending meetings for fellowship for any other reasons than of physical convenience is not in keeping with the truth of the body of Christ.
While it is true, as you say, that districts are recognised in
{203}
the New Testament, yet it should be observed that they are known territories as designated in the empire and not fixed by the saints. We have such as the assemblies in Asia, Judea and Galatia.
I do not see, indeed, that the saints have anything to do with fixing districts. We accept what exists under the government of God.
Deuteronomy shows that distance has to do with responsibility, and so one is obligated especially in regard of meetings in his neighbourhood, but this neighbourhood is not fixed by us, but as ordered in the government of God.
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 6th, 1924.
Mr. E. Hansen.
Beloved Brother, -- Since hearing of the death of your dear brother Samuel I have been wishing to write to you all. My wife and I feel keen sympathy with you and Mrs. Hansen, but especially with dear bereaved Mrs. Lindberg and her children and we will be obliged if you will kindly tell her so. You may be assured that our prayers go up for your sister and the children. We feel sure she will be comforted in the knowledge that her dear one is with Christ, which, as Scripture says, "is far better". Then she will also be comforted by the love and care which we are sure will be shown her by you all.
My wife and I had great fears about Samuel's health and so we were not surprised to hear that he had fallen asleep. Sometimes the Lord is pleased to intervene and restore one of His own to health, but generally the course of God's government proceeds with us as with the rest of men; faith accepts this in the light of resurrection and everlasting life -- indeed falling asleep, or dying, is but going to be with Christ, which love desires. Thus death is ours. But nevertheless it is right that God's hand should be recognised -- that there is discipline in our loved ones being taken from us. It is right also to have the sense of bereavement, for to be without natural affection is apostasy (@2 Timothy 3). But the Lord comes in to fill the void created, and I trust dear Mrs. Lindberg will make up her mind that no one else really can fill it. She will find thus that in drinking the bitter waters (@Exodus 15) the knowledge of the
{204}
love of Christ, who *tasted* death for us, will make them sweet.
We often revert to the happy season we spent with your dear brother, and the great kindness shown us by dear Mrs. Hansen and yourself, and we thank God for the grace given you both to thus identify yourselves with His interests. We trust you are sustained in this, so that you make the valley of Baca (@Psalm 70: 14) a well-spring, the rain filling the pools. Thus you go from strength to strength and appear before God in Zion.
In this country the Lord encourages us all much, especially in special meetings held in different places. There have been such meetings lately in Toronto, Detroit, Council Bluffs, Winnipeg, Plainfield and Montreal. Besides, a good few have been restored from 'Glanton' during the past few months. You will know that P.L. is in South Africa. My wife and I hope to go to Australia in March, please God, I am sure we may reckon on your prayers.
Our united love to you both and your dear father and mother and Mrs. Lindberg and *all* the dear brethren.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 6th, 1925.
My Dear Mrs. Morford, -- It was so very good of you to write so appreciatively of the aid I sought to furnish you in your service in completing dear Mr. Morford's work. I was very happy indeed in what little I could do and I believe the Lord blessed the magazine as it appeared in its remaining months.
We now think of dear Mr. Nunnerley in *his* work, especially as his hands are so full otherwise. One feels increasingly that the Lord's work demands all possible attention; and although secular employment is no doubt wholesome for most of us, it has a tendency to take off the keen spiritual edge which entire abandonment to the things of God affords. But the Lord says, "I know", and He is very gracious and tenderly supports us in our weakness and removes the dullness so that His work should be properly done and our joy should be full. I am looking forward to the first 'number'.
You may be assured of *our* constant interest in you and yours.
{205}
When the time comes for Joy to leave you (if the Lord so orders it) your feelings will be different. But your God will instruct and support you as you endure the lot of many loving parents. Your sorrow in parting with her will be modified by the knowledge of her joy, and you will have rest in submission to the will of God, which is *always* perfect. We should indeed gladly seek out your dear ones were we to return by Colombo -- but our thought is to travel by South Africa. We expect to sail from Vancouver on March 11th and we *may* reach Great Britain by July.
We are all well through God's great mercy to us, but there has been a great deal of illness in these parts and many have fallen asleep. Dear Mr. Fawcett has been very low again, but God has had mercy on him and he is now on the way to recovery as we believe.
We had an excellent season at Indianapolis. The usual representative number were present. We considered at the reading 'the power of God'. Mr. Gill preached most effectively and *several* young people received blessing from God. We also had a good season in Brooklyn on January 1st -- we arrived back in time for it.
My wife unites with me in warm love in Christ to you *all*.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 18th, 1925.
Mr. E. McCrea.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of December 16th came yesterday and I thank you for your kind interest in my coming visit to New Zealand, also for your invitation to my wife and myself to your house. We will have pleasure in sharing your hospitality if the Lord permit. Of course, we also appreciate Mr. C. Smith's desire to have us with him and his wife, but we note that this will not be convenient for them. Perhaps you will mention to Mr. Smith that I wrote him about three months ago, but that not having heard from him I fear my letter miscarried.
As regards the meetings at Easter, I cabled you tonight, 'Easter acceptable', which I have no doubt will be intelligible to you, that is, that I hope to be free to be with you during the special meetings at Easter.
{206}
We are booked to sail by the S.S. McKura from Vancouver on March 11th, arriving at Auckland about March 30th. Mr. Bond of Auckland sent me an itinerary according to which I am to leave Wellington for Sydney on April 17th; this, I suppose, means an equitable division of the available time between the two countries.
Our first thought was to return via Vancouver, but as Dr. Elliott urgently wished us to call at South Africa I decided to go that way. This will enable me to see the brethren in western Australia, which I much wished to do. On this account, I shall probably have a little more time in Australia than I had hoped for.
The contemplation of seeing my dear brethren in the Antipodes is a very real pleasure, and I trust we shall be much blessed mutually as seeing each other.
We had a good season at Indianapolis this year. We looked at the 'Power of God' in the readings.
My wife joins in love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea and yourself and your family, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 23rd, 1925.
Mr. A. M. Hayward.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of January 16th has remained unanswered longer than I intended but I have been greatly pressed for time so I am sure you will pardon.
I kept no copy of my letter relative to 'District Meetings', but I did not intend to convey the thought that I objected to them as I have seen them, but rather, as you say, the abuse them. As this is what the letter conveyed to you I do not suppose either alteration or addition is -needed. From your letter I judge that your mind in the matter differs nothing from mine.
But I do not see any scriptural justification for limiting a meeting arranged for *ministry* except what may be necessary for physical convenience. Anything else, it seems to me, is not a recognition of "the unity of the Spirit", and the universality of gift. The saints are wisdom's children, and much is left to our wisdom, the existence of love being assumed, as moving in the recognition of the general principles which are
{207}
to govern the house of God, but if anything is introduced infringing on any of these principles, it is due to the Lord that attention should be called to it. If, therefore, a meeting for fellowship, ministry, etc., is arranged in a given place, and a brother with ability to help the saints, living nearby and wishing to attend is prevented because of *district* limitations, then, it appears to me, the principle governing levitical service is interfered with. Further, if saints in general are prevented by *district* limitations, the truth of the body of Christ is interfered with. Other modifications besides those required by physical convenience may exist, such as the judgment of the saints as to the brother or brothers whose ministry would be most suited on a given occasion, but this comes under the head of wisdom, and does not infringe a levitical principle.
I am doubtful, too, as to the scripturalness of a 'District Meeting' that is, a meeting having such a fixed character. I think the idea of a meeting, or coming together in one place should have the assembly in the locality as its basis, not a number of assemblies.
It will be observed that in addressing the Galatians the apostle says, "The assemblies of Galatia", that is, the exercise or obligation of the error would be on each *local* company. He does call them "senseless Galatians" later on to bring home the error to every one of them, but the formal address is to the assemblies, whereas, the Colossians are addressed as "faithful brethren", but when the letter is directed to be passed on to Laodicea it is to "the *assembly* of Laodiceans". The responsibility involved in the epistle applied in each locality. There is no hint of a joint meeting. The apostle further says, "And that ye also read that from Laodicea", and so the seven assemblies in Asia (@Revelation 2 and 3), they are addressed severally. In a word, it is clear that the local assembly is the basis for coming together, direct responsibility being connected with it.
In view of all this I have a certain apprehension of danger in the country being divided into districts with corresponding limitations. There is a tendency towards the parochial and even diocesan systems of the State Church. There is no warrant in Scripture for a church in a district as including all the companies in it, or for a National Church. The economy of the assembly is worked out in assemblies and all coming together into one place is in this connection, as far as I see, and not in relation to districts or countries. Jerusalem, as we see
{208}
in @Acts 15 had a unique place (in the all wise ways of God), but this need not be taken into consideration now.
By the way, I have heard that *you* base the Park Street readings on @Acts 15. Is this correct? I hope not, for such a thought would give these meetings a metropolitan importance and I need say nothing of such a danger. God has graciously blessed them as arranged in love and wisdom for conference and general edification, making for unity in the Spirit among the brethren.
My wife and I were thankful when we heard the Lord had taken dear Miss Bridle to Himself. I am sure Mrs. Hayward and you are comforted that she has thus passed out of her sufferings for ever. The Lord has taken to Himself a great many during the past few months.
We hope to leave here on the 28th for Vancouver and New Zealand, etc.
Our united love in Christ to you both,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
Your brother Jack and his wife passed through lately going to Bermuda. The Lord is blessing them, I believe.
<hr>
Melbourne.
May 28th, 1925.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- It was a pleasure to hear from you and we trust that Mrs. McCrea and yourself continue to keep well, through God's mercy.
I have been unable to lay my hands on March number of *Believer's Friend*, but when I do, I will try to write you. I will also try to look up the letter you mention.
We ever think with pleasure of the happy times spent at your house and in our travels and we are assured that all was of God and had His gracious support and that the links formed will remain. We were distressed to hear of Mrs. A. Suckling's illness, but we gather she is improving. Dear Mr. House is improving slowly, but steadily, but an operation will be necessary, and of course this is a serious matter, especially in view of his general weakness, but the Lord will help in this as in all else.
The meetings in Australia so far were supported of the Lord.
{209}
They were generally large, but the halls were good and generally *all* heard. This was a signal mercy. The grace of the Lord was specially upon us in Sydney. The personal links formed there are sweet as in New Zealand.
We leave tonight for Adelaide, remaining there until June 2nd and then to Perth. We sail, D.V., on the 8th from Fremantle.
My wife joins in warm love to Mrs. McCrea and yourself and to *all* the brethren. Please tell Mr. Rowden I will be writing him later.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- Since writing this morning I have had opportunity of looking at the papers you mentioned. J.N.D.¬s letter (Volume 2, p. 237) is a sober setting forth of the principles that should govern us, I am sure, in regard of the matter in question. Generally, I believe, it is wise to leave all cases of a personal nature in the hands of each meeting. If there is anything flagrant (shown to be such) it must be refused, but this is rare. In the Whangarei case more harm than good has come out of the indirect interference that has taken place. The peace of Auckland has been seriously threatened by it, according to what I hear. The Lord will always come in for adjustment in uncertain cases, and it is infinitely better to leave them in His hand, in connection with those responsible in their localities, than to jeopardise general peace by interference.
The Park Street reading is suggestive -- on pages 82, 83 there is a reference to 'country meetings' which savours a *little* of metropolitanism. -- J.T.
<hr>
On Board S.S. Sophocles. June 13th, 1925.
Mr Cecil Joyce.
My Dear Cecil, -- I was very glad to receive your letter.
You had been much on our hearts and in our prayers, especially as we had been hearing from your dear father and mother that you had expressed your desire to the brethren to be allowed to break bread so as to remember the Lord with them.
I gathered from news received before we sailed that your
{210}
wish was to be granted soon, and so you may have broken bread already.
The light that broke into your soul leading to this happy result and the same result in dear Ernie and other young people in your district caused more joy to my wife and myself perhaps, than any other incident in our happy visit to Sydney.
We earnestly trust and pray that now your committal to the Lord in the fellowship of His death is definitely made that your progress will be steady. The enemy will not fail to attack you, but "God is faithful, who has called us into the fellowship of his Son", and He will stand by you; besides, you will be surrounded by the affectionate care of your parents and the brethren, indeed you will prove that salvation in a practical sense is found in the circle of the saints. But at the same time, you shall have to work out *your own* salvation with fear and trembling. This involves the need of maintaining constant *personal relations* with the Lord, through prayer and self-judgment. Thus you will grow in strength -- as overcoming the *flesh in yourself* you will advance to more honourable conflicts for the sake of the testimony. But your first victories must be over Satan through the flesh -- see the conflict with Amalek (@Exodus 17). Get all you can from the family readings and the meetings, but be sure to continue in *private* reading and prayer.
The voyage so far has been fairly comfortable -- there has been some rough weather, but we have kept well, thank God. We feel borne up by the prayers of our dear brethren. How we value them! I hope to write to your father before landing -- in the meantime give our united love to *all*.
Affectionately your brother in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board S.S. Sophocles.
June 20th, 1925.
Mr. R. S. Sinclair.
My Dear Mr. Sinclair, -- When I last wrote we had finished our visit to New Zealand; now we are on our way from Perth, to Cape Town, having spent over forty days in Australia.
We visited Sydney first, where special meetings were arranged covering nearly a week. It was a most cheering time. There are twelve meetings there and the interest is as keen and as well sustained as any I have experienced. The attendance
{211}
ranges from 800 to 1,300. As excellent halls were available, the hearing was very satisfactory. I am sure the Lord helped in this as in all else. There were readings and addresses, including the gospel on Sunday evening. It was said there were over 1,300 at the Ashfield Town Hall for the gospel. It was indeed a most inspiring company. It would take many pages to convey an adequate account of this series of meetings.
From Sydney we went to Newcastle, where Mr. Guy Allbut lives. We had a happy time there, but we were saddened after the meetings by a serious illness which seized our dear brother W. J. House. He has been ill ever since and during the present voyage we received a wireless to say that he was to have been operated on eight days ago. We are anxiously awaiting further news: our brother is greatly valued.
We then proceeded to Brisbane, where we had a long week-end and an excellent season, staying with Mr. Robert Wright, who has been used in helping many by speaking privately (he is a dentist) to them about the Lord. A feature of the service there was 'lunch-hour' meetings on three successive days.
Many notices had been circulated and many 'outsiders' attended. There are three meetings in Brisbane and several comparatively near, so that the meetings ranged from three to five hundred. There are several good brothers and sisters there and some aggressiveness in testimony. They have a Tract Depot. There are Depots in Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, Auckland, Wellington and, I believe, Christchurch.
From there we returned to Sydney, where we had another series of meetings -- more interesting even than the first. Several young people got blessing, notably two of Mr. Joyce's children and they were desirous of breaking bread. By arrangement I had a meeting with the Ashfield brothers who had been withdrawn from last year. In view of this meeting the dear brethren in fellowship at Ashfield came together for prayer at 6 a.m. to the end that the Lord would graciously come in for recovery. This was touching and I am sure pleasing to the Lord. The interview lasted two hours (I was accompanied by two of our brethren) and I felt the Lord was in it. There has not been opportunity to hear what further developments have taken place. One sister (a very influential one -- rather too much so!) got delivered and she and her daughter have asked for fellowship at Ashfield.
About May 20th we arrived at Melbourne and had nearly a
{212}
week there -- about fifty coming from Sydney and district. There are eight meetings in Melbourne, but as there are more meetings in the district, the numbers attending were about the same as Sydney. Those from Tasmania also came over -- some very dear saints. The hall engaged for the meetings was excellent and the hearing most satisfactory. We stayed with Mr. W. J. Young, who truly seems to be a pillar among the brethren. At Sydney we stayed with Dr. Van Someren and with Mr. J. J. Joyce on the second visit. Mr. and Mrs. Joyce came all the way across the continent with us.
We reached Adelaide in due course and had a long week-end there -- an extremely happy time. We stayed with Mr. W. Wright, a very dear brother who enquired much for you. Indeed, a visit by you and Mrs. Sinclair would be *greatly* appreciated in the Commonwealth and New Zealand. Mr. W. and three daughters entertained Mr. Young, who came with us, Mr. and Mrs. Joyce and ourselves most 'royally'. There are two meetings in the city. The numbers attending the special meetings ranged from two to four hundred.
At the appointed time, seven of us started across the desert (it is as truly such as that in Arabia) to Perth. It took us three days, but as the train accommodation was excellent, we were comfortable most of the way. We had a week-end of four days at Perth. There are two meetings there and one at Fremantle nearby. The numbers attending the special meetings corresponded nearly with Adelaide. The Lord graciously helped us at the other places and we were all cheered and abiding work was done, I believe. We said farewell to our beloved Australian brethren at Fremantle on the 9th inst., having embarked on this ship for Cape Town. We feel we have formed abiding links with them.
Looking back, it has been the *most encouraging* period of service and fellowship that one has experienced, and correspondingly as you can understand, one's heart is bowed by the sense of the favour the Lord has graciously granted him the support afforded throughout. His work in these countries, extending over sixty years (including Mr. Darby's and Mr. Wigram's visits) has borne fruit and we are indeed favoured to have seen it, as I may say, in its entirety, for I believe we met 90 percent or more of all in fellowship in both countries.
I am landing at Durban to run up and see the saints at Johannesburg and Pretoria, and my wife with others on board
{213}
are continuing to Cape Town by boat. We hope to have nearly a week at Cape Town and then go (D.V.) by the Nestor to Liverpool, arriving there on July 24th. We expect to be at Barnet on August 1st. Mr. Arthur Elliott, we hear, is travelling on the Nestor.
I trust Mrs. Sinclair and you keep well through God's mercy. You will soon be thinking of holidays, I suppose. We have both kept very well, thank God.
Our united love to you both,
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 24th, 1925.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- I believe I am two letters in your debt; that of August 10th, awaited me here on my return from Great Britain. I was very thankful to hear of the good season at Nelson on August 4th, and of the large number present. I am sorry to hear that the Ngatimoti brethren were not making headway. If the brethren in the district are cast upon the Lord He will surely come in for them. I was grieved to see so many dear brethren unable to walk together locally.
As regards the remark that we should not seek to teach from the types of the Old Testament, I would say that the report that Mr. Darby said this is contradicted by his writings, as these show that he taught much from the types. I cannot understand how any Christian can deny that the Old Testament should be used for the instruction of God's people. Every scripture is said to be *profitable for doctrine*, etc. Not only Mr. Darby but every servant whose writings we have, used the Scriptures for this purpose; above all we may refer to the Lord Himself and His apostles. As regards the book of Esther I am not sure that I understand what you have before you at Palmerston. I suppose it was that Israel had failed, typified by Vashti, and that the church, typified by Esther, takes her place in universal dominion. This I think, is quite a helpful thought.
At present Mr. N. Suckling is here and we are enjoying his company. We expect Mr. Arthur Suckling with Mr. and Mrs. Hayward on their way to New Zealand next month. There is
{214}
much cheer in these parts and generally in America, although the Nanaimo matter is still unsettled. A good few have come back from Glanton throughout the country since Mr. Magowan's return. We are looking forward to the visit of Mr. and Mrs. Budd and Mr. and Mrs. Murray. My wife unites in warm love to Mrs. McCrea and yourself also to the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 3rd, 1925.
Mr. W. G. Hardwick.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of October 23rd was duly received. I had already known with much sorrow of the serious cleavage in the meeting at Berkeley and I have prayed for you constantly. It seems that the enemy has gained a footing arising immediately through certain failures in some whom brethren outside had regarded as walking with God. Then on the part of those responsible to help and restore there seems to have been an inability to do so. Personal feeling, too, as is usual in such cases has had much part.
It is difficult for one so far away to give any advice. In a general way, suffering is the order of the day and where it is accepted humbly deliverance will surely come. God looks to the man who is of a humble and contrite spirit. Then we are enjoined to let patience have its perfect work. God will not fail to show himself strong on the behalf of those whose hearts are perfect before him.
I wish I could be of service to you and Mrs. Hardwick and indeed to all the brethren in Berkeley, but being so far away it is difficult, indeed almost impossible, to arrive at a true judgment. I can, however, pray for you all, and no doubt this is the best service that can be rendered at the moment. As said above, I have been doing so constantly, since I learned something of the trouble from Mr. Lock and Mr. Gill.
I have *some* exercise about going to the Pacific coast, and I am looking much to the Lord as to this.
With love in the Lord to you both, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{215}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 24th, 1925.
Mr. Francis Willy.
Beloved Brother, -- We were glad indeed to receive your letter from the *Aorangi*. By this time you have settled down with your family and your brethren at Sydney. I trust you found Mrs. Willy and the children well and cheered of the Lord; also that you found the work of God progressing. I saw some correspondence re the O.F.H. situation, but I fear little progress is being made. A work of God is needed in each of those at O.F.H., but I am sure the brethren will be concerned that their attitude towards them should be in keeping with this.
There is continual cheer here. The brethren remember your address, having enjoyed it much. Our brother Mr. Neville Long has been here and his ministry is much appreciated. Mr. A. M. Hayward is also here and his addresses much enjoyed. He is on his way to New Zealand and will, no doubt, see you all in Australia.
<hr>
December 1st, 1925.
You will see that I have been interrupted! I am now on the train to Los Angeles. My wife and I attended the special meetings at Council Bluffs, leaving there today for Los Angeles. We had a good and happy time at Council Bluffs meetings. Mr. Sinclair, Mr. Gill and several others able to help were present. We read in @1 Samuel 1 - 7, 8; @2 Samuel 6; @John 14. Mr. A. Suckling, Christchurch, was with us.
I regret to say that a divided state exists in the meeting at Berkeley, near San Francisco. It is the outcome of much fleshly feeling and I fear the enemy has secured considerable advantage. A bad feature is that Modesto, the nearest meeting, has recognised one of the parties. I am sure you will pray for them and for all the brethren of the Pacific coast, as there is danger of the evil spreading.
Mr. Gill is going to the West Indies, for which I am most thankful, as need is pressing there. His ministry at Council Bluffs was most helpful.
I hear they had a good time at Plainfield, where about five to six hundred came together on Thanksgiving Day. Messrs.
{216}
Long, Hayward, Lock and many others whom the Lord uses were present.
No doubt you saw the dear brethren at Auckland. I hear several have been added there during recent months.
My wife joins in love in Christ to Mrs. Willy and you all, and all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
January 16th, 1926.
Mr. E. Goodenough.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of the 18th ult. and enclosure duly received. I am very interested in all you write and the information as to 'London'. I heard lately that the brethren have decided to take the County Council area as defining the City, but this has not been confirmed.
As to your letter I would remark that the County of London differs from the other counties in the very important feature that it is designated *Metropolitan*. The tax bill you forwarded is headed 'Metropolitan Borough of Camberwell'. This means, of course, that Camberwell is part of the Metropolis or chief city of the country.
Then under the heading 'London Government' appears 'The Authorities comprise the Corporation of London, the London County Council, the Metropolitan Water Board, the Metropolitan Asylums Board, 28 Borough Councils, and 28 Boards of Guardians'.
Under the heading of 'London Cities (incongruous) and Boroughs' we have the population of London by itself *inclusive of all the 'cities' and boroughs*.
It is impossible therefore to avoid the conclusion that the city of London, Westminster and the Boroughs form a complete whole, the Metropolis of the Country; in other words, this is *London*.
It seems clear then that if we speak of the assembly in London we have to include all these cities and boroughs.
I quite see the difficulty the dear brethren have to contend with, for the number of meetings involved makes it hard for those who have the care of the saints (the 'elders' ) to deal directly with all in the City. God has helped them hitherto,
{217}
however, and He will help them in their more extended responsibilities. I return your tax bill as you may need it.
There was much encouragement in the visit to the west coast.
With love in Christ, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board S.S. Ausonia.
March 24th, 1926.
Mr. Francis Willy.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of November 13th was read with much interest, and has remained unanswered longer than I intended.
All the items of news of the dear Sydney saints were enjoyed, more particularly as the places are present before one's eyes by their names. How great the advantage of personal acquaintance! I am glad you found your family well.
Dr. Van Someren wrote me most cheerfully as to his visit to New Zealand. The Lord helped him there, I am sure. His expected visit to Great Britain is postponed, he says; but he takes this from the Lord, who will open the way for this wished-for visit in his own time for our dear brother and sister. I am wondering whether we shall see Mr. and Mrs. W. J. House in Great Britain. I hear Mr. Dartnell is with them. It will be a pleasure to meet them all indeed.
You will see that we (my wife and I) are on our way to England. My wife fell and broke the outer bone in her left leg early in February, and as you can understand, had a trying time. She made steady recovery, however, through the mercy of God, so that she could leave her crutches behind as we sailed. I hope to visit Germany and France before returning to America. We are to land at Plymouth, then calling at Teignmouth, en route to Liverpool, where (Wallasey) we are to attend meetings on Good Friday, going to Belfast for the Easter meetings.
We have had joy and sorrow in America during the winter. Joy in the work of God in many places and sorrow on account of conditions on the Pacific coast. The division in the meeting at Berkeley has occasioned unrest in Los Angeles and Modesto. Lately Mr. R------ and his wife withdrew from the meetings at Los Angeles and no doubt others will follow him. This, however,
{218}
maybe the arrow of the Lord's deliverance for I fear he had much to do with the Berkeley trouble. On the other hand, as I said, there is encouragement in the work of God, seen in conversions and general edification; *several* new meetings have been formed.
I need not speak of my interest in your remarks as to O.F.H., and my prayer is for the recovery of our brethren. There is the "casting away" and the "*reception*" (@Romans 11: 15); the latter is "as life from among the dead".
My wife joins in love in Christ to Mr. Henderson and *all the brethren*.
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Macduff, Scotland.
June 10th, 1926.
My Dear Brother, -- I return herewith Mrs. K------¬s and other letters which you and she wished me to see.
Mrs. K------ has evidently receded from the position she had reached when I spoke with her in Melbourne last year. She then, as I remember, had decided to leave O.F.H. and seek fellowship at Hercules Street. She is now raising the whole question of Ashfield again, and assumes an unjustifiable attitude towards our brothers Van Someren and House and indeed the Sydney meetings in general. I think it is due to our brethren in Sydney that she should be referred to them. It is a question of consistency as to fellowship. I have gone over the ground so much with her that I feel I can undertake no more. If she were really with God in her exercises she would not be in such a fog. Her daughters and others who love her begged Mrs. K------ to return to Sydney and get right with her brethren before she came to England, but she would not hearken. It is evident that she must come to this. She cannot be in fellowship elsewhere if not in Sydney. My wife and I have deep regard for our sister and for her family, but the best way to befriend her is to tell her the plain truth and insist on it.
With love in Christ to you and your house, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{219}
September 2nd, 1926.
Mr. C. M. Menzies.
My Dear Brother, -- In answer to your enquiry I would say that governmental limitations are not to intrude into the liberties and privileges of the house of God to which all Christians belong, whatever their race or colour. In the government of God the Negro races labour under certain limitations, but I do not see any evidence of a curse in this fact. As you say, the curse was pronounced on Canaan; but this was in view of his position in the promised land, and there is no indication in Scripture or history that the Canaanites were black. It may be further remarked that the rulers of the ancient world from Babel were Hamites, including the Egyptians, and these were not black. The limitations governing the Negro races also govern the Asiatic races in a more limited degree. The so-called white races maintain rigid separation generally in regard to these Asiatic peoples.
In view of these facts we have to conclude that what marks off the Africans and Asiatics from the Europeans is due to moral and climatic conditions, and while the government of God enters into this fact the restrictions involved are not the outcome of a curse directly or indirectly.
In our *public* relations it is not right to disregard the governmental limitations that exist, but grace in the Christian would go a long way toward minimising this; certainly we should be free to visit our coloured brethren and should recognise them as of the family of God.
As gathered together in the assembly, the colour line should be wholly ignored; if a coloured man has the Holy Spirit his position the assembly is exactly the same as that of a white man who has the Spirit. If we are to go by *names* one would gather that there was a coloured man in the assembly at Antioch -- *Niger*. If the Ethiopian eunuch had returned to Jerusalem after he was converted can there be a doubt that he would be accorded the full place of a brother among the saints?
As regards inter-marriage between white and coloured persons, this, to say the least, is not seemly, and "love does not behave in an unseemly manner". It is wise for Christians to leave governmental conditions until God alters them. Our relations in the assembly are, as I said, another matter.
With love in the Lord, I am
Yours affectionately,
James Taylor.
{220}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 21st, 1926.
Mr. Francis Willy.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of June 22nd was duly received. I was most interested in all the items of news of the dear brethren in Australia. I am very thankful that your 'calling' enables you to visit so many gatherings. This is of the Lord, I am sure, and I trust you will find constant help from Him in your service. The need is great, I need not say. I fear you have found 'business' difficult, for the demand for linens does not seem to have improved in Australia; indeed all textile lines are depressed. There is *some* indication of improvement in this country. Scripture shows that commerce plays a large part in the apostasy, and so it is no doubt a mercy that the Lord's people are saved, or checked from entering deeply into it at the present time. I can thank God, at any rate, for the exercise caused by the depression to my boys and myself.
I note your remarks as to the Sydney 'Saturday night' meeting, which are interesting. As I said in our conversation on the steamer, I believe all matters of administration, discipline, etc., come within the range of that meeting. Of course, general confidence underlies every thing and wisdom would leave matters relative to any subdivision of the 'assembly' in Sydney with them as much as possible (except, of course, that all critical matters should come immediately to the care meeting) -- for one reason so that the care meeting should not be unduly pressed. "Elders" were appointed for *cities* as well as for assemblies, and so all matters relative to the government of the assembly in Sydney should come before them; at least this is the *principle* governing the position -- how it should be worked out in detail is a matter of wisdom. The saints in all the meetings thus get the benefit of the wisdom and experience of the elders. @Acts 4, 6, and 15 show that this principle obtained at Jerusalem. We have found help from God in observing all this in New York for over 25 years. Greater New York was then incorporated.
We have been blessed and helped generally through several visitors from New Zealand and Australia this year. Mr. and Mrs. House, Dr. and Mrs. Van Someren, Mr. and Mrs. Henderson, Mr. Dartnell, Mr. Bond and others. We are looking for Dr. Van Someren and Mr. Henderson to visit us soon. The former was helped, we hear, at the special meetings
{221}
at Detroit. There is general encouragement throughout this country and Canada, thank God.
I trust Mrs. Willy and the children keep well -- my wife's foot still troubles her, but we are well otherwise, thank God. The brethren remember with pleasure your visit here and your address is fresh in our minds.
Our united love in Christ to you both and all,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 19th, 1926.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter reached me while I was in Europe and I need not say that I had much on my hands in travelling about. But at the same time, I feel I have been remiss in not writing Mrs. McCrea and yourself so that my wife and I could express our deep sympathy with you both in your great sorrow in the death of dear Mr. Power. How very sad! I trust the Lord has comforted you and all his relatives and indeed the dear brethren at Wellington -- for all would keenly feel such a severe blow.
My wife and I can the more enter into your feelings as a similar bereavement has befallen us. Our niece, Mrs. Yale of Detroit, and another sisters were killed instantly, also by a train, near Dayton, Ohio, in July. They, with their husbands, were motoring back from the special meetings in Knoxville when the dreadful thing happened. My niece leaves a husband and two girls (the latter at an age when they sorely need a mother) and the other sister, Mrs. Duncan, leaves a husband only. He had his leg broken and has not yet recovered. These occurrences are very remarkable and are among the ways of God, "past finding out". I trust we shall all profit by the sorrow and humiliation caused. We heard of it on our way back from England in July.
I am very glad to hear of the good season at your Easter meetings, but sorry that there is no better news of Ngatimoti. How long it takes these sores to heal! I had confidently looked for recovery there. We have two such cases in this country, Nanaimo and Berkeley and there are several in Great Britain.
{222}
The enemy has been foiled in producing a *general* cleavage, and hence his efforts in these *local* eruptions. I trust we shall not be slow to take warning, for the existence of these local conditions always afford Satan vantage ground for larger efforts.
We have much enjoyed a visit from Dr. and Mrs. Van Someren here lately. They have gone to Montreal, intending to sail for England tomorrow. We have also had Mr. House (Australia) and Mr. Henderson -- their ministries most acceptable. The latter and his wife are still in this country.
There is generally much cheer in this continent, I am glad to say. During our stay in Europe we visited many places, including Germany, Switzerland, France, etc. We found help from the Lord throughout. It is strengthening to observe the work of God in such varied circumstances.
My wife joins in warm love to Mrs. McCrea and yourself and indeed to all the dear brethren in Wellington.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 18th, 1926.
Mr. Arthur J. H. Brown.
My Dear Brother, -- We were glad to receive your letter October 2nd, telling us of your safe arrival at home and that you found Mrs. Brown and all well.
I am thankful you came to see your brethren in America. I am sure it is of God that brethren should thus visit each other, for in this way family sympathies are awakened and promoted. I believe that in this way, of late years, the truth of the house of God, in its practical bearing, as universal, has been emphasised.
I attended meetings at Toronto last week. The Lord helped. H.G. writes of a good season also at Winnipeg.
You will have heard that our brother Mr. Carter broke his leg. It was as walking down our stairs to breakfast. We are much grieved by this affliction to our dear brother. He is progressing well, thank God.
Please God, we shall sail for Barbados on January 8th. It is good of you to wish to know so as to pray for us. You may be sure that we value your prayers.
As meetings are to be held at Indianapolis at the beginning
{223}
of the year, I hope to attend. Mr. Newlands and Mr. Gill hope to be at Council Bluffs next week. Meetings are to be held at Plainfield at the same time. Our united love in Christ to Mrs. Brown and you all.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- As regards Titus 2: 14, I believe "redeem" has reference to a *price paid* -- the Greek word means this, as you will know. It would mean that the Lord by giving Himself has paid the ransom to loosen or free us from lawlessness. Other words translated 'redeem' in Scripture vary in meaning, as you will be aware, having the sense of delivering or setting free -- by *power*. Possibly our brother G------ had this in mind; but the one in question has in view a price paid. -- J.T.
<hr>
November 30th, 1926.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of October 15th was much appreciated by my wife and myself. It was good of you to write so fully. We could follow you step by step in your Irish trip. It was a comfort to know that our dear brethren in the isolated meetings especially had this benefit. Mr. Hamilton knows the brethren in Ireland and being a sympathetic man, would with yourself afford much cheer, I am sure. How great the favour of rendering service to the Lord's people! In men like Joseph and David we have examples of the brethren. In this country we have been favoured during recent months by the visits of several from other countries able to help and who care with "genuine feeling" how the saints get on.
There is much encouragement generally on this continent, and not the least is the exercise there is that the work of God might be extended and deepened; that it might take effect in large centres of population hitherto untouched. It is "a day of small things", however, and we must not go beyond faith in our expectations. Special meetings held in recent months have been blessed of God. In September I visited the Boston district and found a living interest in the things of God. There is a very commendable brother -- C. H. Howell. One notices how those in the lead in a district give character to it.
{224}
Later I visited Philadelphia and Baltimore. In the former the work has not prospered, largely, I believe, for want of energy in those more prominent there. In the latter city there is a somewhat better meeting. During this month special meetings were held in Toronto, which I attended. There was a very good time indeed, through the Lord's help. Last Thursday I was at a meeting at Plainfield where there was a very good interest and a large number -- over 600. We are now looking forward to the usual meetings at Indianapolis. They are to be held this year, please God, notwithstanding that dear Mr. Sinclair will be unable to attend. We hear he is steadily improving, for which we are most thankful.
Our brother Mr. Carter, as you are aware, is laid up with a broken leg. He is doing well, thank God. I have no doubt that the Lord intends a special lesson for Mr. C. in this affliction that he may be more acceptable to his brethren. I trust he may not miss it.
You will know that your brother visited us here. We were, of course, glad to see him but we could not travel far together, as you can understand.
We hope to visit Barbados, sailing, please God, January 8th.
Our united love to you *all*.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
January 4th, 1927.
Beloved Brother, -- As regards Mediatorship I think my remarks which troubled you are quite scriptural, and I am confirmed in this by recent consideration of the matter. When you say -- 'the mediator stands related to God, whereas revelation is connected with the Father' -- you are hardly correct. @John 1: 18 connects revelation with God. "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath *declared* Him". "Declared" has reference to God clearly, although declaration involves the Father of course. What was needed was one who could "lay his hand upon both" -- God and men; the "daysman" corresponds with the Mediator although become Man -- the Word became flesh -- He can lay His hand upon God for personally He is God. You say that the Mediator implies that He took a place lower than angels. Surely as become Man He was in
{225}
this position for the sufferings of death, but His Person is unchanged though descending so low -- hence we have the death of His Son -- the Son is the Mediator. The smitten One is Jehovah's fellow. He as equal with God, owned to be God over all -- lays His hand on God and on men -- the Daysman or Mediator. It is true that revelation or declaration is by the only-begotten Son, but this implies His Manhood, there would not be full revelation otherwise. God is love and hence the position in the bosom. But in drawing near to man to make that love known and effective the Son is the Mediator. See His service to Nicodemus and the woman of Samaria; He is the Mediator as bringing God to both but His remarks to each imply His deity. What I think underlies your difficulty is that you do not make sufficient allowance for what God is in His essential Being. "No one has seen God at any time" -- a Divine Person -- one who "was God" -- must needs take a form or condition in which God is within man's range, in which He reveals God to men and approaches men in this revelation.
The mediatorial thought (God moving in One, equal with Himself indeed, but in fashion as a Man, to make Himself known and to bring men into intelligible relationship with Him) is present from the outset. Revelation is entirely from the divine side -- it is by the Son, but the Mediator is on God's side and man's side also. It is "the man Christ Jesus".
I need not say more for I am sure you will understand my meaning and I believe you will agree as you reconsider this great subject.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Barbados, B.W.I.
January 29th, 1927.
Mr. J. Teaffey.
Beloved Brother, -- I am very glad to have your kind letter containing so much that is interesting of the work of God in London. The giving of a letter of commendation surely does not relieve those who give it of the responsibility as to the person commended, for he may not use it and may indeed go to some other place than that to which he was commanded, some place perhaps in which there was no meeting. He is not thus immune from discipline and the meeting commending him is directly responsible, of course the meeting or meetings
{226}
nearest to him should be brought into such a matter, but that in which he was identified last is the best furnished to deal with him, and it would be lax if it failed to do so -- maintaining the unity of the Spirit of course in acting with the nearest meeting. The Lord seems to be helping in the boundary question. C. Menzies, when writing me lately, sent me a copy of his letter to ------. I am very thankful for this letter. I have always valued C.M. I am afraid of ------¬s insistence on @1 Timothy and Titus as governing care or investigation meetings. Indeed the Forest Hill letter addressed 'to the Caretaking Brothers' grates on one decidedly. Then such a conference as was suggested involved more than rule: principles were involved and in order that all should be instructed in these, those with spiritual understanding, wisdom and experience should be present, even although perhaps wanting in the qualifications for eldership. Besides all the saints are concerned in these important matters. While 1 Timothy and Titus should ever be before us, and maintained in principle, yet younger brothers can best learn how divine order and government are maintained by being present at such meetings. The multitude (@Acts 15: 12) surely implies more than the apostles and elders.
We arrived here on the 13th and found an excellent interest among the dear brethren. There is a striking evidence of God's work in this island. The attendance at the addresses run up to 700 or more inside and *outside* the good Hall on Chapman Street. Outside Bridgetown there are 9 meetings several of which I visited. I am very cheered by what I find here. The intelligence of the dear brethren coloured and white, is remarkable. We hope to sail back to New York on February 6th. Later we hope to be on your side, perhaps by Easter. My son Jim and his wife are, please God, going over to the Continent next month and will pass through London.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
March 16th, 1927.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- ... When in Barbados we were dwelling on the "earthen vessel" how breakable we are. We are thus dependent on God *every moment;* as we are to glorify Him -- the excellency of the power is thus not of us but of Him. The
{227}
next day after dwelling on this feature of the truth I took ill with rheumatic gout in my feet and I am still laid up in my seventh week! Thus we are made to prove the truth of what we say. Our faithful God will have us in *possession* of the things He presents to us as light. On returning from Barbados we came into *cold* weather and my wife and I got the grippe, aggravating, of course, my gout; so we have both been more or less laid up ever since. My wife, however, is better, thank God. On account of 'these things' our immediate movements are somewhat uncertain; I have a feeling that the Lord may be detaining us on this side somewhat longer this year. At any rate, it seems we shall now stay for the usual meetings at Rochester at the end of May.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 1st, 1927.
My Dear Brother, -- I regret the delay in replying to your letter of July 18th. It is very hard to keep up with correspondence when travelling about.
Besides, I had nothing very definite to say in regard to the sea, lavers, etc. I am much interested, however, and I think your remarks quite in keeping with what the Scriptures in 1 Kings and 2 Chronicles present.
In the former we have a much fuller description. This is in keeping with that book which treats of the things of Solomon's regime as enhancing his glory rather than from the standpoint of their usefulness. Thus Ephesians sets forth the things treated in relation to the divine glory and so their fulness is seen. This helps, I think, as to the enlarged description given in 1 Kings, especially the ornamental features of the bases of brass. The ornamentation is given with striking detail hence the mind is occupied with it rather than the usefulness of the bases. All this contemplates spiritual refinement, which, as I said, is in keeping with Ephesians. The engraving points particularly to *finished* ornamentation, which we should expect where things are intended to reflect the glory of Christ. It says "Glory [to God] in the assembly in Christ Jesus", etc.
As regards the details, the meaning can be safely arrived at as we bear in mind the meaning of each type *as presented elsewhere*
{228}
*in Scripture*, that is, numbers, living creatures, flowers, metal, etc. It becomes a question therefore of meditation. 1 Kings greatly helps to an understanding of the grandeur of Christ's coming kingdom, its bearing being towards eternity.
I note your remarks as to Mr. McK------ : it is *most* difficult to judge as to persons under discipline unless one is on the spot and *directly* responsible. It is wise to keep with the local brethren unless there is unquestionable evidence that they are not with God in the matter. I have felt the wisdom of this in regard of Glasgow and Belfast.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Barnet, England.
July 7th, 1927.
Mr. C. A. Coates.
Beloved Brother, -- I have been awaiting an opportunity to answer yours of the 24th ult. I was very glad to have it, especially your remarks as to the Mediator.
What has exercised me is the repeated statement of Scripture that no one had seen God at any time: that thus to make Him known, One capable of laying His hand on Him and on man was needed, as Job saw. I have regarded therefore that mediatorship necessarily involves the Lord's Person (His divinity) as well as His manhood; so that while John does not use the word, mediatorship is implied in the declaration of God. It is through, or by, the only-begotten Son, a divine Person but as Man, for otherwise He would not be within man's range. It is dependent on the Word becoming flesh. Men are in view particularly in @1 Timothy 2, and so "the man Christ Jesus". John's gospel and 1 Timothy 2 would cover Job's requirement; the 'official' references (Hebrews) relate to the New Covenant and so are more limited. In @John 17 eternal life is given by Christ as *given* authority over all flesh, which is mediatorial. In the 'eternal state' God being with men tabernaclewise is, I am sure, in principle mediatorial. Indeed the more one dwells upon what God is (@1 Timothy 6: 15, 16) he cannot but be convinced that to have to say to Him, be in relationship with Him, *must* be on the principle of mediatorship -- He being what He is and we being what we are. But I will not say more on this great subject, knowing that you will see what I have in my mind by what I have written, although
{229}
you may have other thoughts which as you express them may make the truth clearer. When you are free, I shall be glad of a line, I need not say.
I greatly value your prayers, the result of which, I believe, I am often conscious. You may count on mine continually.
The meetings in the London area are very interesting. The work of God is indeed cheering. We are going to Worthing for the week-end; then Purley, Park Street, Leamington, Burton, Sheffield, Newcastle, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Wallasey, Ireland.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 16th, 1927.
Mr. Charles Hammond.
My Dear Brother, -- I am very glad to have your letter and to learn from it a little of current happenings and exercises among the dear brethren in the London area.
As to @1 John 2, I am quite clear that there is in it an indication that young Christians may be ministered to as by themselves. Peter and Paul also address the young and old separately. Of course it may be said that while they are so addressed what is said to each by any of the apostles is in the same epistle, but this fact does not negate that different classes are addressed. But while I have often spoken of this matter, I never forget what led to serious objection being made to so-called Sunday-school classes some years ago. A regular system had developed which largely corresponded with worldly religious methods which are current. It would be a disaster if saints, seeking to recognise the truth, should now drift into this error. If children or 'young people' are instructed together by godly brothers or sisters in a humble, unpretentious manner, I believe the Lord will bless the work.
In this country and Canada there has been a good deal of blessing among young people during recent months. Addresses to them are usually given at general meetings held in different parts and usually some confess the Lord and seek to be allowed to break bread. Meetings at Knoxville, Detroit, and Winnipeg, recently held, were marked by this feature.
I had hoped that conditions at Forest Hill were improved, but I gather from your remarks that this is not so. I was very
{230}
grieved by what I heard of Dr. Spencer's experience there. I had known him fairly intimately for a long time, and had much correspondence with him regarding principles governing saints in a city or town where two or more meetings exist, and *I know* that he was quite sincere and transparent in whatever understanding he had of the matter. He wrote me from Forest Hill as to the position there, and at the time he wrote he was uncertain. I mention this to show that he was by no means wilful or partisan and so as an old brother, should be regarded with extreme consideration. I am unaware of any difficulty as to Mrs. Spencer, but from your letter I gather such exists. What I have said about her dear husband refers equally to her, I am sure. But we can do nothing against the truth, but for it -- still it is most serious for those whose actions are in this direction. As you say, the wisdom of the saints is to wait on God. David's attitude in @2 Samuel 15 indicates a *faith*-system, through which, in result, the wisdom which is of God overthrew the most renowned human wisdom.
I value the quotation from F.E.R. as to mediatorship and your own remarks also. It is a wonderful subject indeed.
With our love in Christ to you and your house, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 20th, 1928.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter is just to hand and I am glad to have it and all the news it contains of the Lord's work and interests on your side of the Atlantic.
I need not say that I am very interested in all you mention. I shall indeed be glad if you go to the West Indies, for the need is great. There is a wide open door here also and I believe you would find much cheer among the brethren. The interest in this district is perhaps greater than I have seen it -- thank God! Of course you need not take our movements into account. We have decided nothing yet, but we have the end of March before us in view of Easter.
Thus if you go to Barbados and Jamaica you would have sufficient time to give the dear ones in both islands a good turn and then make for New York.
Of course we should miss you *greatly* when in England, but
{231}
the Lord's interests have to be considered and not us. It is likely we shall go to Germany, possibly at Whitsuntide.
The news of Glasgow interests me greatly -- I am glad you were there for the meetings at New Year time. Poor ------ were he at all with God how quickly adjustment would come! He is not standing on the "sea of glass".
My wife joins in warm love to Mrs. Lyon and your sister, also yourself -- and Lois. We shall gladly accept your hospitality -- thank you for your kind invitation.
In haste, affectionately,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board S.S. Cedric.
March 7th, 1928.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for yours of the 16th ult. My wife and I appreciate your renewed invitation and we shall gladly avail ourselves of it as the time arrives for an extended stay in London. This is not likely to be until June, as you apparently understand. If, however, an earlier opportunity occurs, I shall let you know in due time.
We are on the ocean as you will observe. We hope to arrive at Liverpool on Tuesday and should reach London (by train) that afternoon. If possible I shall go to the Continent that day, but if not, the day following. I have much ground to cover before returning for meetings in Kingston on Good Friday, please God.
I note the number who have fallen asleep recently. The winter season is usually marked by illness and death, but *we* recognise the Lord's hand as each of His own is taken; with us it is falling "asleep through Jesus". Indianapolis has been much afflicted, for *six* of those breaking bread were taken since September. In our district we had three within ten days. One of these was Mrs. Moore, to whom you referred. Her funeral was remarkable -- there was such a sense of the Lord's support.
In all this illness and in these removals we are made to realise how things are in human circumstances, and how the Lord can use them to humble and sober us and at the same time to impress us with His love -- that *He* actually entered into death. All is thus changed for us as the waters of Marah were made sweet by the "wood" cast into them. Our vision through
{232}
all these things becomes clearer and we learn more to look, not at the seen, but the unseen things, which are eternal.
There is a very good interest in and around New York. In Staten Island (one of the meetings in the city) seven were seeking to be received into fellowship last week.
Our united love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and yourself and the brethren, especially Mr. Glenny.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
March 8th, 1928.
Mr. O. Gresswell.
Beloved Brother, -- My wife and I are deeply grieved by the news that your dear sister has been taken from you all, and, I may add, from *us* all, for although she is now with Christ, she has departed, and so you and your sister must walk on without your loved one.
The shock to you all would be the greater because of the suddenness of your sister's death, besides *you* were ill, as we understand, and this would increase the trial for you. I am sure you all will be assured of our deepest sympathy.
We have had *much* sorrow caused by illness and death in this district during the winter, and it continues even now, for two of our number were buried last week and two others, greatly valued sisters, are very low, one not expected to recover. Thus we are drinking the waters of Marah with you all at Hazellville. But we find the "sweetness", that Christ has been into death in love for us, and taken the bitterness out of it. We are assured that you both and your dear brother and his wife are proving this in good measure. The love that was expressed in His death lives and is available for us as He walks with us until the resurrection; and we have the express word "Thy *brother* shall rise again".
We hope to be on your side soon, and we shall see you both, we trust.
With our united love, I am,
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
{233}
Leipzig, Germany.
May 5th, 1928.
Mr. G. Spiller.
My Dear Brother, -- It was good of you to write at such length -- pardon long delay in acknowledging. I send a line now to thank you. It is an advantage to me to have an account of the work of God at Portsmouth. You are all much in my prayers. The work of God progresses more in the large towns and cities and of course the enemy does all he can to hinder it. Portsmouth is an evidence of this. Wisdom is ever 'the principal thing' in checking his efforts. "The poor wise man" by his *wisdom* delivered the city. So it is always.
We spent the last few days in Ghent, Belgium, where we met some interesting Christians, although there are none in fellowship 'with us' there. We arrived here today with Mr. F. W. Kingston, where we stay over the week-end. Then we go south (on business), hoping to see the few in fellowship in Czechoslovakia. Next week-end we hope to be in Berlin and later in western Germany. We expect to be at Chester for Whit Monday.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Jedburgh, Scotland.
July 16th, 1928.
My Dear Brother, -- I received yours of the 10th inst. and enclosure. The painstaking which you show impresses me. I wish it were employed in a better cause. I wrote briefly in reference to a statement of mine which you quoted approvingly, suggesting that the 'principle', as you regarded it, was generally accepted by brethren and that what was in question as to London was the application of it, not the thing itself. As to this the 'many' in the area involved had agreed -- could the others not fall in with them? You give me *nine* typewritten pages, largely seeking to show my incompetency to judge of London boundary matters; but this was not the point, but rather whether the principle mentioned was involved, or the application of it.
That it is not for a resident so far away (as I said in a letter to you) to determine matters local to London, is obvious; but your implication that I am not *now* in a position to form a judgment as to what should be regarded as London, for the
{234}
purpose in question is another matter. If I am incompetent to do so, *you* are certainly not to blame! You furnished me with enough data two years ago, and I have heard you dilate more than once since on the subject. Besides, I have heard from others, as you can understand; indeed the relation of the meetings in London to the metropolis as a whole has been a concern to me for several years back, and I had been making no little enquiry as to facts even before you kindly sent me such copious information.
My letters from which you quote were based on facts submitted at the time; they were tentative professedly and not final, and the fuller information I have now shows no real discrepancy in them. What I said was London is London in an attenuated sense, but still London. Centrifugally London has worked out to limits that brethren have wisely decided should not be reckoned for the purpose on hand; but nevertheless the area is London in a sense. The extraordinary incongruity of the facts governing the London area precludes definiteness, and this consideration by itself should induce great forbearance in all concerned.
I quite accept that the direct responsibility of this boundary matter lies with those who reside in London, but responsibility as to change that may go wider because of it, belongs to all. It was on this ground I ventured to write you, for the extension of the boundary, which occasioned the discussion, was not an infringement of the principle you insist on, but a more consistent application of it in view of the changed conditions through recent growth and governmental enactments. I am most thankful for your assurance that Forest Hill brethren will not press their view, but the divergence, like the letting out of waters, may go far beyond your control or that of others. Hence the great urgency of brethren patiently seeking to see eye to eye so as not to give place to the devil. The possibility that saints may need to pore over parliamentary Acts and municipal laws and statistics to determine whether Forest Hill or the rest of London is right is distressing in the extreme. May the good Lord save us from such a disaster! I believe it is in your hands to avert the danger, and I beg of you, dear brother, to consider as before the Lord whether this is the case and seek to help your brethren in this crisis. I believe you would please the Lord by giving up digging into these worldly things; the occupation must be defiling and deadening. A large
{235}
proportion of your time is necessarily consumed in ferreting out and arranging this information which might command attention, and perhaps admiration, in a worldly assembly, but is unsuitable in the house of God. The *volume* of this that has been brought forward necessitated Mr. Carruthers¬ production (on the writing of which I believe he had divine help) but all such research should be abandoned. In your own case it must have interfered with the service which the Lord has given you, and which has been greatly valued by the saints. By waiting on God the saints in London will be enabled to determine the area in which they are responsible to Him (@1 Corinthians 1) without the devious definitions of lawyers, e.g., the *ordinary* meaning of the word metropolis will be enough for them. The limited nature of the general over-rule of the London County Council interferes not for them with the fact that it is an over-rule; the likewise limited over-rule of the King does not deny that he is King. Normally the saints will begin with God in this enquiry and see what it is that He has been witnessing to (as He witnessed to Nineveh) and whether the boundary as decided is a little more extended or a little less does not affect, as a principle, this great matter.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- I much regret your reference to Nineveh in yours to me -- I am sure you are mistaken. The book of Jonah helps much in the matter on hand.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 16th, 1928.
Mr. A. Angus.
Beloved Brother, -- I am glad to have your letter of recent date. The matter you mention often comes up. What is to be observed is that preaching is dependent on gift or qualification for it in Scripture. "How shall they preach unless they have been sent?" (@Romans 10: 15). Thus the first preaching (@Acts 2) is by Peter, who "stood up with the *eleven;*" it does not say, 'with the 120'. This is in keeping with @Mark 3, where the Lord is said to have appointed twelve that they might be with Him, and that He might send them to preach. Another thing of great importance in this connection is that the assembly as
{236}
such does not preach or teach, in spite of Rome's claims falsely based on @Matthew 18: 17. It is taught.
In view of what is said above, the preaching of the gospel in a locality is not the direct responsibility of the meeting (although, of course, normally all would be exercised about it, sympathetic with it), but of those who are in any way fitted for it. Some brother or brothers qualified wish to serve in this way (woe to them if they do not, @1 Corinthians 9: 16) and he or they ask for the use of the meeting-room for this purpose. They carry on the service with the fellowship of the saints. If they do not preach on a given evening they see that someone fitted by the Lord does.
It is obvious from above that the brother 'in charge' of the gospel is not an official but rather one engaged in the Lord's service in the proclamation of the gospel; nor is his function to provide preachers merely, but to carry on the service himself as far as he may have ability.
Of course, as in all else, love and consideration for others must enter into the practical working out of the matter, or rivalry and jealousy will ensue. The wisdom from above is without partiality and hypocrisy. Thus the brother responsible would secure brothers elsewhere specially qualified in preaching the gospel -- thinking *only* of the Lord's interests.
Sometimes one hears of brothers in a meeting preaching *in turn*, whether there be gift or not -- this, I am sure, is a mistake. As I said, preaching should be by those qualified or "sent". Of course, one must have opportunity to show whether he has ability, but this can be given -- if ability exists it will soon be apparent.
It is indeed a joy to hear of encouragement from the Lord among you at Donaghadee. May He continue to bless you all!
With love in Christ to you and your family and to all the saints.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 16th, 1928.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
My Dear Brother, -- It is very kind of you to write me so heartily and fully -- inviting me again to your house. I shall be very glad indeed to take advantage of this invitation if it please
{237}
the Lord to grant me another opportunity of visiting England. I shall let you know of the time in due course. The Lord greatly favours me in these visits and I increasingly appreciate this. The open door I always find in Great Britain, especially in the London area, always touches me.
I note that there is no change in the state of things in London, and of course this is not bad news. As------ assured me that neither he nor those with him at Forest Hill had any thought of forcing an issue I have assumed that no immediate move would be made there. I am sure the brethren are wise in remaining still, as this gives the Lord an opportunity to do something. We may be assured that the Captain of the Lord's hosts will not withdraw His eye from the scene of action and that the enemy will obtain no advantage over Him. @Exodus 14 is most touching as showing the divine skill and activity in the salvation or deliverance of the saints. There is a time, however, to stand still and see it, and a time to move forward to realise it. The latter involves the experience or acceptance of death.
The present is really a critical time and so requires great care and watchfulness. There are elements of trouble enough, but the enemy finds their co-ordination very difficult. A letter from the Brighton district which I saw lately indicates a delicate, if not treacherous, situation at Preston Park. The thought of a division which would 'separate brethren equally' seems relished by some. This is most humbling and distressing. The cleavage there is the outcome of party feeling as I could easily see by a conversation with Mr. B------. I was pained by the marked change in him from what I had seen in him earlier. On the other hand, I fear Mr. S------ does *much* damage by his extreme way of presenting the truth, and his arbitrary way.
Dr. Elliott has been ministering here and was much appreciated by the saints. Mr. Grimsdick is here now and also valued. He has made definite headway I believe. In general there is much to cheer in America. The usual meetings held at this season of the year are being held. Early next month (November 9th -- 11th) meetings will, D.V., be held at Toronto and Winnipeg. Here, Flatbush, we are looking at John's gospel, like yourselves. Then at our monthly fellowship meetings we are considering the great subject of Life. We had an interesting time at the first reading. There has been much illness and several have fallen asleep, and so this subject was thought appropriate.
{238}
The notes of the Easter meetings at Melbourne are giving much concern for many statements made are contrary to the truth -- especially as to eternal life and the heavenlies. I have written to Mr. McB------ in detail. I am looking to God that our dear brother will have grace to own what is not scriptural.
My wife joins in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and yourself and family, also to all the brethren at Streatham.
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
October 4th, 1928.
Mr. G. Spiller.
My Dear Brother, -- It was good of you to write me two letters and I wish to thank you for them. My wife and I were deeply interested in the details of dear Mrs. Williams¬ departure to be with the Lord. How intensely trying the moments must have been to Mr. W. and Alys! I wired him to pay us a visit, as I believe it would help them both, besides, our brother would be used of the Lord to help His people here. He is unable to come at present, as you will be aware. I am awaiting a line from him as to this.
The news of Portsmouth interests me greatly. Although it is most humiliating, I see the hand of the Lord in what has transpired. It is another evidence of the sure government of God and that this is in favour of His testimony. But the Lord would have us to take the thing to heart. It is "one of you;" in the present case, like Judas, it is one who had part in the service. But Mr. L------ is not a Judas, but a good man at bottom, as I believe; sparing or ministering to the flesh in various ways, Satan got advantage of him. He sowed to the flesh and is reaping corruption. It will be a great victory if he is delivered -- if the flesh is 'destroyed'. He is now where God can enable him to judge himself.
Dr. Elliott has been in these parts for some weeks and the saints much enjoyed his ministry; he has now moved toward Vancouver. Mr. Grimsdick is now here. I note definite progress in him. His addresses are very good.
Since returning to these parts I have observed unusual cause for encouragement. At our monthly fellowship meetings we are considering the subject of Life. We began with @John 1. The Lord helped.
{239}
I trust you find cheer in the Portsmouth district. I note the Williamses were to be with you for a while. I am sure there was mutual gain.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 1st, 1928.
Mr. Alfred Wellershaus.
My Dear Brother, -- Since parting with you at Cologne we have often had you in our minds and you have been mentioned in our prayers. My wife and I often wonder whether you are married -- if so we trust you and your dear wife are experiencing the mercy of God. We hope you found needed help in the 'examination'. In our youth we are usually tried in our temporal circumstances, but as dependent and cast upon God we gain steadily in our souls. Hence we have "Delight thyself in the Lord; and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart. Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him; and he shall bring it to pass" (@Psalm 37: 4, 5).
I am very interested to hear of the dear brethren in the Rhineland, especially Neidershelden. Since returning (while in England) I saw some letters of Mr. Y------ and wrote him a line, but I heard nothing definite since. In view of the large number at N. and the small number at Weidenau I have feared grave difficulties. It would indeed be a great victory if all the brethren in N. were cleared and happily in fellowship with us, but, as I said, serious difficulties existed. I shall be thankful for a line from you as to yourself and brethren generally in Germany.
In this country the Lord is helping His people. The special meetings usually held at this time of year are arranged for this year. I am hoping to attend meetings at Toronto next week. We are to have special meetings in New York also -- early in the week. At our usual monthly fellowship meetings here we are considering the subject of Life. The Lord helped us at the first one. The meetings here are growing in numbers, and I trust otherwise also.
With love in Christ to you *both* and to all the brethren near you, in which my wife would join, I am,
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
{240}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 10th, 1928.
My Dear Mr,------, -- I duly received yours of October 26th and enclosures. I value your kind expressions of personal regard, which I fully reciprocate. But in spite of these expressed good feelings it does not seem that any mutual gain is accruing from our correspondence. This I am sure you regret as I do.
As stated, my object in writing you at first -- in June -- was not to enter into the 'boundary' matter but rather to urge the importance of the judgment arrived at by the 'many' in London with the hope that you might see your way to fall in with it, especially as the brethren generally accepted (as I then thought and still believe) the principle insisted on by you, and as your attitude tended to cleavage among the saints.
In replying to my two letters you have not dealt with my suggestion as to your moral obligation to your brethren locally and generally. This obligation is found specially in @Ephesians 4: 1 - 6. That passage contains a principle of, *at least*, equal importance with the one you are insisting on -- that 'we accept what exists under the government of God'. Of course Ephesians 4 applies to us all, and it may seem that your brethren in the 23 meetings have not been governed by it in their recent relations with Forest Hill, but it has now a peculiar application to all in Forest Hill and the meetings at Dulwich and Eltham. You all are holding aloof from the mass of your brethren in London in the matter in question on grounds that can be determined only by wise brotherly conference as to existing secular facts, for notwithstanding the quotations you furnish from the brothers mentioned, the brethren *do* hold the principle you are contending for. Their remarks are due in the main (I may say, entirely) *to the extraordinarily complicated laws and customs governing London*. As I said, the brethren in London are really with you as to the principle, and I am assured that if they and the brethren in Forest Hill and the other two meetings come together in the fear of the Lord and as seeking in all lowliness and meekness to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace, a way will be made for you all to walk happily together. The above was what was in my mind in writing you and I do urge on you now -- using the liberty which your kind words give me -- to consider earnestly what I write.
{241}
Do so, please, for the Lord's sake and for the sake of the peace of Jerusalem.
As to the seeming inconsistency in my letter to you as compared with one to ------, I would say that this is accounted for by the London boundary and governmental complications referred to above. When writing to you I was dealing with these latter, but when writing ------, I had the principle you are contending for in mind. In @1 Corinthians 7 the apostle, for a certain reason, directs that each man should have his own wife while throughout the chapter celibacy is encouraged. I need not say there is no inconsistency. When writing ------, I was contending for the general principle that we should accept what 'the powers that be' ordain as to city or other boundaries, but when writing you I was seeking to show that this was not the real issue in London but rather the application of it; that the extremely complicated governmental circumstances there made this most difficult -- that it was thus a question of what should be regarded as London for the purpose on hand, so that the general principle could be applied. I hope you will see by what I point out that there is no inconsistency in the correspondence. I should gladly be of service to Streatham as you suggest, but I am assured, as I said, that the remarks expressed there were occasioned by conditions in London and not opposition to the principle you maintain. Mr. Dolton's letter specially commends itself; he says, 'It is largely a question of' wisdom 'as to where we draw the line'.
I must add a word as to your treatment of the cities mentioned in the Old Testament. You write, 'I submit that none of the great cities of Scripture represent the idea of locality'. This is certainly an extraordinary suggestion. "Go to Nineveh" -- locality is implied there unquestionably. That Nineveh represents certain moral features, as you say, is of course true, but it was not to *these* Jonah was sent but to the place; this is too obvious to require anything more to be said to prove it. Indeed Scripture actually indicates its dimensions. Locality is said by the best authorities to mean, 'a definite spot, point, neighbourhood, site; especially geographical position'. It cannot be denied that any city answers to this definition. That the great cities of Scripture are regarded as representing more than what was local to them is, of course, true; this is indeed true of all cities ancient and modern, but it also is palpably true that each is and was a locality. The
{242}
head of Syria was Damascus, but Damascus was nevertheless a place composed of houses, walls, people, etc. -- *entered* by Saul, for instance. You further say, 'So far as I see a city is not taken account of by God because of its material greatness'. The facts presented as to Nineveh do not bear this out. God says, "That great city, wherein are more than sixscore thousand persons ... and also much cattle" (@Jonah 4: 11). Again, "Now Nineveh was an exceeding great city of *three days¬ journey*" (@Jonah 3: 3). "Three days¬ journey" refers to the ground to be covered in going through -- *this* is material; so also are persons and cattle. That in another sense material things are not great to Him is, of course, true, but we must accept what He says; besides much could be said as to His taking account of things on earth in the *ordinary* way in grace, also of His sympathy, compassion, etc.
I am sure we shall show wisdom and humility if when treating of material or earthly matters with which we have to do under the government of God, we speak of them as they are known by man in a general way. Thus while *much* may be said of the origin and technical meaning of the word 'city' its common or general signification should suffice for those who seek to recognise what exists under the government of God. The Encyclopaedia Britannica says, 'In common usage, however, the word implies no more than a somewhat vague idea of size and dignity, and is loosely applied to any large centre of population'. Thus while, technically, the City of London is quite small, London is yet properly described as the largest city in the world. I quote this only for the general idea, holding that boundaries should be determined, etc. It is in this sense unquestionably that God takes account of it and so has witnessed to it in grace during these many centuries. Brethren have sought to recognise this throughout and I believe they are doing so now, notwithstanding apparent incongruity on account of the conditions I have mentioned.
It seems that 'polis' conveyed primarily the state or area which it governed, but this was not the sense evidently in which it was used in the New Testament; it was employed as the word city or town is employed now generally in English. Thus 'in' Corinth, Rome, etc., meant just the 'places' in which the saints were. The ecclesiastical meaning attached to the word 'city' in France and England in early days is really of no consequence now. In translating the word
{243}
'polis' as used in the New Testament, what is needed is the current equivalent in either language. There can be no question that the English translators have used the right word. 'Borough', which you suggest as better than city, would hardly do as it is not in *general* current use.
I am sorry you think me 'unwise' in continuing to say that the London County Council is an overruling body. As I frequently said, the facts known to me prove that it is. I have not the Local Government Act, which you sent me, to quote from, but I give what I am sure is authoritative in this respect -- the Encyclopaedia Britannica. 'In 1888 the Local Government Act, dealing with the area of the metropolis as a separate County, created the London County Council as the central administrative body, possessing not only the powers of an ordinary County Council, but also extensive powers of *town* management'. Under 'Sanitation' it further says, 'The County Council deals directly with matters where uniformity of administration is essential ... it has certain powers of supervision and control *over* local authorities ... outside the jurisdiction of local authorities'. As London (the great city) is the subject of the law thus dealt with and as its subdivisions are called 'Metropolitan Boroughs' it is perfectly evident that a County in the ordinary sense is not in view, but, as I said, a great city -- 'the metropolis of the Empire'. The word 'County' seems to be employed arbitrarily as applied to London, and so the word 'borough' -- they are out of proper setting; all was for convenience and obviously in nowise intended to render the metropolis of the empire as non-existent. I note that the *inner* city is said to be a *County of a City* (Britannica), so also the Corporation of Glasgow.
As regards the word 'metropolis' it matters little who drew attention to 'Lord Halsbury's judgment;' a definition thus given cannot alter its primary and general meaning. Its generally accepted meaning is that which God would recognise, I am sure. The most elaborate dictionary I know of makes no allusion to the legal definition you mention. Of course, as other words, it may be used arbitrarily, as applies to the policy, for I understand the 'City' has its own police, and of course they too belong really to the metropolis -- the word used in its ordinary sense. As to Auckland in the quotation you give -- the words 'the same city' should be left out. What I stressed at the Conference of brothers there was that if there was any
{244}
municipal governmental element or elements extending to the whole area, Mt. Eden and the other places in question should be considered in Auckland; but it was shown that there was nothing in regard of Mt. Eden.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January, 1929.
My Dear Mr.------, -- I have your letter dated the 24th ult. and also the previous one addressed to the *Celtic*. Thanks for both. I had hoped for an opportunity of talking with you on the subject of these letters.
With you, I am sorry that there should be any disagreement between us and I earnestly trust it will not be for long duration. The best way to ensure this is to be frank, reserving nothing; each being assured that personal motives do not govern him and that while he is concerned for what is right and true, he is not overlooking the value of his brother. As you rightly say, we have been generally agreed in regard of the truth since we first met, 38 years ago, and I am sure we both wish this agreement to continue. You may be assured, therefore, that I am not disposed to take a biased view of your paper. But as it was to me new both in form and substance, I was bound to write freely, especially as you had desired me to do so. I shall now refer to the features of the subject seriatim as they appear in your letters.
First as to the form of the paper, I referred to it as 'open *or* circulated;' it has a formal title and was mailed to some seventeen persons in different parts of the world without restrictions; it would thus be handed round in the different localities to which it was sent. I heard of it before the copy you sent reached me, and I know of copies being made of it by a brother to whom you did not send one. That a letter accompanied each copy you mailed does not detract from above facts and so the paper was clearly *both* open and circulated; and this not only because you could not well control it after so many copies had left your hands, but because you expressed no wish to do so -- as far as I know. Thus I am unable to alter my remarks under this head in my first letter.
{245}
The powers that be, -- I have no doubt that you respect them, but your paper reiterated that the saints had nothing to do with them in regard of city boundaries and the like. This not only produces a bad impression on the mind, but it is obviously incorrect. If I own a house I must recognise the powers that be in the *name* of the place (city, town or village), the name of the street and the number of the house. If you write me a letter it will not reach me unless you comply with the ordering of the civil powers. The same applies to a room or hall in which the saints meet. I need not enlarge on this feature for it is quite evident that what I have said covers the limits or boundaries of places. I am to pay tribute to whom tribute is due, and so I must determine to whom my taxes are to be paid and this is by finding out that I am within the area of the authority to whom the tax is to be paid. In New York the obligation is on the property holder to find out the person to whom his taxes are to be paid; if he fails to pay he will be fined. Unless therefore you recognise the ordering of the civil powers, a communication mailed by you to the saints in New York will not reach them. The Lord Himself designates a street in Damascus and we are bound to accept that "Straight" was its name as given by the civil powers. And so when he told Saul to "*enter into* the city" he alluded not only to people, but to houses, walls, etc. The ethnarch kept the city of the Damascenes shut up to take Saul: the city and the people are distinct. Thus the assembly in Damascus would be the saints within the limits indicated in the word *enter* used by the Lord. To assume that the saints would not recognise those limits, is wholly inadmissible.
You mention the assembly in Philemon's house as showing that the conception of an assembly is not confined to the political boundaries of a city. I never thought it was, nor have I ever heard anyone say it was. The enquiry is not that but what is involved in the expression "The assembly of God ... *in Corinth*" -- must not *Corinth* be determined? As you say, 'the assemblies in households would be embraced in the larger thought of the assembly in a city'.
References to cities after @Acts 2 -- I must say again that these are comparatively many, even when the idea of the assembly directly or indirectly is connected. Besides those formally mentioned we have the Spirit testifying in "*every* city" -- this was obviously in connection with the saints in them; then we
{246}
have elders ordained in "every city;" added to these we have cities in which the gospel was preached -- all indicating how prominent the thought is in the mind of God, as agreeing with @Proverbs 1: 20, 21.
Old Testament cities. -- You say 'The context should show I could not have in mind Cain's city', etc. -- but this was the defect -- the question in the paper was as to 'Old Testament conditions and requirements'. Why should the Old Testament not speak fully -- it treats of other cities besides those under the law. You say you were enquiring about '*assembly* days (not Old Testament times);' you ruled out the Old Testament because municipal, religious interests were all one under the law, ignoring the fact that cities were treated of long before the law, and cities with which the law had nothing to do long after -- cities to which God bore witness as He is doing now. Why should the Scriptures which God had written to treat all this be disregarded? Are they not written for *our* learning? They are indeed! The first three cities they mention are said to have been *built;* to one of these (Nineveh) God sent a prophet to preach to it and he *entered* into it. Surely that is for 'our learning' as to cities and God's testimony to them. Besides, the cities 'under the law' came under a foreign yoke, when their political and religious interests were no longer identical. As you reconsider it I believe you will see that I should not alter what I wrote under this head.
As regards saints residing 'just outside the gate of Corinth' being 'included by the Spirit as in the assembly of God at Corinth', I see no gain in such a remark. Why assume there were any? If there were and they broke bread 'outside' they could, of course, be included in the 'places' mentioned in chapter 1: 2. If they broke bread inside they would, of course, be included in the assembly at Corinth.
As to *incongruities* as at Detroit, these are the *exception;* so also London -- notoriously. The Lord gives wisdom in such cases to those *directly* responsible. Herein, I believe, lies the solution of these exceptional cities; *generally* there is no difficulty.
I shall be glad of an opportunity to speak with you "mouth to mouth" on this (now) extended subject; in the meantime I trust you will take in the spirit of forbearance what I have written thus freely.
I may add that I see no justification in Scripture for your
{247}
suggestion that the "holy city" in @Matthew 27 refers to the saints in Jerusalem and not to the city itself. There is no evidence that it should not be taken there as in @Matthew 4, @Revelation 11, and like passages in the Old Testament, particularly @Daniel 9.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 10th, 1929.
Mr. F. W. Kingston.
My Dear Brother, -- I thank you for sending the correspondence from Niederschelden. I am very grieved to find that such serious error was held (evidently secretly at that time) by the brethren who met us at Weidenau last May.
What strikes me is the endeavour to involve the brethren with whom we are walking in the doctrine they advocate. J.N.D., F.E.R. and C.A.C. are mentioned, whereas all three would repudiate it with horror. Everyone at all conversant with J.N.D.¬s writings knows how he refuted the doctrine as it presented itself in various forms in his time (see Collected Writings, Volume 7). F.E.R., while he had little or no controversy on this subject, used to speak of the lake of fire as a necessity of divine love -- "lake" regarded as implying *limitation*.
It may be that Messrs. B------, J------, and S------ are not well acquainted with the writings of those they quote, but it is noteworthy that they can furnish what seems to support their view. If they know how thoroughly J.N.D. condemned and refuted the doctrine of non-eternity of punishment, they are unfair, indeed dishonest, in trying to make him appear, however faintly, as supporting it. In all this, the enemy is undoubtedly endeavouring to discredit the saints in Germany, Great Britain and elsewhere, who are seeking to maintain what is due to God; his thought would be especially to discredit us in the eyes of those in the Elberfeld fellowship.
Another feature of these papers is the avoidance of scriptures that deal *directly* with the subject in question, of which there are over 60 in the New Testament; some passages are alluded to, but generally we have only fanciful presentations of eras and types which but becloud and bewilder the mind. It may be added that this feature is usual where a false system of teaching is put forward. When the truth is honestly sought,
{248}
the scriptures that bear on it directly are brought under review, and in the order in which they appear in the Word.
Throughout the gospels, epistles and Revelation, there are a multitude of passages which deal with the subject of eternal punishment (that is, punishment to which persons are *finally* consigned by God) and not one of these indicates that its duration is less than that expressed by the English word 'eternal'. I can refer to a few only.
Matthew presents the truth from the standpoint of the government of God, but it is important to note that this government extends in its results beyond the earth and time -- to "outer darkness" and "the furnace of fire" where "there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth" (@Matthew 13: 50).
In @Matthew 3: 12 it is said of the Lord that He separates the chaff from the wheat, and that "the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable". Mr. B------ would have us believe that the fire *is* quenchable and that *chaff becomes WHEAT* after a certain time in the fire -- what folly!
In @Matthew 10: 28 God is said to be able to destroy both soul and body in hell. An annihilationist would dwell on the word "destroy" here, and I need not comment on this, for Mr. B------ is not an annihilationist, but a universalist; he must therefore make "destroy" mean the exact opposite of its ordinary meaning, seeing that, according to him, the persons who go to hell come out after a time refined and saved. Thus we see again that Mr. B------¬s doctrine directly denies the Word of God.
In @Matthew 12: 32 we are told that a word spoken against the Holy Spirit is *not* forgiven, and @Mark 3: 29 says that it has no forgiveness to *eternity*. Mr. B------ teaches that it *has* forgiveness, for all the unforgiven 'children of man' remaining after the Church and the millennial dispensations, come out purified, saved on the principle of mercy, after the terrible night of the eighth day. Again Mr. B------ directly contradicts the Word of God.
@Matthew 18: 8 speaks of the danger of being cast into *eternal* fire, which is also called hell in the chapter (verse 9). Mr. B------ teaches that the fire is *not* eternal, that for men it is but for 1,000 years. Again Mr. B------ contradicts the Scriptures.
In @Matthew 25: 46 we read: "These shall go away into eternal punishment, and the righteous into life eternal". Mr.
{249}
B------¬s teaching will compel him to say that 'eternal' means only a certain number of years when applied in this passage to punishment, but that it means eternal unending blessing -- when applied to life.
@Mark 9: 48 speaks of hell: "Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched". The eternal existence of the damned in eternal fire or torment is thus plainly stated by our Lord. Mr. B------ and those who follow him, are taking upon themselves a most awful responsibility in denying His words. May He mercifully deliver them from their error! In both Matthew and Mark, our Lord is seen as forsaken of God on account of our sins. He proved in His holy soul the full meaning of divine wrath against sin. It was infinite. Those who believe on Him never come into it, but on those who are not subject to the Son, the wrath of God *abides* (@John 3: 36) -- terrible word!
It is well to note that the word "gehenna", being the one translated hell, as a place of eternal judgment in the New Testament, although referring primarily to the valley of the son of Hinnom (near Jerusalem), is never used literally (as referring to the valley) in the New Testament; it is used only in its figurative or spiritual meaning. God had not used the literal valley to destroy men in. Men had used it to burn rubbish, and alas, to offer their children to Molech; but having constant fire, it came to be used by the Spirit of God as a symbol of eternal punishment. In this sense only it is used in the New Testament. Revelation has a word of its own, "the lake of fire". The latter has in view, doubtless, not only the punishment of evil, but the *limitation* of it -- that it is in "its own place". This feature is in keeping with the book of Revelation. The beast and false prophet are specially said to be cast therein, and Satan himself afterwards. But whether the expression "gehenna" or "the lake of fire" is employed, the place of eternal punishment is always in view -- the place prepared for the devil and his angels, but into which all are cast whose names are not written in the book of life.
Luke and John confirm Matthew and Mark, quoting the Lord's words on the subject of eternal punishment. Luke gives us the well-known vivid picture of hades (chapter 16) from which we gather that suffering is endured by the wicked as they die, and that an impassable gulf exists between them and the saved, even before the resurrection. He also speaks
{250}
(chapter 13) of the Lord refusing to admit those who knocked for admission after He had shut to the door, saying "Depart from me", and that there should be weeping and gnashing of teeth as His hearers should see others in the kingdom of God and themselves thrust out. There is absolutely no hint that the door would be opened to them as they spent a night of weeping in hell.
John, quoting the Lord Jesus, tells us of God's love -- that He gave His only-begotten Son that whosoever believes on Him, may not perish but have life eternal. According to Mr. B------, there will be no perishing even for those who do *not* believe on the Son. Again John says, "The wrath of God *abides* upon him" who is not subject to the Son (@John 3: 36). Mr. B------ must say that it abides for a time only, but Scripture does not say this. We must believe Scripture. According to John, the Lord also says (chapter 5) that those that have done evil shall come forth from their graves by His voice to resurrection of judgment. @Revelation 20 amplifies this, and we see there that the judgment is not purgatorial, but being most carefully determined, is awfully and finally punitive -- it is the lake of fire, eternal punishment.
The Acts and Epistles assume throughout eternal punishment for the rejecters of the gospel; at the end, even strong delusion is sent to them by God that they all might be judged who have not believed the truth (@2 Thessalonians 2: 12). They are to pay the penalty of everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of His might. Paul further speaks (@Romans 2: 5) of the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God; that indignation, tribulation and distress shall be on every soul of man that works evil (verse 9); also that vessels of wrath are fitted for destruction (@Romans 9: 22). @Hebrews 6: 2 speaks of "the doctrine ... of eternal judgment", and that "it is impossible to renew again to repentance" those who ... have fallen away (verses 4 - 6); and (chapter 10) that there remains no longer any sacrifice for sins for those who sin wilfully after receiving the knowledge of the truth, but a certain fearful expectation of judgment and heat of fire about to devour the adversaries (@Hebrews 10: 27).
Peter and Jude write in the most denunciating terms of the ungodly, speaking most plainly of their final doom, linking it up with the whole course of God's government as against sin and sinners, beginning with angels who kept not their first
{251}
estate, and specially including the apostates to Christianity, "to whom has been reserved the gloom of darkness for eternity" (@Jude 13).
All these scriptures must be ignored or regarded as meaningless, indeed untrue, if all those consigned to the lake of fire ultimately come out purified, having their tears wiped away by God Himself and being owned as His people. It is for Mr. B------¬s followers to decide whether they will continue to believe their present leader or the blessed God Himself. If we do not believe the witness that God gives, we make Him a liar (@1 John 5: 10), but the Scripture says, "Let God be true, and every man false" (@Romans 3: 4).
The book of Revelation I have anticipated, but it contains the most explicit statements of eternal punishment. It uses, as I said, a term of its own -- the lake of fire; it is also called the lake of fire and brimstone; it burns with fire and brimstone. It was prepared for the devil and his angels (@Matthew 25), but the unrepentant from among men are also cast into it. They shall have their part in it; it is called "the second death". It is said of Satan, the beast and false prophet "They shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever".
The Spirit of God anticipated in this book such treatment of it as appears in the system of teaching before us. "I testify to every one who hears the words of the prophecy of this book, If any one shall add to these things, God shall add to him the plagues which are written in this book. And if any one take from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part from the tree of life, and out of the holy city, which are written in this book" (@Revelation 22: 18, 19). Mr. B------ is altering "the things" of the book seriously by substituting a temporary purgatory, through which all the wicked are to be saved, for an eternal lake of fire into which the devil and his angels with the unrepentant from among men are consigned. He must face the penalty spoken of in the verses quoted above -- most solemn!
Having brought forward the foregoing passages from the many appearing in the New Testament relative to eternal punishment, I turn to remark briefly on some of the statements of Mr. B------ as reported in Mr. S------¬s letter.
Page 4. -- Quoting the Elberfeld 'Botschafter' that unbelievers remain in death -- the lake of fire -- Mr. B------ says,
{252}
'It is like my saying my house is burnt down; it exists no longer, but I remain in my house'. This is because Scripture says death shall be no more. One needs but a superficial knowledge of Scripture to discern the fallacy of Mr B------¬s remark. It assumed that death and the *second* death are the same, whereas they are not; the former is said to be cast into the latter, the lake of fire, which is called the second death (@Revelation 20: 4). In Revelation 21: 4 it says, death shall be no more, but this refers to death as it has existed on the earth since sin entered, not to the second death, which while it called "death", is shown to be death of a *different* kind. It first presented as "the lake of fire" and afterwards called "the second death". Besides, @Revelation 21: 1 - 8 speaks of the new heaven and new earth, especially what characterise the latter.
Mr. B------ enlarges (pages 6 and 7) on this passage (@Revelation 21: 1 - 8) and seeks to make out that "men" here refers to the unbelievers who were cast into the lake of fire: they are now purified and owned of God as His people. He says, 'The tears wiped away in Revelation 21: 4 can only apply to the remaining children of men, who are exposed to the frightful fiery judgment of damnation'. Scriptures are dragged out of their settings and twisted and turned in order to afford some semblance of support for this assumption; but Scripture is too plain and decided in the passages which deal directly with eternal punishment to admit of being contradicted by some passages which do not deal directly with it. Mr. B------¬s efforts therefore prove utterly futile. He says these are saved on the principle of mercy, not grace; but all who are saved, are saved on the principle of mercy. God has shut up all in unbelief, that He might have mercy upon all (@Romans 11: 32); but it is through the meritorious death of His Son and not through the purification of the lake of fire. Through the death of Christ, mercy and truth have met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other (@Psalm 85: 10). Mr. B------¬s system leaves out the truth and the righteousness. He adds (page 7), 'It will then be shown that Christ has not died in vain with respect to those that are lost; regarding the present salvation'. How is it shown? In @Hebrews 10, it is said of apostates that there remains no more offering for sin; and in chapter 6, that it is impossible to renew them again to repentance.
{253}
Mr. B------ seeks to make the first four and a half verses only of @Revelation 21 apply to the new heavens and the new earth, whereas they are in view to the end of verse 8. What John *saw* was a new heaven and earth; then he *heard* heaven speak: "The tabernacle of God is with men", etc.; then He that sat on the throne (referring back to chapter 4) speaks: "I make all things new". John saw the new things, now he is told by the One who sits on the throne that *He* would make all things new. Then John is told to "write, for these words are true and faithful" -- the words he had heard. Then He who sits on the throne "said to me, It is done", etc.; God can thus speak anticipatively. Then He states what He would do for the thirsty and the overcomer: the latter should inherit "these things", that is, the eternal state of things spoken of above. God would be his God and he His son. Over against this eternal blessedness in verse 8 -- the terrible doom of those who in wicked works rejected Christ -- the fearful, unbelieving, abominable, murderers, fornicators, sorcerers, idolators, liars, "their part is in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone; which is the second death". Mr. B------ would make part of the passage for eternity and part for time; but all is for time as a *testimony* from God. It was written down by John and sent to the churches, so that men should know what God will do in new creation, to the end that we should believe, become of those who "thirst" and overcome; on the other hand, that we should be warned against unbelief and wickedness so as not to have part in the lake of fire. The throne refers to God's rights in Christ as a present testimony. It is not only God, but God on His throne and He is the beginning and the end. The "end" is before us in the passage both as regards eternal blessing and eternal judgment. There is not the slightest suggestion here of the purgatorial night by which the wicked of verse 8 become the "men" of verse 9. This is a pure fiction of Mr. B------¬s and an insult to the righteousness and holiness of God. On page 7, Mr. B------ admits that there is no definite passage of scripture for the assumption that the judgment of the lake of fire lasts only 1,000 years. He has the temerity to build up a system of doctrine without a definite passage of Scripture to support it!
Page 8. -- @Psalm 30 is alluded to to support the brief duration of God's anger; but it is to be noted that a *saint* is speaking here, not an unrepentant sinner. The rich man in torment
{254}
(@Luke 16) had no encouragement from Abraham that the wrath *he* was enduring would be but for a moment. This also covers the suggestion of the evening of weeping and the morning of joy: there is no morning for those cast into the lake of fire. Will Mr. B------ say that wrath for the devil and his angels is but for a moment?
Pages 8, 9. -- Mr. B------¬s division of time is quite arbitrary, but his treatment of the passage of the Jordan and circumcision is the most absurd of any I have seen. The Ark of the Covenant he makes Christ and the assembly. The assembly had no part in the abolition of death, which latter the passage of the Jordan signifies. The priests bearing the Ark refer to certain features of Christ as going into death -- intelligence, holiness, etc. 'Did the priests at Gilgal', Mr. B- asks (page 10) 'need a fresh circumcision?' 'No', he answers, 'their task was to circumcise the uncircumcised people at Gilgal'. There is not a word in the whole section in Joshua either about the priests circumcising the people or not needing it themselves. The responsibility of the circumcision here (@Joshua 5) was placed on Joshua.
Then the 2,000 cubits set between the people and the Ark had reference to the dignity of Christ and the greatness of the work He was undertaking. We read: "Ye shall not come near it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go; for ye have not passed this way heretofore" @Joshua 3: 4. Thus the believer humbly sees that Christ died for him, that He entered into death in His own might and overthrew it, bringing life and incorruptibility to light by the gospel. The believer of this dispensation does not pretend (as Mr. B------ suggests) to stand on the 'river of death' until the last of the uncircumcised people under the curse of a broken law come out of the second death (page 9). The suggestion is as absurd as it is wicked.
'Our Gilgal', Mr. B------ says, 'is before Jordan, indeed before the journey through the wilderness at the Red Sea'. This, to say no more, evidences an ignorance of the types. The Red Sea typifies the Lord's death to be appropriated by *faith* for justification and peace with God; the Jordan and Gilgal typify the death of Christ in relation to the *presence and work of the Spirit in believers*. Gilgal is the *rolling away of the reproach* of Egypt, not our exit from it. It was the camping place for Israel; that is, for the Christian, the place of self-judgment
{255}
and the acceptance of the body of the flesh being put off in the death -- circumcision -- of Christ.
On pages 11, 12, we have reasoning as to God's will -- that unless all are saved, it is frustrated. This is but questioning His sovereignty. Who art thou that repliest against God? We have to accept facts as they are and leave what may not be clear to us to God. Mr. B------ asks as to his conversion, 'Was I then willing?' and goes on to speak of what Christians rejoice in -- that every conversion is through grace, by faith, not of works. But then if God converted him and not his brother or neighbour, what can he say? One thief hanging by the side of Jesus on the cross was saved and the other not. What can we say to this? God wrought in the former but not in the latter -- Why not, we have to leave with Him. The unrepentant thief showed the working of sin through his will in *such* circumstances, refusing to own the Lord notwithstanding such testimony. He died in his sins. The Lord said, "ye *will not* come to me that ye might have life" (@John 5: 40) and "Unless ye shall believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins" (@John 8: 24). Man's will stands in the way of his blessing. It is utterly unrighteous and illogical to make God responsible for this. His righteousness, through Christ's death, is towards all, but only *upon those who believe*. The Lord says, "He that disbelieves shall be condemned" (@Mark 16: 16).
The gospel is to all and so all are responsible to believe, but the elect only are saved; as Paul says of the elect, "that they also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus" (@2 Timothy 2: 10). That the gospel in its resultful effects came to the west and did not go to the east, we have also to leave with God. *He* knows why.
The treatment of the subject of priesthood (page 10) by Mr. B------ shows further his want of intelligence of the types. @Leviticus 8 is Christ and the church (its members), remaining at the entrance of the tent of meeting day and night, seven days. It is a complete *spiritual* period -- not certainly 7,000 years. @Leviticus 9 -- the eighth day -- is Aaron and his sons and the *elders of Israel*. Mr. B------ says no sin-offering was offered on this day, whereas we only need to look at the chapter to see that sin-offerings *were* offered. It is Christ and the church in relation to Israel in the future.
Mr. B------ (page 5) makes the goat for the people in @Leviticus 16 a type of Satan. This also shows a want of spiritual intelligence. It is said of "Azazel" -- "to make atonement with
{256}
it" (@Leviticus 16: 10). How could Satan make atonement for Israel? The truth is that Azazel is a counterpart of the goat of Jehovah's lot -- together they present a complete type of the death of Christ for Israel, as the one bullock is a type of Christ as giving Himself for the church -- the members of it. *We* have the Holy Spirit (@Hebrews 10) as a witness that our sins are remembered no more; Israel will know forgiveness when they *see* the Lord without their sins. Mr. B------ says Azazel 'was the substitute for the people, not for the priestly house;' but neither of the goats was a substitute for the priestly house, the *bullock* was this.
Note also that the goat on which Jehovah's lot fell is also said to be "the sin-offering for the people" (verse 15). As I said, the two goats present a complete type of Christ as making atonement through His death for Israel.
I need add no more; I trust that the foregoing remarks, in conjunction with what Mr. Coates may have written, will be used of God to deliver at least some of our brethren from this deadly error. That Mr. S------ and others have sought the counsel of some of their brethren, gives good ground for believing that they are prepared to accept the teaching of the word of God on the subject.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 15th, 1929.
Mr. Francis Willy.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of September 15th was duly received and I was very glad to get it.
I need not say that I am most thankful to hear that the brethren in Sydney have been helped of the Lord in reaching a more scriptural and practical way of maintaining order and unity in their administrative procedure, also that Adelaide and Perth are moving on the same lines. One is reminded of the word, "Thus I ordain in *all* the assemblies" (@1 Corinthians 7: 17). The exercise and communications on the subject of city administration are remarkable, but no doubt God is in all this, so that saints may be more intelligent in what they are doing.------ wrote a paper on 'City Boundaries' which tends to darken and confuse. The errors of it have been pointed out to him, but
{257}
he is trying to struggle through the tide of opposition to his views without making any withdrawals or admissions.
I was grieved by many wrong statements appearing in the last Melbourne notes, such as the *stoppage* by God of eternal life and that the heavenlies (Ephesians) are certain things sent down here. I wrote Mr. McB------ and Mr. Y------ briefly and later I sent the former a detailed statement. I have not heard from him as to the latter.
What has weighed on me lately is the need of observing the Spirit of truth. For instance, Mr. W------ condones Mr. McB------¬s errors by saying that he was seeking to press the heavenly side of the truth! And referring to ------¬s 'Memo' on 'City Boundaries' Mr. W------ said the subject should be viewed from 'all sides' -- right ones and wrong ones, I suppose! This attitude can but lead to latitudinarianism.
We were thinking of you all in view of the recent holiday meetings. I have no doubt there was help from God. I am sure you would enjoy Dr. Elliott. I hear good tidings of meetings held in Great Britain.
In this country and Canada the Lord helped. I was in Chicago. The meetings were not large but the Lord was distinctly with us. There was present a Baptist 'minister' and his wife -- very nice people. Since the meetings Mr. W------ n wrote to say that they had 'decided to leave denominations'. This, I need not say, was good news. He is an acquaintance of Mr. H------, the free Methodist minister who came into fellowship about three years ago in Gerry, New York. Mr. McGowan had been in touch with Mr. W------ n and I also.
I visited the meetings in Ontario in November and I never found more encouragement there. Since that time five have come into fellowship or are on the way at Tillsonburg. Mr. McGowan was there lately. The meetings in the 'middle-west' of the U.S.A. are not quite so bright -- some troubles existing -- but I believe God is coming in for them.
Yes, we were grieved to hear of Mr. Brown of Chatswood. There is much pressure generally of this kind. In this district there is much cheer.
My wife joins in love in Christ to you and Mrs. Willy and your family.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{258}
New York.
February 4th, 1929.
Mr. Alfred Wellershaus.
My Dear Brother, -- Very many thanks for yours of the 23rd ult. I wrote you last week and now I see that you hope to be free to accompany me to the South as I requested in that letter. I assure you I am *very thankful*. I shall be spending a few days in Belgium beginning about March 13th and then hope to join you for the Lord's Day. I must be back in England on the 28th or a little before, as I am 'booked' to attend meetings on Good Friday at Kingston-on-Thames and at Belfast at Easter.
I shall have to leave the question of a meeting at Bendorf until I reach England -- or until I see you. I fear such a commitment would curtail my time in Saxony and Czechoslovakia.
Please God I shall communicate with you when I arrive in England or in Belgium.
With our united love in Christ, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board S.S. Cedric.
March 6th, 1929.
Mr. G. Spiller.
Beloved Brother, -- I was very glad to receive your letter of January 29th, telling, as it does, something of the work of God in your parts.
Young L------¬s case is good and reminds us of how much is to be done in the families of the saints. That F. W------ and his wife were about to break bread again is cheering news. I did not know him so well as H------ but I have always been interested in the W------ s and so was the more grieved by H------¬s breakdown. I earnestly hope he too will be restored.
How distressing that L------ e should be knocking at the O.B. doors for admission. It is not conviction but *will* -- the outcome of a bad state of soul. The roots which bear such fruits reach far back indeed. While thankful for the exposure and consequent deliverance granted by the Lord, we cannot but mourn over such a fall. It is due to the Lord and our brother that we should.
You will see that I am on the ocean, hoping to arrive in Liverpool on the 12th inst. Business requires that I go at
{259}
once to the Continent. Please God, I shall be back in time for the Easter meetings: Kingston, Good Friday and then Belfast. Later I hope to visit France and perhaps Germany -- for the special meetings at Leipzig at Whitsuntide. Thus I shall not have as much time in England as usual; but I hope to visit Portsmouth, as I wrote Mr. Green.
The Lord is blessing His people in the New York area. There is sustained interest in the meetings and steady growth in numbers and, I believe, spiritually. In one of the meetings in the city seven were seeking to be allowed to break bread with us as I left.
My wife, who is with me, joins in love in Christ to Mrs. Spiller and yourself, also to the brethren as you have opportunity to convey it.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
July 15th, 1929.
My Dear Brother, -- Pardon my delay in writing, but your letter reached me late as I was then in Great Britain.
The subject of it is most delicate as relating to our Lord's Person and so I am very desirous that nothing but what is divinely accurate should be written.
First, I wish to say that you must have misunderstood me in thinking that I said it would be derogatory to the Lord as a Divine Person to speak of Him as being sent. I am sure I never had such a thought and I cannot believe I said what you report. He is never less or other than a Divine Person -- "Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come" (@Hebrews 13: 8). In John's gospel, which presents Him in this way, He is said *many* times to have been sent -- more often than elsewhere. Besides, as you say, the Holy Spirit is a Divine Person and He is said to be sent.
Further, I never had the thought that the idea of the Lord, the Son, being sent did not precede incarnation. "The Father sent the Son" is a full, general thought and I should not limit it to time; but I do believe that the bearing of it *includes* the Lord's formally entering on His service, as anointed after His baptism. That He came down from heaven as sent is surely true and that He was conscious that He was here for God's
{260}
will from the outset of His incarnation is also true -- He was cast on God from the womb -- but Scripture presents facts in an orderly, intelligible way and so it is as anointed that He speaks of being sent (@Luke 4: 18). John speaks of His becoming "flesh" -- which necessarily includes His infancy, etc. -- but what he records as after the event (@John 1: 14) refers to the Lord as known publicly -- after the Holy Spirit came upon Him. The force of "sent" is obviously in this connection. John the baptist was sent, a *man* from God; the Father sent the Son.
As regards the application of the term Son, or Son of God, to our Lord as "in the form of God", I have long hesitated about it, while not entertaining any anxiety as to those who had no difficulty as to such application, who indeed, like yourself, held it as a cardinal truth. They held, thus, His eternal personality and so there was nothing to fear on this head.
Beginning with @John 1: 1 we are all on the solid rock of Christ's eternal personality, as being in the beginning and with God then, yea, being Himself God.
There being perfect agreement as to this, we can, without *much* fear as to error arising in the consideration, enquire calmly whether Scripture does, or does not, warrant the application of the terms mentioned to the Lord as in the form of God.
I have read F.E.R.¬s remarks -- had read them before you sent the paper -- and they represent what he held at the time, of course, indeed, what was, and *is*, generally held; but as a matter of fact, it was Mr. Raven who first mentioned the questionableness of the application I have mentioned. This was in my hearing -- when he was in America in 1902. The remarks were not published, as far as I know, but they are, well known by many. I heard of a letter of his lately to the same effect, and while J.N.D. like F.E.R. treats sonship in the ordinary, or accepted way, in 'Notes and Comments', Volume 7, page 7, he (speaking of @John 1: 14) says, 'Nor do I see that in this character He is spoken of as Son save as known in the flesh'. He guards his statements afterwards with a 'note' lest bad use should be made of them, but they remain in the text -- hence we can see what was in his mind, although not pressed. What should be well observed in John's gospel is that in treating formally of the Lord's Person in chapter 1 he does not use the term Son, but Word ('Logos' ). In verse 14
{261}
we have "only-begotten" to express the glory which they among whom He dwelt, contemplated. That is, it is not a formal designation by the Spirit, but expressive of *their* apprehension of what they saw in the Word become flesh. In verse 18 He is formally called the only-begotten Son in the bosom of the Father; this also is said of Him *after* He became flesh. Later the Baptist witnesses to Him as Son of God, having seen the Holy Spirit descending and abiding on Him. Nathanael also calls Him Son of God, because of what he saw in Him. In each case (verses 14, 34, 39) He is regarded as, or called, Son of God because of what was *apprehended in Him as Man*. The formal statement of verse 18 also unquestionably alludes to Him as Man. The preposition "in" has (in Greek) the force of reaching to, or coming into, also the verse reads, "Who *is* in the bosom of the Father".
The statement that the Father sent the Son does not in itself prove that He was actually in the relation of Son before incarnation, not only because of what I have already pointed out as to sending, but because if we say that it does we shall be obliged also to say that He bore the designation Jesus Christ before He became Man. When speaking to the Father(@John 17) He says, "Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent". We have also, "Whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into the world", and "Christ Jesus came into the world", etc. The *Person* is in view in each case.
But there can be no doubt that the term Son, or Son of God, is intended to convey the greatness and glory of the Person as become Man. Revelation is, of course, for *finite* minds and hearts and so this expression of relationship and affection, as covering what was contemplated in Christ as in manhood, is intended to convey His dignity and glory.
But this is not saying that He bore the term or title as in the form of God. While through it the believer *apprehends* clearly who the Person is we cannot assume to know Him in His essential Being; no one knows Him thus but the Father.
I am somewhat afraid that there is at times an assumption to know the form of God, which would mean that we bring Him within our compass; whereas He dwells in light unapproachable, whom no man has seen nor can see. The revelation of God, therefore, is not a question of His form. I hesitate therefore to apply names and relationships to Divine Persons as in absolute Deity. *Many* scriptures might be quoted that
{262}
should check us in this, for instance, that the Son does *not know* certain things, which is without modification in @Mark 13. It could not be applied to Him as in the form of God.
The remark that the revelation of the relationship of Father and Son did not make it is quite true, but when was the revelation made? *After* Christ became Man. It was plainly indicated from the outset Who He was, but the formal revelation was at His baptism; the declaration of the Father was by the Son as become Man. And He was marked off as Son by resurrection of the dead.
I trust what I have written may be of some help; it will show you, at any rate, that I am not thinking lightly or carelessly about this great and blessed matter. In the spirit of the man in @John 9, I would worship the Son of God.
With love in Christ, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
July 18th, 1929.
Mr. S. J. B. Carter.
My Dear Mr Carter, -- Thanks for your brotherly letters.
First, as to @1 Thessalonians 5, the article in Believers¬ Friend. I had not seen in MSS. R.B. must have revised it. But I always considered "sleep" in verse 10 to be death, as in chapter 4. I find J.N.D. so regards it -- Synopsis. No doubt your information is correct as to *kathendo*, although I note LXX has it in @Daniel 2; but this is hardly an exception. At any rate, like our own word sleep, this and *koimaomai* strictly are used only in a figurative way of death. The context, it seems to me, of @1 Thessalonians 5: 10 shows that death is meant, for I do not see how the apostle could use sleep in the sense in which the state or conduct of unbelievers is described earlier in the chapter. "Whether we may be watching or sleep, we may live together with him", seems, as it stands, to mean, whether we are watching -- as alive in the body -- or asleep in Jesus. Otherwise it would be 'whether we be watching or, like those of the night, in a state of insensibility to Christ and His things, we should live together with him'. This would treat lightly the very bad state alluded to. As I said, I cannot see that the apostle would thus speak. Mr.
{263}
Darby, as I remarked, regards "sleep" here as "asleep in Jesus".
When the subject of our Lord's sonship was mentioned at Barnet I was unaware -- had forgotten perhaps -- that you had written a leaflet on it -- quoting F.E.R. Lately this was sent me by a brother named Ghinn, of Melbourne. I think it right to mention this, as it might seem that I had you specially in mind. In truth, I was thankful you brought the matter up -- although you did, I was not thinking of you, or attacking you in my remarks. It is a most weighty subject and I have no doubt the spiritual intelligence in the meetings warranted attention being called to it. What I expressed has been in my mind for at least twenty-five years; it came to me through F.E.R. when he was in America in 1902. It came out in a reading but was not included in the *printed* notes. It is also extant in correspondence. J.N.D. evidently had the same thought, although like F.E.R. he generally treated the subject as commonly accepted; Mr. Raven had the thought later, I think. I refer to 'Notes and Comments', Volume 7, page 7: 'Nor do I see', he says, 'that in this character (@John 1: 14) He is spoken of as Son save as known in the flesh'. He guards this afterwards in a note, but the text remains.
But, of course, what we must rely on is the Scripture itself and the more I weigh it on this great matter the more I am unable to see the justness of applying the designation Son to our Lord as in "the *form* of God" -- before incarnation, I mean.
Your remark (in the leaflet) that the relationship was not made by the revelation is just as far as it goes, but what should be noted is that the Lord's Sonship in *manhood* existed *before* the revelation. It was of course, there from His birth, and Luke and Matthew formally recognise this, but the *announcement* of it was at His baptism.
As was said at the meetings, the great and blessed fact is His eternal distinct personality and the infinite glory of it -- *He was God*. We are all agreed as to this and there can be no admission of compromise or doubt as to it. The language of Scripture (@John 1: 1 - 3) is wonderfully plain and concise. The question then is, Does Scripture apply sonship to Him as in the *form* of God, or before He became flesh?
What is usually said is that God could not send or give a Son unless He had one. This is obviously true, but what underlies the remark is that the act, so to speak, of giving or
{264}
sending must be *before* incarnation, or that the incarnation was the expression of it. I am not prepared to deny or aver anything as to time definitely, but the matter should be weighed in a spiritual way. We might also, on the same ground, say that God must have had "Jesus Christ" (@John 17) in order to send Him. No one will say that that designation applied to Him before incarnation. We have also, "Whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the world". As far as I understand, J.N.D. connects sanctification there (@John 10) with Him as *Man*. Anyway I am assured it should be.
It helps, I think, to bear in mind that revelation is for *finite* minds -- no man can take in the form of God -- and so sonship, being owned in Christ by the Father, conveys what He is personally; our minds can take this in, we can apprehend (not comprehend) *Who* He is thus, always bearing in mind that no one knows the Son but the Father. But the truth of His Person -- Who He is -- is in the soul as a solid rock. It is a term (I am only submitting this, seeking to be subject and cautious as on such holy ground) therefore, which, while applied to Him as in manhood only, asserts His deity; the *Person* is before the adoring believer (@John 9) and known. We cannot compass Him, but we apprehend *Who* He is; He loves me in a known personal way, and I love Him. But, as I said, my finite mind is met; I can apprehend Sonship in a Man, but I do not pretend to apprehend it in One in the form of God. This is beyond the finite mind, it seems to me. The relationship of Son, or Son of God, in a Man is enough to denote His Person (a Person I can know and love) but what He is *in the Deity* is beyond my range. He dwells in light unapproachable, whom no man has seen nor can see.
Thus in John's gospel, where the truth of our Lord's Person is formally treated, Sonship is not mentioned *until He is said to have become flesh;* and then it is given as the conclusion arrived at by those who contemplated Him; they saw His glory as of an only-begotten with a Father. John the baptist's testimony is also on the ground of what he saw, and that of Nathanael. In verse 18 we have the formal statement of the Lord's Sonship by the Spirit, but this obviously also contemplates Him as Man; He *is* in the bosom of the Father. The preposition "in" (*eis*) as you will know, points to His *coming to* the position. This probably implies His personal worth or attractiveness as Man.
{265}
As to giving and sending, while these are generally in the past tense, the greatness of the person given or sent is in view. Such terms as the "Word" (@John 1) and "Jesus Christ" (@John 17) and "Christ Jesus" (@1 Timothy 1) have to be borne in mind as well as "the Son". Designations known and used, having come out in Christ become Man, are used to indicate His Person whether before or after incarnation. As I said, I do not see how we, as finite, can apprehend His Person save as we see what He is to and with God. What was seen was intelligible to man -- an only one, with *a* father.
I return Mr. C------¬s letter -- if you are free you may show him what I write. As far as I can recall (and I had much correspondence with him) W------¬s view bordered on the denial of Christ's eternal Personality -- not the application of the term Son. W------ implied the Lord's inequality with the Father.
My wife joins in love in Christ to Mrs. Carter and you.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
1929. <br>My Dear Brother, -- Of course what is advanced is J.N.D. and F.E.R.¬s earlier statements. I am assured the Lord's hand is steadily over the enquiry instituted and that through it He will be better known -- He will become greater in our eyes and ourselves less. This will be true gain. I believe many have a conception of God, of the Deity, which *implies* that He is finite; it is assumed unconsciously that He is compassable by the human mind, is held as such in it. With most, I fear, there is but little idea of what is presented in revelation or declaration -- the magnitude and inscrutability of what lies behind it. Romanists picture the Father, Son and Spirit in a material way and make Mary 'the Mother of God;' the Deity is thus blasphemously reduced to the level of man's mind. The Trinity comes definitely into view at the Lord's baptism, centering, as to revelation, in Christ *as Man;* in Him only could God -- being what He is -- come within man's range. The "fulness" dwelt there, and yet God (in His essential being and form) remains "invisible", dwelling in unapproachable light, etc., but He is in Jesus and known by the believer
{266}
to be there and thus the heart is bowed -- he worships the Father, he worships God. God remains God and man (I mean the believer) remains man; I do not speak of man's place toward God in Christ, which is a concurrent subject, but of One of the Divine Persons becoming Man, so that God is there -- in One personally known and personally loved -- God is there in all that He is, known, and in a Man with whom the disciples were familiar, and so worshipped; so the Son is said to be "the true God".
J.N.D. clearly held to our Lord's 'eternal sonship', but he seems to have had a remarkable subconsciousness that Scripture treats of sonship as applying to Him as in the flesh as Man only (see Notes and Comments, Volume 7, page 7); indeed all his comments on @John 1 - 3, pages 1 - 68; also Volume 2, page 423. But in his teaching he held strongly to the Lord's eternal sonship, associating it with His eternal personal existence; it seems to have been in his mind as unquestionable, without reconciling the unqualified statements of the Lord as to the Son implying relative inferiority to the Father, as in @John 5 and @Mark 13. It seems to me that the statement in the 'Creed' that our Lord was begotten before the worlds is just, if sonship prior to incarnation is held. It is not meant to imply that He had a beginning, as I understand, for the 'Creed' asserts that He had not, but that *something* had happened, so that He could be regarded as Son. The only such occurrence spoken of in Scripture, as far as I can see, is the incarnation -- our Lord's birth. As thus in manhood here He is owned as God's Son, but in such a way and under such circumstances as to make it perfectly evident that He was a divine Person, 'equal with God'. "The Son", therefore, is rightly employed to designate His Person. If we say, 'The Father eternal, the Son eternal, the Spirit eternal' we express the Eternal Trinity, but we are not saying that these *designations* were formally applicable before the incarnation: the *Persons* were there.
I am beginning to see that all God's operations as revealed in Scripture had the incarnation in view, and that what is conveyed in "the Word", "the Son", "Wisdom" was there in *principle* or in an *anticipative way;* whatever the instrumentality or instrumentalities employed, the Person to be known as Son was acting -- all in view of God's counsels. The service was thus mediatorial. J.N.D. says, Christ was Son in creation as in redemption. This is intelligible as sonship is
{267}
viewed anticipatively. There can be no doubt that @Proverbs 8 is anticipative of Christ as Man from the allusions to the habitable earth and the sons of men.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- @John 17: 5, 24, show plainly that relationships, glory and affection proper to divine Persons ever existed, but I do not see that Scripture warrants names or designations being given to Them as may be given to Them as seen in revelation. J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
August 28th, 1929.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for two letters received and enclosures, which latter I now return.
You have been much on our hearts and in our prayers, especially in view of the meetings at Detroit. You have also been on the hearts of the brethren, especially in the weekly meetings for prayer.
The meetings at Detroit -- lasting three days -- will be a heavy tax on you, but I am sure the Lord will consider you and the brethren in every way. It is most important to be on the Mount with God rather than with the people in view of such services. Thus one is under divine influence and is able to be for God and the truth, instead of considering for persons -- a danger always present when saints meet together in numbers. In thinking of you and Detroit, @Exodus 32 has been on my mind.
I trust you found cheer en route from Winnipeg, especially at Chicago.
We are uncertain as to the approximate time of your visit to us. No doubt you will let us know in due course. The itinerary you sent last I lent to someone and it has not come back.
I am very glad to have seen the letter from dear Bezert and I earnestly hope his sister and niece will be delivered. The news he gives from the Haute Loire is very cheering.
It is good that H.H. is to be at Vancouver. H.G. would be at a disadvantage otherwise as it is his locality. They will work well together.
{268}
I just heard from Miss Newlands. There has been correspondence between Mr. Carter and myself as to 'eternal Sonship' and D.L.H. is taking a hand in it. I believe the Lord is helping in this great matter.
Our united love in Christ,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 7th, 1929.
My Dear ------, -- Yours of May 22nd is somewhat long unanswered, but it came while we were in Europe, and it is difficult to keep up with correspondence while travelling. Mrs. Taylor and I were very glad to hear from you and of your engagement. We do not remember meeting Miss P------ (of course she was quite young at the time of our visit to Australia) or her family but we have no doubt that you suit each other and that as your union takes place it will be "in the Lord" and so will be blessed of Him. I hope your circumstances will admit of your marriage taking place at a reasonably early period, as *long* engagements are not healthy. I am sure the Lord will guide and help you both as to this as in other matters. You will be well advised to take special account of the counsel of your parents in this matter.
While in England we learned of the death of your cousin,------ of Leeds, and were very grieved, but in view of his delicate state of health for some years we did not wonder that the Lord took him. We were touched all the more by the news because we had spent a happy season with him and his wife and your dear father and mother last year. You all have our sympathy.
We have found much cheer in New York since returning from Europe. Five have been received into fellowship in our meeting (Flatbush) since and three more are to be 'proposed' tomorrow. A good few have been received in the other meetings in the city, also, and in addition to this a new meeting has been started in Staten Island. Over against this cheer, however, matters causing some sorrow exist, especially on account of the peculiarly *mixed* character of *some* of the meetings.
During last week-end special meetings were held in different parts and the Lord graciously helped. We had a *very* good
{269}
time in Cambridge (Boston). Mr. Lyon was at Detroit where, we hear, the Lord also helped.
As regards individual and collective prayer, the Lord would normally value the latter more in the proportion of two or more to one. Of course, the *state* or *character* of those who pray is of great importance -- see @James 5: 14 - 18. Thus the prayer of one *may* be more effective than that of many. Convey our united love in Christ to your dear parents and to all in the house.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 7th, 1929.
Mr. A. Wellershaus.
Beloved Brother, -- I have been thinking much of you since we parted after the happy season at Leipzig.
My wife and I learned with much satisfaction that you had passed your final examination and had secured a post as teacher. I believe I heard it was in the town where your father resides, but I am not sure. I earnestly hope it suits you and that you find the Lord's help in *all* your affairs. We are thinking too of your dear fiancée and we are interested to know if the time of your marriage is fixed. We *missed* you at Barnet, where the Lord greatly helped His people. It would have been an advantage had you been there, but later on you may find occasion to visit and make the acquaintance of your brethren in Great Britain.
We found much to encourage here since our return early in July. Five have been received in our meeting and three more are to be proposed tomorrow. Besides, a good few have been received into fellowship in the other meetings in the city and a *new meeting* has been started in Staten Island -- where Mr. Pfingst resides.
You will be aware that Mr. P. Lyon is in America. He has been in the 'far West' but we look for him here soon. The Lord has helped our brother in seeking to serve His people. Last week-end three special meetings were held -- Vancouver, and Cambridge (Boston) -- P.L. was in Detroit and we hear the Lord helped him. We had a *very* good time at Cambridge. We have not heard yet from Vancouver, where Mr. Hardwick (London) and Mr. Gill were.
I am waiting on the Lord as to the Rhineland meetings, and
{270}
hope there is encouragement. I have heard but little since I left England. The notes of the Leipzig meetings are being prepared for the press, as you will be aware. I am wondering if *you* are helping. I trust they will be used of God as circulated among His people. Notes of the Barnet and Belfast conferences are also being published and no doubt you will get copies in due time.
My wife joins in warm love in Christ to you and Mrs. Noske and to the saints near you.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 9th, 1929.
Mr. C. A. Coates.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your letter of the 25th ult., being most interested in your remarks as to the great and precious subject of our Lord's sonship. I am drawn to your suggestion that such a passage as @John 17: 5 had incarnation in view. I am assured that this applies to @Proverbs 8; but I have connected @John 17: 5 with chapter 1: 1. His personal distinctness is seen there and chapter 17 shows that love existed between divine Persons before incarnation and that there was a glory that One had "along with" Another. This, of course, we should assume, as knowing Them, even if the fact were not stated. The glory of verse 5 is, I suppose, what is termed 'Godhead glory'. He demands it now as Man, as having glorified the Father on the earth. Thus, while He remains Man, Godhead glory is ever seen in Him. It is very wonderful that He should take up what is a personal right (for He "was God") on the ground of having finished the work given Him to do on earth. Then (verse 24) He speaks of *given glory*, connecting it with the Father's *love* for Him before the foundation of the world. There is thus a blending of what He was and what He shared before the world (i.e. as in the form of God) with what He is and has as Man. @John 17 is specially marked by this. As spoken in our hearing, as it were, we have the expression of the intimacy and affection which exist between divine Persons brought within the range of our apprehension, and as entering into our own relations with Them and with each other.
But while we are in this way allowed an insight into the
{271}
relations of divine Persons, it is necessarily limited to our finite conception. If we think of the Person loved or glorified it is One now in manhood; and if we think of the One who loved Him it is *His* Father -- that is, all hinges on incarnation. That they were ever distinct Persons is cardinal truth, but Their form, how They loved Each Other, communicated with each Other, what Their designations, if any -- all is beyond us, it seems to me.
As to @John 16: 28, I understand it as in keeping with this gospel in a general way. Much is made of His coming or being sent from God or coming or being sent from the Father and going to Him, or of coming from heaven. The Persons are in view, but already known by the designations used. In chapter 16: 28 there is a double action in both cases -- coming out from ("from with") and coming into, and *leaving* and *going to*. The former would be incarnation and then taking up a position in public testimony -- at His baptism; the latter His giving up the public position (as indeed He had done in chapter 12), and His ascension. Coming from the Father cannot be said to imply that that *term of relationship* existed before the incarnation, any more than that "Jesus Christ" applied before. This, at least, is my understanding of the matter.
We shall be thinking of you in view of the cold weather coming. I can understand how *so many* visitors try you. Receiving *all* who come to you, preaching the kingdom of God and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ involves plenty of work! That the Lord may continue to help you in this great service is our continual prayer.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 20th, 1929.
Mr. C. A. Coates.
Beloved Brother, -- I regret to find I omitted referring to your enquiry as to F.E.R.¬s remarks on our Lord's spirit. His paper helped me greatly at the time it appeared and what you write confirms me in my understanding of the truth involved.
It is a question of a Person said to be God (@John 1) and so in the "form" or condition of God, taking another form or condition, *becoming* flesh. "The Word became flesh". He was *really* Man -- spirit, soul, body. As to spirit, I may speak
{272}
of *my* spirit as something characterising me or a *feature* of myself, but Scripture also regards the spirit as the man himself; that is, his real self, what he is inwardly, eternally, what he is in relation to God. The spirit, in contrast to the material, returns to God who gave it. Thus the saint, while in falling asleep he commits his spirit to the Lord Jesus, or asks Him to receive it, departs to be with Him -- the person goes.
All this bears on our Lord's incarnation. Becoming Man *He* was really Man. His *Person* was unchanged. His spirit was Himself. He commits it to His Father. He had become a Man and was in man's place and so committed Himself to His Father. He had just said to the thief, "To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise" (@Luke 23: 43).
Scripture presents facts so that our finite minds can take them in and I am sure our wisdom is to take them simply as presented and the Holy Spirit gives us understanding or apprehension in keeping with our limitations. We thus see a blessed Man committing His spirit, as about to die, to His Father and we know He refers to Himself -- what He was inwardly; His body would be separate for a moment. We adore, bearing in mind *Who* was there, the *whole* truth being inscrutable.
Matthew and Luke give us the maternal side to establish the reality of His humanity -- He came of a woman, but John says "The Word became flesh" -- One who was God, taking human condition. It is thus Himself, whether He speaks of His spirit or His soul. F.E.R.¬s opponents had in mind that there was a human *being*, spirit, soul and body, and *besides* a divine Being; that is, a dual personality (more accurately two Persons inwardly), one *merely* human and the other Divine. This is manifestly false.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 30th, 1929.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Your very interesting letter of July 16th was very welcome, also a letter from Marjorie to my wife. We are very glad indeed to know of her decision to definitely identify herself with the Lord's people and we trust she will be confirmed and blessed of the Lord in this, to her, new and
{273}
privileged path. No doubt the lead she is thus giving them may be followed by the others in due course. We feared their scholastic pursuits tended to influence the girls unduly and so we were the more thankful for Marjorie's decision, assured that, under God, it would influence the others.
It was an advantage to have all the items of news of Streatham and London generally which you kindly sent. That you could speak of some young people moving in the path of righteousness and faith in different places was cheering. Lately I heard something of independency at Clapham, but that it was checked the Lord having taken a hand. I have no details. While Forest Hill remains as it is the contagion will exist and tend to spread. This makes the position serious and hence the need of special dependence and watchfulness by the dear London brethren. My prayers for you all are regular.
The Lord is helping us here. Nine have been received into fellowship during the past few months in our meeting and others are on the way. Additions are taking place in the other meetings also. In Staten Island two dear young men who have been holding back for *years* came to decision last week.
I have not seen P.L. since he arrived in America, but he is due here tomorrow morning and I hope he will remain some weeks in the district. H.H. is due here this week also and is booked to sail on the 9th inst. for England. The Lord has blessed them both, we hear, in their service.
I hope you find much liberty to get about in the Lord's service and that you are much encouraged of Him. The need among the saints is great.
My wife joins in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and you and to all your family and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 31st, 1929.
Mr. Francis Willey.
Beloved Brother, -- I am very glad to have your long, interesting letter of the 26th ult.
I had heard of the Fairfield matter with deep concern and I earnestly hope the Lord's good hand may continue over it, so that, at least, it may not spread; and that He may grant an adjustment, saving all concerned.
{274}
I recall the position of Parramatta as related to Sydney, and unless it is regularly included in the latter city by the authorities I do not see how it can be regarded by the saints as of it. It has a separate history, being at one time capital of the State, and as politically distinct should be so accepted by the brethren. If we follow the facts presented in Scripture relative to cities I cannot see how we can evade the recognition of the boundaries set for them by the ruling powers. The earlier allusions stress *building*, as in @Genesis 4: 10, 11; and the later, boundaries or limitations, as in Jerusalem, Nineveh, etc. Then, as to nearby towns, Bethany, although but two miles or so off, was regarded as outside Jerusalem. The Lord recognised the boundary in going *without* the city -- @Mark 11:19. Cenchrea was the port of Corinth and yet it is treated as separate by the apostle, having an assembly. It is wise to leave the determination of boundaries in each place for the assembly administration with the local brethren, but I am sure we can not disregard with impunity what "the powers that be" determine or order. The London situation is the most complex, but there cannot be a righteous doubt that the brethren have acted wisely in accepting the London County Council area. That three meetings in the area should elect to refuse this is most humiliating, and very displeasing to the Lord, I am assured.
As regards names or titles of divine Persons, if I understood aright, you are correct in saying that they belong to the declaration or revelation of God -- Scripture does not warrant us in applying them as if borne by the Persons of the Godhead *before* the incarnation of our Lord. That the Persons ever existed as distinct, and that there were affections, etc., proper to Them, is plainly stated and fundamental truth that cannot, must not, be beclouded. In revelation God has graciously come out to us in names and relationships that we can understand, all bearing on the incarnation of Christ. But when we think or speak of the relations of Divine Persons as in the Godhead I am sure we should hesitate, bowing our hearts in the presence of what we cannot comprehend. But the Infinite has come within the range of the finite in the Word becoming flesh. A lonely Man among men is known and loved and worshipped; and God in Him, so that he who has seen Him has seen the Father. Of course revelation *is* revelation -- it is of God as to His nature and attributes, but so as to be intelligible to His creatures, that is, in the Son as Man; but God as to
{275}
His Being "is a *Spirit*" dwelling in unapproachable light, whom no man has seen nor can see. The believer knows God as in Jesus and this will be so eternally. Still the Father is distinct in His operations and communications, speaking *to* and *of* the Son while He (the Son) was on earth, as well as speaking in or through Him. It is all too wonderful for words, and that we should be admitted into such light and blessedness should surely humble us and make us worshippers of the Father. "Fulness" and "the invisible God" (@Colossians 1) refer to God, or the Godhead in an *absolute* sense, as I understand.
I follow with much interest all you say as to the Melbourne notes. I earnestly trust the Lord will graciously hide them from eyes that would use them against the truth and hinder souls who may be seeking their way. I wrote Mr. M------ as to the danger in this respect but in his reply he made no reference to my remarks.
We find much cheer in *this* district. A good few have been 'added' during the past few months.
I am thinking of all the dear brethren in Australia much and my prayers go up steadily, always rendering thanks too for the work of God there.
My wife joins in love in Christ to Mrs. Willy, yourself and your family, also the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 12th, 1929.
Mr. J. Owen Smith.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 26th ult. is just received. I had heard, through Mr. W. A. Smith, of the great loss of our dear brethren in the north of Scotland. I handed Mr. S.¬s letter to someone and so I do not have it by me, but I think he advised a little caution as to the whole matter as (he said) the fishing people had been doing well of late years. But there can be no doubt that need exists -- judging by what you write.
I am, please God, leaving for the Pacific Coast this week to attend special meetings to be held at Los Angeles and so I shall be unable to take the matter up with the brethren, but I am speaking to one or two and I shall leave your letter and Mr. W. A. Smith's to be considered at the next care meeting
{276}
and I am sure something will be done. Much will depend, however, on what may be learned further from W.A.S. His brother-in-law, Mr. J. Smith, lives here and undoubtedly he will have information.
At any rate, the brethren, I am sure, will take the sad circumstances under consideration and will do what they can to help.
With love in the Lord Jesus, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 1st, 1930.
Mr. A. J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I was very glad to receive your letter of December 17th and I should have replied earlier had I not been away from New York. Last week I returned from a somewhat extended trip, having gone as far as the Pacific Coast. The journeying caused much fatigue, but the seasons with the dear saints most refreshing. The meetings are few on the West Coast but the quality good. There were four days of meetings at Los Angeles and much help from the Lord. There is a very interesting work there. Los Angeles is now one of the 'famous cities' of the world and God is graciously placing a testimony there. The same may be said of San Francisco, of which Berkeley, where the meeting is, is a suburb.
I saw a good few of the meetings in the Central States en route both ways and found ample evidence of the work of God generally. In view of the immensity of the territory and population the result of the testimony presented is small, but I am sure it is much to the Lord and there is something for men, too. I ran into a cold belt coming back and got influenza, from which I am still suffering, but it is wearing off, thank God. My wife was unable to travel and so did not accompany me West; she has been under doctor's care and is somewhat improved, thank God.
We are very grieved to hear of the sad happenings at Purley and Ilford. It is a strong feature of Satan's way, that if he cannot divide the people of God he will seek to corrupt them. I have no doubt that these efforts have been met in the spirit of power of Phinehas.
I was thinking much of the dear brethren met in different places in Great Britain during the recent holidays. So far I
{277}
have not had much news, but I am assured the Lord helped His people. I hear the special gospel meetings are to be resumed in London during this month, and we shall be looking up for the blessing of God on the word preached.
We appreciate your and Mrs. Gardiner's further kind offer of hospitality and we shall avail ourselves of it as we have opportunity. We usually make Mr. Jerrard's our headquarters, as you know. My son Jim is on his way to your side on business, going direct to the Continent. He expects to be in London en route to Belfast, calling at Miss Lyon's.
We are thinking of dear Mr. Binney in his illness. I should write only I just fear that he may not be in the body. Please convey our sympathy to Mr. and Mrs. Eardley Binney.
With our united love in Christ to you both and the children, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 1st, 1930.
Mr. A. Geo. Lewis.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of January 20 was duly received, and I am glad you were free to write.
I do not know that I can say anything to help you on the subject you mention beyond what you have read in the Notes you mention. I take the use of the word "world" to be *somewhat* abstract in @John 3: 16, that is, that it alludes to what God created formed and ornamented, man being set in it and over it, or as ordered later with Israel as its centre. The first mention of it in John's gospel (especially chapter 1: 10) includes the former -- it had its being through Christ. "The world knew him not:" this would allude to persons, but persons in and of the system, including the material order of things, that began to be through Christ. Literally what the Lord met was what existed in Israel, Jerusalem, Galilee, etc. -- but the whole created sphere in which men were was involved.
It seems to me that this has to be borne in mind in treating of @John 3: 16. I have no difficulty in admitting that it is 'the world that then was' from this point of view. Thus it would be the world of @Genesis 1 - 2 or what was set up later in relation to Israel (@Deuteronomy 32: 8). @Ezekiel 31: 9 has this latter in view.
{278}
But while all this underlies @John 3: 16, and while it is somewhat abstract, as I said, what is emphasised is the *universal:* that *all* were in view and not the Jews only. "World" therefore is subordinate to "whosoever".
As to 'Covenant and family relationships', I cannot tell you where my remarks on this subject can be found -- I believe they appeared as notes of a reading in Mutual Comfort, but the date I do not remember. The first refers to God, as in @Romans 5: 5; the second to the Father, as in @Romans 8: 15. Of course, we are sons and children of God, but known as Father. The covenant is between God and His people, not with His children. As sons of God we have "the Spirit of His Son, ... crying Abba, Father;" as in the covenant, we have "the Spirit of the Lord" (2 Corinthians 3: 17), or "the Holy Spirit" (@Romans 5: 5).
I am interested to hear of Mr. Williams and Mr. Rofe ministering among you in Tasmania. I am acquainted with both.
With love in Christ to yourself and all the brethren in Hobart, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 1st, 1930.
Mr. Charles Hammond.
My Dear Brother, -- I thank you for your letter. I had heard of the occurrences and conditions you mention and they have been and are a matter of concern and prayer. As the dear brethren in the London area take them to heart, as they do, I am sure, the Lord will come in for them. The enemy, being foiled in his efforts for widespread division, keeps up these isolated attacks. They are not limited to your district, being, alas, more or less general. But the hand of the Lord is definitely with His people -- the thousands of those that love Him and keep His commandments -- and after they are made to suffer "a little while, himself shall make perfect, stablish, strengthen, ground" (@1 Peter 5: 10). When we definitely "cry unto the Lord" relief comes.
-- -- -- , of course, is unbalanced mentally, but an apt instrument
{279}
for such an attack; but the Lord will bring the scourge to an end as the dear brethren are cast upon Him. Forest Hill is really serious as now become a crystallised condition, marked by a certain independency and disregard of the unity of the Spirit. Of course we can be thankful that these features are not more pronounced; but they are there, and would, I fear, become more active if opportunity offers. Thus the humbling fact that an *armed* state has to be maintained in regard of what is *within* the fellowship. But we may count on the hand of the Lord being against the evil; it says, "He *was casting* out a demon". As was said to Asa, He will be with His people as they are with Him.
We find all these things in America, too -- the joys and the sorrows, only in a smaller way.
With love in Christ, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
August 7th, 1930.
My Dear Mr.------, -- I am hoping to see you especially so as to speak a little as to your paper entitled 'The Son' -- sent me in April. The fact that it was a carefully written article with a title occasioned my remarks. It had the same character as the paper on City boundaries -- it contained your definite thoughts -- 'I cannot but see', etc. -- and these would be received into the mind of any reader according to his estimate of your judgment. If he relied on you he would be affected by your remarks rightly or wrongly. The fact that you profess to be questioning implies that it *might* be the latter and this is most serious in view of the gravity of the subject. You might not hear from him, but damage had occurred -- even if he did mention the matter later you could say, 'My paper was in the nature of a question;' but this could not relieve you of responsibility. Thus the method you have adopted in these papers in dealing with the things of God has a grave moral defect. The paper conveys the idea of something carried by a Levite, having a title, etc., but it *professes* to be an uncertainty and so unworthy of such dignity. In spite of this it will influence its readers according to the reputation of the Levite
{280}
that carried it. I am speaking of the principle of handling divine things in this way. It is a kind of element that would start a fire, @Exodus 22: 6. As I said, I write of the principle of the paper. Besides, as far as I was concerned, you could have spoken or written me, months having elapsed between the time of the meetings at Barnet and the time of my sailing to England -- instead you sent me this paper.
Reduced to its basic contents, the paper negatived what I said at Barnet. Yet you asked me if I saw anything wrong in it!
Answering your enquiry (not your P.S. of July 28th) as to @Matthew 11: 27 and 28: 19, I would say that I understand the titles or names mentioned as those taken in the declaration or revelation of God. Before touching the main point I would remark that it is quite obvious that *Holy* Spirit is a designation of that Divine Person as having to do with evil or unholiness. There would be no need for it ('holy' ) otherwise. The word Spirit (breath or wind) is evidently used to convey to men how God in that Person was acting in creation. All such activities had in view the Spirit coming on Jesus. Mediatorship all centres in Christ, the Son, in manhood. The mediatorial principle was present from the beginning (*by* whom, etc.), but anticipated the incarnation. All things have been created by Him and for Him.
In presenting the Person of Christ the Holy Spirit begins with designations applying to Him *as Man*, such as the Son, the Word, Wisdom, etc., but this is far from saying that these applied to Him as in the form of God. In @Romans 9: 5 "Christ" is said to exist God over all, but clearly we cannot say that that term always applied in that existence. It implies that He is anointed and so takes a place below proper Deity. The same remarks cover the designation Son. Although there is the clearest evidence that it indicates His personal deity, yet He says, "The Son can do nothing of Himself", and that no one knows that hour, "nor the Son" -- these statements do not convey Deity but rather that One who has, as to His Person, part in it has taken a relatively inferior position to carry out the will of God. This is as clear as anything in Scripture and so to make terms which convey this latter apply to or characterise the Person as in the form of God is unscriptural.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
{281}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
August 29th, 1930.
My Dear Mrs. Morford, -- I duly received yours of the 15th inst. and all the Notes you mention. So far I have revised and sent to Mr. Nunnerley 13 sets to be published immediately and at a low price. I have also revised the Belfast/Dublin Notes and sent them to Miss Greeves. So these books should be in circulation within two months.
I sent two sets of Worcester notes to Miss Newlands yesterday, thinking she would like to look over them. I shall send the others to her as ready. Miss N. knows my viewpoint well and so could make changes in the Notes which greatly lightened my work.
I am very much afraid of *too much* going into print from me and I am cast on God about this. Of course things should stand on their merit, but brethren like variety not only of matter but of *names*.
We are very thankful for the cheerful report about Miss Newlands, and earnestly trust she continues to gain strength, through the mercy of God. Thankful also to hear of Mr. Berny. I trust the change will greatly benefit him. Please convey our love to him or Mrs. B. as you have opportunity.
And now I wish to thank you for your kind co-operation with the Notes. I trust you are not unduly taxed with the work.
My wife and I are leaving tonight for Detroit for three-days meetings there. Our united love in Christ to you and all.
Yours affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 13th, 1930.
Miss Joan Wells.
My Dear Joan, -- Mrs. Taylor and I were most interested in your sweet letter of July 25th. I should have answered it and the one from your dear father, earlier, only my hands have been more than full since returning to New York.
We are delighted to think of your resolve to take a firm stand for the Lord in your new school. May He bless and support you in every way! As we face difficulties in faith, depending on Him, we are not only victorious, but we *grow* through the experience. I have thought much lately of Jairus¬ daughter,
{282}
whom the Lord raised up from the dead. Being young she was a subject for *further development*. She had heard the Lord's voice saying, "Damsel, I say unto thee arise". It says, she *walked;* her would henceforth take character from the experience she had with the Lord. It does not say she *talked*, although girls are rarely behind in this!! Thus we may see that a girl's walk is the important feature. I am sure that you will see what I mean, and that the Lord may help you in your walk and ways will be the subject of our prayers for you. Being the eldest in the family He would use you as an example to all your brothers and sisters, and a comfort to your parents. While at Detroit lately -- attending special meetings -- a dear girl of eleven and a half years was staying in the same house as we and she got definite blessing from the Lord at one of the meetings. It was delightful to hear her speak of the joy she had as accepting the Lord Jesus as her Saviour.
With our united love to all you dear children,
I am, Your affectionate friend,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 17th, 1930.
My Dear Brother, -- I have been long in replying to your letter of July 18th, but it is because of want of time.
I quite agree that the dealing with sin by the people of God should have a public *bearing;* all who might be interested should know that the great principle of judging evil is maintained.
In detail, however, this, the mode of procedure, would be regulated by wisdom. If a special meeting is called, as you mention, of course, only those in fellowship -- those breaking bread -- would be present. I cannot see how 'any professing Christian in the place could rightly claim to be there'. If such persons are disregarding Christian fellowship, expressed in the Lord's supper, how can they 'rightfully' claim to have part in discipline? If identified with current religious denominations, or otherwise worldly, they are under discipline themselves in principle, for those who are seeking to keep the commandments of the Lord, naming His Name, in the town or place have withdrawn from them (@2 Timothy 2). "Ye and my spirit being gathered together, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ" (@1 Corinthians 5: 4) -- "Ye" corresponds with those
{283}
truly in fellowship *now*, as @2 Timothy 2: 22; not to all 'professing' Christians.
If the meeting for discipline takes place after a prayer or reading meeting and interested or exercised persons are present at the latter, it would be right to let them remain *perhaps*, so that they might see that holiness is maintained, although unless they are clear themselves it is not right that they should have *part* in the discipline. As far as I know brethren are enabled of the Lord to act wisely in these matters. They are indeed the children of wisdom.
With love in the Lord, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- It is of immense importance to keep the whole assembly steadily in view in our collective services, being governed at the same time by 2 Timothy. We are thus preserved from sectarianism. Formal routine tends to the latter. But as with Him, the Lord gives such power and tone to our actions that we are free from, and so cannot be righteously charged with, it. As a matter of fact we are, however in power, regarded as sectarian, for nominal Christians, or even true Christians not walking in obedience, are unable to think of us otherwise. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 30th, 1930.
Mr. E. J. Hemmings.
Beloved Brother, -- I wish to thank you for your letter of the 1st instant and the account of the visit by you and Mr. Cooper to the Baltic Countries¦. I earnestly trust and pray that there may be fruit for God from the seed sown. The energy shown by you both in working in such difficult fields, also by Messrs. Fiske and Crocker in visiting Iceland, is cheering and leads one to pray that others may also be led to move out on to fresh grounds.
There can be no doubt that the work intended by the Lord for those to whom He has given the light of Christ and the church is to move in the unfolding of *positive* truth, exemplifying it in our ways. This is the sure way of maintaining the truth --
¦This is the first contact with Miss Stenbock before she was breaking bread. -- Editor
{284}
"for a testimony to them", as the Lord Himself says, and in this respect the movement for less costly written ministry will be, I believe, prospered by Him, for in this way believers will be reached who could not be orally. But contact with our brethren is of special importance and so I am cast on the Lord to lead to more energy and sacrifice in this service.
The brethren in America are more than holding their own by the Lord's help, but this is not saying very much, and as considerable ability is developing, especially in this district, I am encouraged to hope that there may be more abounding in the work of the Lord.
We received your cable relative to the sister arriving here, and my son Jim went to meet her but he found she had been evidently detained by the immigration authorities and left a note. We have not heard from her, however. If you have her address, send it and we shall try to see her.
I purpose attending special meetings at Toronto next week. Two of our grandchildren are laid up with the dreadful disease 'infantile paralysis'. We are cast upon God about them, I need not say.
With love in Christ, in which my wife would join, I am,
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 30th, 1930.
My Dear Mrs. Morford, -- Thanks for all notes sent -- all you mentioned have come, including Peterborough. I am now working on them, but they shall not be finished before December 1st, as I am subject to many calls; but if this volume is published about February it will meet a need I trust.
Many thanks again for your kind co-operation in this service, in which I am sure you have the sense of the Lord's approval, as I have. Blessed indeed are all who in any degree help to minister a portion of meat to the "household". I am encouraged to believe that the Lord will take advantage of this movement to make printed ministry less expensive to cause it to become more widespread, extending to many of Zion's poor to whom it would otherwise never come.
It is of great importance that accuracy should mark what is
{285}
published in print, and I have been greatly aided in this respect by Miss Newlands and now through you; for however careful one may be he is apt to miss a mistake at times while a second eye would catch it.
In *many* publications during recent years I have noticed errors -- not only clerical or 'slips', but also developed thoughts -- that could not have appeared had the articles been looked over by competent persons other than the writers.
I am so thankful for your report of dear Miss Newland's health. It is good of the Lord to spare her to us, but I fear she must suffer much. I have very great sympathy with her, especially as I am so poor in enduring illness myself.
I trust you keep well and that you find help from the Lord in every way, proving the widow's portion. The Lord encourages us to take up *special* promises.
My wife's health has been poor lately and we are in great distress by the illness of two of our dear grandchildren with the dreadful disease, 'infantile paralysis'. They are very bad cases too -- the only children of our oldest son Allen. They live in Portland, Maine, one of the children being in a hospital there and the other in Boston. Perhaps you will mention this to Miss Newlands as you have opportunity, as I am unable to write now. The children are recovering, thank God. Their mother is poorly too, so Allen has a heavy load, but he seems to obtain great help from God in it.
Our united love to you and to all your household.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 15th, 1930.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I have to thank you for two letters, also for a cable from France. We are grieved to know of the dear Blanc's loss, and I trust God will comfort and bless the dear couple in their affliction. I shall send them a line, please God.
I am assured there was help from the Lord at Valence and St. Etienne. We remembered you all as together.
The removal of beloved Miss Newlands would touch you as it does us. She was a remarkable vessel indeed and, for me, London will not seem itself without her. The Lord, I am sure,
{286}
would have us feel the loss; as we do He will come in for us.
Mr. Jerrard too -- of sterling value in the testimony, particularly of late years.
You will be back from the Continent by the time this reaches you. I trust you find your sister and Lois well and the latter showing signs of growth. I trust also your dear brother and sister at Harrow and all theirs are well and helped of God in every way.
I returned from Toronto on Wednesday, having attended special meetings there over the week-end. The Lord helped us as together. There were less visitors than last year, particularly from the States, but the average attendance I thought about as large. There is a nice work of God in Toronto and Ontario generally. I returned via Rochester and had a meeting there in which there was help.
I went to Canada by Boston, particularly to see Allen and Georgina and their two dear children, who are very ill with infantile paralysis. Their lives are spared mercifully of God, but their recovery is likely to be slow and, of course, the danger of after effects is serious. But all is in God's hands. No doubt a rich education is in view for the dear parents and the children too. Alas! we are slow to take advantage of such opportunities. I believe Allen is being helped through this and the sorrow of last year -- the severe illness of Georgina.
I hear of slight improvement in L. Emtage. I am thankful to have good news, through Mr. Hayne, of Jamaica. But it appears the great sorrow in Kingston and Half-Way Tree remains.
Meetings are purposed in the West as usual, and I trust God will help the brethren -- Chicago, Council Bluffs, Los Angeles, etc.; also in Plainfield and Knoxville. I feel unable to take the trip to the Coast this year. The cold of the Middle West affects me seriously.
With love in Christ to you all in which my wife joins, I am, affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- Many thanks for Romaine's book sent from library -- evidently by you. The lecture on 'The Self Existence of Jesus' is *very* remarkable. I have copied part and sent book back. -- J.T.
I am hoping to hear of Dulwich and Eltham 'coming in'.
{287}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 19th, 1930.
Mr. J. Owen Smith.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your letter and suggestion of another meeting at Bedford. It commends itself to me, and please God, I shall fall in with any arrangement made. I think Bedford a good centre. Of course the matter can be left open until I am in England again. If the Lord permit, I should be crossing in late March.
I am cheered, I need not say, by the good report you give of Bedford and district. May the Lord continue to bless you all! God looks for His people to be before Him in service according to His requirements. I have been noting lately how *details* appear in the revival under Josiah. We had @2 Chronicles 34 and 35 at the conference at Toronto this month and had much help.
How good the news is of the ministry of Mr. Trevvett at Cambridge! What you mention of DeMann is also interesting. It will be an important matter indeed if the truth obtains a foothold in Holland.
The meetings at Toronto were well sustained and I hear of help at meetings at Winnipeg at the same time.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Smith, the baby and yourself and the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- Herr Kunste had written me also.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 21st, 1930.
Mr. A. J. H. Brown.
Beloved Brother, -- I am very glad of a line from you and what you write as to the 'box' rather commends itself to me; it certainly should not be made to appear as *part* of the Lord's supper. Thus if, as you suggest, it is placed by itself on the table -- that is, at a distance considerably greater than that separating the bread and cup -- the Supper would retain its own distinctness and the box would be in *seemly* evidence, denoting our practical response to what is divinely presented in the 'emblems'.
As regards `172:3, verse 3, I quite follow your objection, but the lines you note are clearly based on @Philippians 3, and while the apostle mentions certain things which, on account of Christ, he counted loss, in verse 8 he says, "Surely I count
{288}
also all things to be loss". Of course "things" cannot be said to include 'persons' and therefore not one's wife and children. 'The dearest object of our love' would include persons and so is not literally right; that is, if we view the matter purely from the standpoint of the wilderness.
But there is another viewpoint -- that of new creation. "In Christ Jesus" there is no male or female. And has not @Luke 14: 26 to be read in the light of this? Philippians 3 would be on the same line, the apostle having the *full* thought of God for him in view; and so elsewhere he says, "we henceforth know no one according to flesh".
What has to be owned therefore is that Philippians 3 implies a spiritual stature and energy far beyond most, if not all, today, and so we are shut up to the necessity of taking it up in an *abstract* way. This is warranted; indeed otherwise there is *much* which we should be obliged to avoid either singing or saying. While we cannot regard persons -- believing wives, etc. -- as loss or dross, natural relationships, in the sense of what they afford, may be so regarded as *compared with Christ*. It is a question of appraisement, Christ in glory being the standard.
No doubt the writer of the hymn did not include persons (Christians) in 'dross', but literally they cannot be excluded as 'objects' of love, and so the line should be altered, as you say. As applying to things attaching to us in the flesh, in which we would live naturally, the line could be sung, however. Please God, I shall mention your remarks as the hymn is considered.
I am very thankful to hear of your visit to the north. The recovery at Cullen is a great mercy.
I have recently attended special meetings at Toronto where the Lord graciously helped His people as together. Next week meetings will, please God, be held at Council Bluffs and Plainfield.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 4th, 1930.
Beloved Brother, -- I wish to thank you for two letters and enclosures.
As regards @Deuteronomy 21, there can be no doubt that it
{289}
conveys a principle governing such a position as Bexley Heath. It has been so used in several cases and the Lord has confirmed the application of the principle of proximity.
What has to be borne in mind is that fellowship is general as well as local, hence when a division occurs in a meeting, fellowship in the former sense is involved, and so *in principle* all have to say to it. "Thine elders and thy judges" (verse 2) implies this for those of Israel are in view. In agreement with this, saints generally today would wisely leave a matter such as Bexley Heath in the hands of the meeting or meetings nearest. The fact that @Deuteronomy 21 deals also with the establishment of guilt or innocency in the nearby city, does not invalidate the principle of proximity.
The most important feature in the chapter is the priests. These refer to spirituality (ability to judge), and if this does not exist in a meetings confidence by saints elsewhere could not wisely (believers characteristically are wisdom's children) be placed in it, and so its nearness to the scene of trouble would fail of importance; hence meetings further afield, in which there is spiritual ability to judge, would be responsible to take part in the matter.
Thus the procedure would be on a moral basis, the work of God in His people being taken into account. The position would be one of general fellowship, into which the adjustment of the saints necessarily enters. Thus wisdom would leave the adjustment of the case with the nearest meeting or meetings, being assured of sufficient priestly integrity and ability existing in it or them to form a godly judgment.
This is exactly what marked the handling of the Bexley Heath case. There was general confidence in Sidcup, and this was strengthened by other nearby meetings confirming what Sidcup did.
As a matter of fact the situation at Bexley Heath was "already judged" (@1 Corinthians 5: 3), for the course of Mr. M------ and his party was widely known, and the occasion of much sorrow; so that when they seceded from their brethren, there was very little doubt anywhere as to where right was; indeed, those who best know the facts recognised thankfully that the Lord had come in for deliverance.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
{290}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 9th, 1930.
Mr. W. Stanford.
Beloved Brother, -- I am ashamed that your letter has remained so long unanswered. It is not because I did not value it, for I did and I enjoyed reading your remarks on Jonah.
That God should bring a man who acted in such a self-willed way into such circumstances in recovering him that his experiences corresponded so strikingly with the sufferings of Christ is indeed remarkable. The potentialities of the case account for it, I suppose, as added to God's *sovereign* way. As to the former, His underlying work and the great result -- in Jonah himself and in Israel, whom he typified -- account for the great pains, patience and grace shown. As to the latter, why should He not honour a servant thus if He pleased? The brief reference to Jonah in @2 Kings 14 is significant and throws much light on the book. He is there 'Jehovah's servant Jonah the prophet'. "The word of Jehovah" in this passage has reference to His compassion for Israel.
I am very interested in the news of the work of God in your daughters, and I hope your son will not despise his birthright. When decision is postponed until young people reach their 'twenties' the enemy has an advantage as the mind is more set and independent and the heart less impressionable.
The work of God in America is encouraging on the whole. Since returning from England I have visited many places: Detroit, Toronto, Boston, Rochester, Baltimore, Philadelphia, etc., etc., and found definite interest in all. A large number gathered at Toronto last month and the Lord helped us over three days. At Plainfield two weeks ago a large number also came together and we had similar help and a very happy season. Similar meetings have been held in the western parts of the Continent.
We shall be thinking of the brethren in Great Britain especially in view of the many extra meetings to be held -- that the Lord may crown the year for you all with His goodness. One is greatly touched with the evidence of His hand being over His people.
My wife unites with me in love in Christ to Mrs. Stanford and you all.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
If you have opportunity convey our love in the Lord to Mrs. Hindley and her family. We think of her in her bereavement. -- J.T.
{291}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 13th, 1930.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- I was glad to receive your letter and to learn through it of your movements among the saints, involving, mutual help and cheer.
I note you are booked to sail for New Zealand on January 7th so that you have still a considerable time to spend in America. No doubt you will visit Seattle and all the meetings in British Columbia. I trust you will be helped of the Lord in your service.
The report that Mr. Myles was printing at the back of his house is not true; so far Mr. Morrish is doing all the printing. No doubt you will be aware of this by this time.
As regard 'natural ability' -- viewed as covering what one is as a creature of God (his members, faculties, etc.) -- it is used in His service, indeed without a body we could not serve. Thus Romans requires our "members" to be yielded up as instruments of righteousness to God. The work of God in us affects the whole 'moral being' -- we are born 'throughout' @John 3 -- and this works out in our bodies. The natural *mind* is polluted and so has to be renewed, but the physical organs, including the brain, are used of God. The work of God affects the moral being, mind, affections, etc., and these operate through the physical members.
These latter, involving *graded capacity*, are necessarily in view as God selects a man for His service; thus we have in @Matthew 25: 15 "according to his particular ability". Paul was an "elect vessel", and of course the "vessel" would include his physical members. God had, so to speak, gone a long way up the stream of his history to prepare him. He had separated him from his mother's womb; and he says he served God from his forefathers.
Our son's children are still very ill, I regret to say, but we are cast on God as to them and we are assured that He will reach His end in the affliction. They are both seriously paralysed, and are undergoing treatment in a hospital in Boston -- the best available.
I trust you both will have a good and comfortable crossing and that you will find occasion of encouragement in Wellington and New Zealand generally.
With our united love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea and yourself, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{292}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 17th, 1930.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I value much the information in the two letters I received from you recently. I regret the blunder as to dear Andre Blanc. I wrote Gabriel at once, expressing our sympathy. I had thought it was Paul's child. I told Dr. and Mrs. Borden and they sympathise also. *They* go on fairly well.
We are *so* thankful to hear of Dulwich and I earnestly trust Eltham will soon move -- showing an endeavour to keep the unity of the Spirit. As far as I see Sidcup acted in keeping with @Deuteronomy 21 as to Bexley Heath. Verse 2 refers to *general* responsibility, and verse 4 to local. The priestly element, verse 5, is general. It is remarkable how the elevated character of the priesthood is introduced.
Modesto assumed the right to settle the Berkeley matter as the nearest meeting on the principle of local responsibility, but the brothers there ignored *general* fellowship. It is clear that an action of a meeting (assembly) *outside itself* cannot be *binding* on others; thus when a company breaks up, fellowship in a general sense is involved. Modesto ignored this and had to withdraw its action. Modesto ignored the judgment of brethren in a general sense, not taking Los Angeles, etc., into account. Sidcup *did* take into account the judgment of nearby meetings -- they expressing their concurrence in Sidcup's action. The same is true in the Swansea matter.
I am thinking of you and all the dear brethren who will be ministering during the holidays.
Lately I have been to Toronto, Rochester, Boston area, Baltimore and Philadelphia with much cheer. I hope to be in Boston again for the 25th instant and then South Manchester. Mr. Gill is to be at Chicago. We had a remarkably good time at Plainfield on Thanksgiving Day. The work of God indeed in this district affords remarkable encouragement.
We were expecting your brother and his wife for dinner tonight, but the latter is poorly and so they cannot be with us. We are arranging for a visit after the holidays, please God. They attended the meetings at Plainfield. We remember dear Lois.
Allen's children are now together in an excellent hospital in Boston. God has something for the parents and us all in this sorrow. They are, I may say, completely paralysed. So far their recovery is very slow.
{293}
We trust Miss Lyon keeps well. Our united love in Christ to you all.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- I note your remarks as to Mr. H------¬s article which commend themselves. "Vessel" does not convey the thought of our Lord in John. A *dwelling* is not the idea of a vessel -- it is greater as you intimate. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 9th, 1931.
Mr. D------.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of the 7th inst. has just come and I thank you for it.
The first and chief fact to be noted in this Columbus matter is that it is occasioned by a request for fellowship in their breaking bread there, addressed to the nearest meetings, by a few saints resident in that city. Should this be granted or not? Who should immediately say? It is a matter which *in principle* concerns all, but @Deuteronomy 21 plainly indicates that it lies with the nearest meeting (or meetings, so as to assure confidence, if it does not appear there is sufficient priestly discernment and intelligence in the one), and this way has been universally recognised among the saints, and the Lord has very definitely owned it. Why should it be disregarded in the present case? The brethren who met at Chicago, as your letter states, 'Attached first importance to the Chicago meeting being free to commend the movement to the meetings nearest to Columbus -- they being responsible in the first part for the commendation of the brethren at Michigan City to the brethren generally'. There is no scriptural principle or precedent for a meeting or assembly commending another meeting to other meetings. The Lord's rights in the midst of "two or three" would be disregarded in such an action. To say that the few at Columbus cannot be regarded in this light would be very wrong. Severally they have been in happy fellowship with saints generally, and as loving the Lord He would own and help them in seeking to remember Him as He requested and to maintain His interests where they
{294}
reside. Fellowship formally extended to them only recognises what is there.
But if it be said that Chicago should commend them as individuals (your letters says, 'the movement', which would be collective) this also would be unscriptural, for there was a recognised meeting at Michigan City before most of those who had resided there moved to Columbus, and any commendation should be by it. Besides, some of the few at Columbus never lived at Michigan City or near Chicago, and thus why should Chicago commend them? The company at Columbus is composed of some who resided there for years, as I said, others who had lived at Indianapolis, but more recently at Michigan City, and who moved to Columbus some time ago, others who lived regularly at Michigan City, but moved to Columbus also some time ago, and others who moved quite recently from Michigan City. That it should be made of first importance that a meeting much further away than three or four others should commend this company to the 'meeting nearest' is certainly a novelty. But it is far worse, it would involve the overthrow of the economy of the assembly, this being connected with companies in localities, each (while in one fellowship) being responsible to the Lord; the local principle widening out as necessity requires, as in the present case, but never leaping over those who should, as near, take up responsibility as neighbours.
The idea of a *meeting* moving from one city to another is inadmissible -- it would be a meeting on wheels for a time, which would negate the local feature which Scripture requires; besides, it could not be said of the company at Columbus, for, as I said, some of them never lived at Michigan City.
The brethren meeting at Chicago to consider this matter have no status warranting them to pronounce on conditions existing at Columbus. They could, of course, take counsel as to the truth or principles governing such a position, but judgment as to conduct of any at Columbus should be left with the company at Columbus. Or if it were evident that it could not be dealt with there it should lie with the nearest meeting, according to the principle of "his neighbour next unto his house" (@Exodus 12: 4), or the "city that is nearest", (@Deuteronomy 21: 3). To attach any disciplinary authority to such a meeting as was held at Chicago would soon destroy the local principle established in Scripture and land the saints into metropolitanism
{295}
or the principle of a general assembly. What you say happened at Chicago is of this kind; 'It was quite understood that the brethren at Chicago had expressed themselves that no encouragement should be given to them (the H------ s) to move about', etc. That brethren (who in this case hitherto enjoyed the fellowship in confidence of saints generally) should be thus disciplined by brethren representing several meetings and resident for the most part far away from their own locality, is a wrong done to them, and highly objectionable to any sensitive mind having a knowledge of the economy of the assembly. It is, as I said, metropolitanism.
The meeting which existed at Michigan City had an assembly status equal to that at Chicago or any other, and so while it continued, any leaving Michigan City for another place would of course be commended by it. For a brother or sister in these circumstances to ask for a letter of commendation from Chicago would be out of order; and then having moved to another place his or her local responsibility would be there, and not in the place vacated. Thus the local responsibility of all those now residing in Columbus is in Columbus. The Lord will support and bless them there as they are subject to Him, and He will order the extension of fellowship to them (through the neighbouring meeting, as it is subject to His will) in due course.
Some have alleged that I am supporting Mr. H------, but this is not the point at all; it is a question of the truth or principles that govern the situation which has arisen in a most extraordinary way. A difficulty that should have been regarded as local to Columbus and the adjacent meeting (persons further away possessing needed information furnishing it, of course) has become very widespread through the attitude and actions of those at Chicago, and confirmed by those gathered at the special meetings mentioned.
My wife and I are glad to hear of you all; especially that Mrs D------¬s health is improving and that the elder children are interested in the truth. May God lead them on!
Our united love in Christ to you all and to the saints.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{296}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January, 1931.
Mr. D------.
My Dear Brother, -- Answering your letter of the 15th inst. I would say that I am very thankful that you concur in all I said in my previous letter as to local responsibility. This involves the procedure in the two special meetings held in Chicago, for according to the notice of them signed by 4 brothers, they were composed Of '40 brothers from 12 different meetings' to form a 'judgment' as to matters local to another city and this judgment was formally signed by 4 brothers, addressed to a brother in that city and sent to him. This brother was mainly the subject of the 'judgment'. This is directly contrary to the word of God in @Deuteronomy are 21: 18 - 21, in which the parents of the *rebellious* son are directed to bring him to the elders of *his* city and to the gate of *his* place, etc. Whatever, therefore, the conduct of Mr. H------ or others in Columbus, whether in Michigan City or elsewhere, the enquiry should be at Columbus and not at Chicago, and those who took part in the unscriptural proceedings at Chicago will need to clear themselves before God and their brethren.
As a matter of fact it is doubtful that the conduct of any of us would bear such an unscriptural and consequently unspiritual examination as Mr. H------¬s was submitted to. The notice shows that the testimony of one witness was accepted, e.g. that of Mr. J------. If, for instance, your movement from Toronto to London, including your history and relations in the former city, was investigated in *this* way at that time you would object, I am sure. Suppose the investigation was by '40 brothers from 12 different meetings met together' at Hamilton, the brethren there having been adverse to you. It would be wrong (because of the composition of the enquiry meeting and the locality) even at Toronto. In the present case the error is worse, for Mr. H------ had not left Chicago, not having lived there, but in Michigan City.
You enquire, 'Does the fact not still exist, that the brethren at Michigan City formally came together and agreed to *all* moving to Columbus?' Does it exist? You should know, as having attended the enquiry meetings. Was it *proved* there? If not it must be ruled out. The discontinuance of a meeting does not in itself involve any principle. I could cite *many* instances of meetings discontinuing and I never heard complaint
{297}
of transgression as to them. But even were there this it would need to be dealt with in the local setting of the person or persons involved. I have known meetings discontinued in a town and set up in another, the same persons, and no one questioned this. It was a matter of convenience, which the Lord would own.
As regards the move from Michigan City, I never knew of such pains taken to acquaint brethren generally of such an occurrence, Chicago being included, and yet there was no objection, as far as I know, until the request was made for fellowship in the breaking of bread at Columbus. If any divine principle was being violated this should have been brought to the attention of those who resided at Michigan City, that is, while they remained there. I saw friendly correspondence between my brother at Chicago and Mr. H------ in November relative to the latter's removal to Columbus and no objection was made.
You ask 'Is it right that the H------ s should move freely among the saints?' According to authentic information from your parts you had decided that they should not, basing your decision on what was judged at Chicago, and that it was actually put into effect. This, as I said in my last letter, is unwarranted, as these brethren are not under discipline by any competent authority.
You will be aware that ------ has condemned his part in this whole matter; I hope you will do the same, dear brother.
It is due to the Lord and your brethren that you should.
Affectionately in the Lord,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 14th, 1931.
Mr. A------.
My Dear Brother, -- A copy of a letter written to Mr. H------ from Chicago dated January 5th was sent to New York. This letter records a procedure in that city which disregarded a feature of the truth governing the assembly, and as the brethren at Cincinnati are, according to the letter, involved in this, I think it right to send a line. I do so especially as the brethren at Cincinnati form the nearest meeting to Columbus and so the immediate responsibility of enquiring as before the Lord into the position or state of the saints residing in this city falls to them.
{298}
The truth set aside is that taught in @Deuteronomy 21: 1 - 9 and like passages in the Old Testament, such as @Exodus 12: 4, bearing on and amplifying the *local* aspect of the assembly as presented in the two epistles to Corinth. There we have God's assembly, in a city, and it is said to be His temple and Christ's body, the Spirit of God being there. Thus it is furnished in every way to meet its obligations, to act for God in its own sphere. Gifts are set in the assembly (chapter 12) in its universal aspect, and of course, these are for all, and so where available may be consulted, especially "governments" in a circumstance such as that at Columbus. But the mind of God as to any matter may be sought in His temple in a local assembly, and power, in the Spirit, is available to carry it out. What is thus set out in the Corinthian letters applies to Cincinnati or any place in which saints are gathered to the Lord's name.
The Chicago letter states that 'the brethren from Indianapolis and Cincinnati desired the judgment of their brethren from other parts in regard to what is right in relation to Columbus; consequently 40 brothers from 12 meetings met together'. Thus, we have a meeting called in Chicago to judge of matters relative to saints in Columbus, a city hundreds of miles away, and this meeting composed of brothers from many gatherings, some of which are thousands of miles away from the place concerning which enquiry is to be made and judgment to be passed! The number of meetings is mentioned, as if this added weight, whereas in truth if all the meetings in the world were represented, this would only add to the error. It would be a 'general council' such as Rome would convene. This is not warranted by Scripture, on the contrary these councils from an early date obliterated the status of the local assembly as taught in @1 and 2 Corinthians, which I have mentioned. It will be serious indeed if this heritage, which the Lord has restored to His people, should again become lost. His place and authority in the midst of two or three gathered to His name would thus cease.
As I have already said in relation to @1 Corinthians 12, counsel may rightly be sought where needed from any brother or brothers capable by wisdom or experience of giving it, but this is an entirely different matter from a lot of brothers from different localities 'met together' to arrive at a 'judgment' as to matters *local*, especially when local to another city. Besides, any counsel obtained from brothers supposed competent
{299}
to give it should be taken up by those who sought it and weighed before the Lord in their locality so that they should be assured of its being according to His mind.
The meeting at Chicago is said to have reached 'a judgment' which according to the information I have in addition to the Chicago letter, is of a piece with the composition and assumed status of the meeting -- it has not scriptural support. Mr. D------ who attended the meetings held, writes me as follows 'The brethren representing several meetings at Chicago attached first importance to the Chicago meeting being free to commend the movement to the meetings nearest to Columbus, they being responsible in the first part for the commendation of the brethren at Michigan City to the brethren generally'. This is in keeping with Mr.------¬s judgment conveyed in a letter to Mr. H------ before he went to Chicago. The Chicago letter does not go so far, but nevertheless records the unscriptural feature, that a meeting being near can recommend another meeting to other meetings or 'brethren generally' and that having done so it retains a certain sponsorship for it which the latter has to recognise. All this is a human way of viewing and dealing with the things of God, having no scriptural sanction; indeed Scripture is not appealed to in this letter. The idea entering into a company of saints beginning to break bread in a place, answering the Lord's request, is that brethren in the nearest meeting recognise that the features of the assembly are there (however small and feeble) and so extend fellowship. Normally, all other meetings accept this and so "keep the unity of the Spirit". One assembly assuming oversight or sponsorship over another, in however little a degree, to this extent disregards the Lord's place and rights in the latter.
You will understand that I am not entering into the wisdom (according to records Chicago was notified of the intended move to Columbus) or unwisdom of what was done at Michigan City; these are matters which brethren at Cincinnati and Columbus will no doubt enquire into in due course; I am concerned about the divine principles that were disregarded at Chicago and that the brethren at Cincinnati may be helped as waiting on God in the responsibility as to Columbus that under Him has come to them. Our testimony largely lies in adhering to what is 'written', in being governed by the light intended by God for our guidance in any position or service to which we may be called.
{300}
I enclose copy of a paper written for publication in regard of a current exercise in England; it bears on the present case, as you will see. It may be of help to you and the brethren.
Love in Christ to you all.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 19th, 1931.
Mr. McL------.
My Dear Brother, -- What I have seen in answer to the request for fellowship by the saints at Columbus fixes attention almost entirely on Mr. H------ and the evident idea of a company of saints seeking to walk together in Christian fellowship is overlooked. Even though the proposed time set for the breaking of bread did not afford as much time for consideration as some thought necessary, a brotherly word of counsel to wait with the assurance that inquiry would be at once made by those immediately responsible (those in the nearest meeting) would have shown a shepherd spirit. It may be said that this was done, but was it? I believe I have accurate information, and from it I learn that there has been no inquiry made yet *at Columbus*, where it should be made according to Scripture (see the emphasis on "*his* city" in @Deuteronomy 21: 18 - 21). The matter was surely important, involving something for Christ, and if it was inconvenient for brothers near to go to Columbus immediately, they could at least make clear that they *would go*.
Instead of this, inquiry was made *in Chicago*, where it should *not* be made, that city being farther away than four others where meetings are. This led to meetings being held in Chicago composed of '40 brothers from 12 different meetings' to form a judgment as to Columbus. The inquiry involved accusations made against a brother in Columbus and a 'judgment' reached, this 'judgment', being signed by four brothers as addressed to the brother in question (Mr. H------ ) and sent to him at Columbus. In this there was disregard of the principle clearly set out in the passage quoted; the "rebellious son" (which expression is somewhat in keeping with what some in Chicago said of Mr. H------ !) is brought "unto the elders of *his* city, and unto the gate of *his* place". Note, it is not their -- the parents¬ -- city. Those responsible for those
{301}
inquiry meetings at Chicago therefore acted in an unscriptural way.
You will see that I am not, in what I am saying, seeking to justify Mr. H------, but rather to call attention to the serious way in which Scripture has been disregarded in the way the request of the saints at Columbus has been dealt with, particularly in those meetings at Chicago. But then all should seek to justify Mr. H------ if possible. I mean, "I *desire* to justify thee", as Elihu said. I have not seen this in any of the things said or written by those who had part in the Chicago meetings. Notwithstanding this, nothing has been proved against him involving fellowship. He had been in happy fellowship generally and received in ministry, taking the lead in Detroit at the end of November, and it was well known a considerable time before that he was moving to Columbus, and I saw happy correspondence between himself and my brother George in connection with his (H------¬s) move to Columbus, and then because of a proposal to break bread at Columbus (some irregularities being alleged, which even if true, were minor) this widespread storm arises! I understand that some in Cincinnati and Indianapolis said that those in Columbus should not be allowed to break bread if they came to either place. I understand also that much was made at Chicago of the movement from Michigan City, it being said in the letter to Mr. H------ that this was 'a breach of fellowship'. Why was this not taken up *while Mr. H -- - was in Michigan City;* it was known he was leaving? But in truth there was nothing to take up in this respect. The explanation of Mr. H------¬s removal from Michigan City was very full and made widely known, including Chicago. There was no injury done to anyone by it that I know of. To say that an 'injury' was done to the Lord is going beyond the facts; He will have a company in Columbus, and in all likelihood better results from a testimony there. This movement is spoken of as a 'great sorrow', 'breach of fellowship', etc., but these are mere words.
But I have by no means stated the whole case of the Chicago proceedings and so I send you copy of a letter I wrote to Mr. A.
With love in Christ to Mrs. McL------ and yourself.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{302}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 20th, 1931.
My Dear Mr------, -- Last week the thought arose in my mind that I should call and see you as to matters relative to Chicago and Columbus and I took counsel as to this, but the way did not seem clear, your health entering into this; but I am pressed to send you a line and to enclose with it some papers to indicate to you my grave concern as to this matter, especially the proceedings at Chicago.
In view of the seriousness of it, your part in what has transpired, and in view of our long acquaintance and identification, in large measure, in the testimony and service of our Lord, I feel it would be unbrotherly not to communicate with you in an open, frank way; with the hope, too, that my doing so may tend to defeat the current purpose of the common enemy.
There is no need for me to add much to this as the copies of letters I am sending will convey to you my mind on the salient features of the matter. But I do earnestly beg of you to weigh the scriptures the letters bring forward; perhaps having done so you may be able to take out of the enemy's hand the great advantage he has in the result of those meetings held in Chicago in relation to Columbus. These meetings, being contrary to the scriptural principles that should govern us in such circumstances, afford him means of damaging the Lord's interests -- His rights in the midst of two or three gathered to His name -- and any effort to defeat this will be pleasing to Him. What I write is not a question of *my* judgment as to an obscure case; what is involved is not obscure, the principle set out in the letters I enclose is as plainly and fully established and 'believed among us' as any truth I know of. The 'Glanton' conflict greatly helped to this end; God by His spirit made the rights of Christ in local gatherings clear then and He has been emphasising and confirming this feature ever since. The teaching of the Old Testament has greatly helped in this as amplifying the teaching of the Corinthian letters. There has been a constant effort to minimise the authority of the Old Testament, but the Lord says, "If ye do not believe his [Moses¬] writings, how shall ye believe my words?"
Thus if Mr. H------¬s conduct be even as bad as anyone might wish to make it, @Deuteronomy 21: 18 - 21 teaches that inquiry into it and a 'judgment' reached should not be in
{303}
Chicago, for the meeting there is not "his city". His city is Columbus (inclusive, according to @Deuteronomy 21: 1 - 9, of the nearest city to that, if necessary). It has been said that, applying @Deuteronomy 21: 1 - 9, Michigan City is the place of the "slain man" and that Chicago is the nearest city, but we cannot make verses 1 - 9 cancel verses 18 - 21 and Mr. H------ (the person in question, agreeing with the latter) is now residing in Columbus. Then there is no "slain man" as in Deuteronomy 21 in Michigan City. The fact that a meeting is given up in a place, saints moving from there for causes known best to themselves, does not by any means prove that a man has been slain (so to speak), otherwise many are guilty. To your and my knowledge many meetings have been discontinued by saints moving elsewhere, e.g., Passaic, Summit, Seabright, Newark, Chattanooga, Portland (Oregon), etc., etc., and I never knew of it being alleged that any right principle was thus violated or special damage done or a 'great sorrow' occasioned. It may be said, Michigan City is different, but this is not so, certainly not in principle, and details (even if some regard them as questionable) must be left between those responsible to God. It may be said that there was design, ulterior motives, etc., but this is but judging our brethren, as I know you own. There is nothing in the facts proved in this case to involve fellowship, nothing different in principle from other cases we know of, as stated above. I hear you say that the *last* brother and sister leaving Michigan City would need a letter of commendation from Chicago. Why so? Paul says, Do we need letters of commendation? They are not always needed. I and my wife do not take one anywhere. Letters of commendation are given when needed, and the brother going from Michigan City to Columbus would not need one from Chicago as he would be better known in Columbus than in Chicago.
Pardon length -- much more than I intended, but, I believe, of the Lord.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
(Note: -- Meetings at Passaic, Summit and Portland have been resumed. -- ED).
{304}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 21st, 1931.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your letter of the 3rd instant and enclosures, all of which are very interesting to us. I am glad you visited Ireland.
I much regret to hear of conditions in Glasgow, especially that the brethren there absented themselves from the Airdrie meetings. The position in that district is evidently very serious. I have followed the history of the difficulties there from the outset and I know the roots are deep. The Lord, I am assured, has His hand over the brethren there; were this not so, disintegration would have set in long since. I think the Messrs. Newlands have been fairly well taken into all the exercises. Judging of such matters by the general appearance (the failure to gain some in the neighbourhood, etc.) is misleading, for we cannot give people eyes to see, although it is also true that we may not afford them much worth seeing. Forest Hill is an example of how some are determined not to see.
I have written Mr. Myles a brief account of a serious difficulty existing in the West, caused by the brethren at Chicago interfering with a matter at Columbus, Ohio -- brethren in the latter place having requested from the nearest meetings fellowship in their beginning to break bread there. I have requested Mr. M. to let you see it.
I am sending you herewith some correspondence which will indicate what is at issue. The meetings held at Chicago, as you will observe, disregarded most important principles.------, H.G. and W. B -- were present and prominent, especially the first. The Glanton matter was never really gone through in the West and I have no doubt the Lord wishes to enforce the principles then maintained.
I sent a paper to R.B. on @Deuteronomy 21, also a copy to Frank S. and I shall be glad if you see it. Priesthood appearing in the local brethren as they accept responsibility before God for what may have happened is a very important feature.
We had your brother to our house but his wife and son could not come, the former being ill. I regret I could not see any genuine feeling as to God's claims in him. I note all you say, *God* can reach him, thus our part is prayer.
{305}
Our united love in Christ to your dear sister and yourself and Lois,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- The Westfield brethren are taking the matter up with ------ and so far he has cancelled his first letter.
We greatly need the prayers of saints.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 26th, 1931.
Mr. A------.
My Dear Brother, -- What pressed upon my mind in reading your letter of the 19th inst. was priesthood -- how essential it is to a right understanding and treatment of the request of our brethren at Columbus for the fellowship of their brethren in their breaking bread there. It is obviously dependent on the features of the assembly, however small, existing among them. This requires priestly or spiritual discernment, and for this diligent enquiry should be made *in the place*. See @Leviticus 14: 33 - 48 for this principle of careful local enquiry. In @Deuteronomy 21, where every controversy and stroke are to be at their word, the priests are said to be chosen of Jehovah to *bless* in His name. Malachi says, "The law of truth was in his mouth", and that the priest's lips should keep knowledge and the law should be sought at his mouth.
Your brethren who are concerned as to Columbus are enquiring whether these priestly features exist at Cincinnati. All are agreed as to proximity, but priesthood there is not clear, and this being lacking there can be no expectation of the mind of God coming through you. The wide detour to Chicago (I do not, of course, refer to the general fellowship meetings there) and the participation in a council of '40 brothers from 12 different meetings' met together there to judge of a matter at your doors was disregard of the law governing the position which true priests would insist on. The 'judgment' reached was not even sent to Columbus through you, but direct. You say the word 'judgment' should not have been used in the Chicago letter to Columbus, but those not present at the meetings are bound to accept what is formally stated by four
{306}
brothers, it conveys what *they* understood and meant. This is perfectly clear in the tenor of the whole letter.
You own that 'the number as gathered together (at Chicago) was quite large', but that this was evidently in accord with @Proverbs 11: 14, 15, etc. The same could be conveniently said for the different church councils, to which I referred in my previous letter, but it is making use of one scripture to overthrow another. There is indeed safety in a multitude of counsellors *as regulated by Scripture*, but the very opposite is the case where they are not, which has proved to be so in this instance, as ------¬s full acknowledgement with other evidences shows.
It is true that Chicago as the nearest meeting, had a certain responsibility as to Michigan City, while the meeting existed there, as Michigan City had as to Chicago, if anything compromising general fellowship arose; but the discontinuance of a meeting, in itself, is no breach of fellowship. I know of many instances of this, saints moving to other places, and I know of a meeting ceasing in a town, the same persons forming as a meeting in another town, and no one thought of transgression on the part of the persons involved. The information furnished to brethren generally, including Chicago, as to the movement from Michigan City, was fuller and wider than any I have ever seen of such a matter. This was a considerable time, too, before the final move, and yet no complaint (that I know of) was made until a request for fellowship was made at Columbus.
The responsibility of the nearest meeting to Columbus is now to determine whether conditions warranting Christian fellowship exist there, and if so to extend it; there is no option if the conditions exist. Making this recognition depend on Chicago being 'happy' will not carry a priestly conscience. Chicago should not take this ground; if brethren there know of conduct of any at Columbus involving fellowship they can prove it in a 'lawful assembly', that is, at Columbus (@Deuteronomy 21: 18 - 21). Their doing this cannot but be viewed in an unfavourable light by those who soberly weigh the facts of the relations between Chicago and Michigan City for some years past. Certain at Chicago had adverse feelings against certain at Michigan City, and last winter a meeting was held by brothers involved in both meetings, Mr. Gill being present. I saw a letter from him afterwards in which he stated that those from
{307}
Chicago had no case, or words to this effect. I also saw a letter from my brother to Mr. H------ also written shortly after, in which, in the friendliest terms, he reported that he had said to the brothers who had attended the above meeting, as all were returning to Chicago, that it was time they should stop talking about their brethren at Michigan City and start visiting them. He followed this up by a very friendly visit for a Lord's Day, a good few others accompanying him. Thus the difficulty seemed settled, and now it has flared up again. I mention all this, not to show that Mr. H------ was entirely justified in regard of this old sore or that the others were wrong, but as necessarily entering into the 'unhappiness' of Chicago and of its value as weighed in the balances of the sanctuary.
My letter is longer than intended, but I am very concerned before the Lord that the position of Columbus should be clarified -- that those immediately responsible to see to it may "see all things clearly". Their concern as priests, as I already said, will be not only to abide by the "law" but to make it effective and in this to minister to God and *bless* in His Name. That He may help you all in this will be my constant prayer.
Affectionately yours in the Lord,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 4th, 1931.
My Dear Mrs. Morford, -- I very much appreciate your thought as to the Notes I have on hand.
I am unable to decide anything as to them. Mr. Myles has mentioned considerable opposition to the publication of productions of mine, except in a limited way, and of course this cannot be overlooked or ignored. I am not sure, however, how widespread this criticism is or by whom. Did I know I should be the better able to judge of its nature. Mr. Myles sent me a copy of a letter from Mr. H------ in which the writer says my things should be limited in publication, all others also, but he and Dr.------ complained in this way to me three or four years ago, and I do not observe that Mr. H------ has reduced *his* volume; and were it not that it was shown that what Dr.------ wished to publish at that time was erroneous, his contributions would not be diminished. But *I* must not be too critical!
{308}
Do you not think we may leave these Notes for a little in view of much already current? If there seems room for another volume later in the year these can be published.
I am uncertain as to the time of our reaching your side of the Atlantic this year. This is mainly because of a trouble that has broken out in Chicago. I wrote of it to Mr. Myles and Mr. Lyon and you may have heard, so I will not go into details.
It was quite sudden. Mr.------, by cancelling an objectionable part he took at the enquiry meetings at Chicago greatly relieved the position, but the brethren at Chicago and others who attended the meetings have made no effort so far to meet their brethren's consciences. We are much cast on God, I need not say, as to these matters, and I am sure we may count on your prayers.
The Lord is greatly helping us in the New York district. There is general brotherly confidence and unity. At our monthly fellowship meetings we have been looking at *service* with remarkable interest and I believe much profit.
I trust you and yours keep well, as we are, thank God. Our grandchildren are improving, but slowly. I have no doubt this is necessary because of the parents and we all being slow learners.
My wife unites in love in Christ.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 6th, 1931.
Dr. McA------.
My Dear Brother. -- I am thankful you were free to answer my letter of the 15th ultimo, yours of the 3rd instant having come last evening. As you have kindly written in numbered sections, I can reply the more easily and I shall do so as nearly as possibly seriatim.
First: You say as to @Deuteronomy 21 and @Exodus 12 that you believe 'we' (the brethren who met at the enquiry meetings at Chicago as I understand) 'acted upon' them, in proof of this saying, 'we believe that we at Chicago were the neighbour to Michigan City'. The occasion of the meetings, as your letter of January 5th states, was a desire for the 'judgment' of brethren on the part of some from Indianapolis
{309}
and Cincinnati regarding *Columbus*, your being neighbour to Michigan City was therefore irrelevant. That *some* now in Columbus *had* resided in Michigan City cannot be made to weaken this, however much may be said as to what these should or should not have done. Brethren are now obliged to judge of all these matters as before God, and must "judge righteous judgment" as the Lord enjoins. To this end what does not directly bear on any point must in faithfulness be ruled out. I am sure you will own this as right and fair. Thus Chicago was *not* observing the scriptures quoted in coming together to judge of matters belonging to a locality to which four meetings are nearer than it. Nor did my brother recognise the above scriptures when he telephoned to a brother in Columbus that Chicago 'was not happy' that the breaking of bread should begin there; that he did this without furnishing reasons was arbitrary and disregardful of local responsibility. If information such as should prevent the breaking of bread was in his possession, this should be placed in proper, that is, local hands, and the Lord trusted to look after His interests. Apparent modifying occurrences cannot be admitted for two wrongs cannot make one right. At the brother's meeting this with other 'actions' of Chicago were viewed approvingly as paragraph 3 of Chicago letter states, the unscripturalness of the one I mention being clearly disregarded. Incidentally this also shows that the principle of judging existed at the said meetings and not merely the furnishing of counsel.
Second: What you remark as to the word 'judgment' does not at all show that it was misused in your letter; the whole document is pervaded by the thought of it. You quote @1 Corinthians 7: 40, but @Acts 15, which you appeal to in paragraph 3, is more fitting. The proceedings at Jerusalem were of the nature of an apostolic metropolitan council and could be permissible only under the then transitional circumstances; besides doctrine was considered and not local assembly matters. There are, of course, principles in the chapter which we may follow, such as brethren coming together locally to consider a matter and the assembly carrying a decision into effect, but the principle of a general or metropolitan assembly as applied since is false and destructive of @1 and 2 Corinthians as shown in church history.
As to the word 'judgment', you will find in @Acts 15 what corresponds with the proceedings at Chicago much more
{310}
accurately than @1 Corinthians 7. James says (verse 19), "I judge", etc., then what he formulated was embodied in a letter by the apostles and elders with the whole assembly, "having arrived at a common judgment". Making due allowance for the great differences in persons, etc., this is what happened at Chicago. Mr.------ indicated the judgment, reading his letter to Mr. H------ of December 24th in the final (I understand there were three meetings) meeting and this was embodied in the letter of January 5th and *sent to the saints at Columbus*. The evidence of all this is Chicago's letter, Mr. D------¬s letters to me, and Mr.------¬s personal account to me. As regards @1 Corinthians 7: 40, Paul's "judgment" *was* such and would be so regarded by a faithful heart. If applied to such a case as Columbus it would be brethren there or at Cincinnati taking the considered opinion or judgment of a brother or brothers capable of giving it, to the Lord and having it verified locally.
Third: You say, 'I have been in two such meetings with you'. Pardon me, I must deny this, for I have not attended such meetings as are indicated in the Chicago letter and other testimony. Such occasions have to be regarded in the light of what passes in them, and the full information available shows most plainly that while counsel was sought and given (some of which was good, but the main part withdrawn later by the giver as wrong) the Chicago meetings, composed of 'forty brothers from twelve different meetings', entered into conduct and relations of saints in a city far away, sending also a formal judgment directly to these saints. No, dear brother, you did not attend such meetings with me. You enquire if @Proverbs 11: 14, 15 does not apply. This scripture cannot be made to overthrow other scriptures, such as those already quoted. It could be conveniently used thus to support a general council, which would set aside @1 and 2 Corinthians and many other scriptures. The scripture in Proverbs 11 is most valuable in local care meetings and often comforts us here.
Fifth: 'Our letter says nothing about representation as you say'. I do not find that I say it does. I remark, 'If all the meetings in the world were represented' -- an independent statement. But Mr. D------ says 'Brethren representing several meetings at Chicago', etc. And Mr.------ speaks of all the meetings in the belt from Minneapolis to Cincinnati and from the Missouri river to Detroit being of one mind as to
{311}
Columbus. The number of meetings is also mentioned in the Chicago letter, so that there was clearly *some* idea of representation; but I did not say there was, nor could I say now that the mind of the twelve meetings was represented.
Seventh: You say, 'We never had such an absurd idea as that one meeting could commend another meeting to another meeting or brethren generally'. You ask, 'Where did you get that idea?' I saw it first in Mr.------¬s letter of December 24th to Mr. H------ (now withdrawn).------ writes (referring to the company at Columbus), 'It appears to me that the first and vital link is that you should be commended in the love and fellowship of those nearest you from where you move, that is Chicago'. Chicago's commendation of the saints at Columbus would obviously not be to themselves, but to nearby meetings, as ------ says earlier in his letter 'Chicago ... commanded Michigan City to your brethren elsewhere'. Then in your letter of January 5th, I read, 'Chicago ... having been mainly responsible for recommending to brethren generally ... the breaking of bread at Michigan City'. Mr. D------ cites substantially what ------ wrote as of 'first importance' in the mind of 'brethren representing several meetings in Chicago'. His words are 'to commend the movement to the nearest meeting to Columbus'.------ had read his letter at the Chicago meetings. You embody part of it in your letter of January 5th, as the 'judgment', while Mr. D------ gives it all. There is no suggestion from any source that ------¬s thought of *commendation* by Chicago was to be replaced by the idea of Michigan City *consulting* Chicago. The above will show you how I obtained 'that idea'. It is indeed 'absurd', as you say.
Eighth: The records I referred to as to Chicago's knowledge of the movement from Michigan City are correspondence in November between Mr H------ and ------ that Mr H------¬s letter was private, as you say, does not rob it of a prime importance as to the matter before us. It contained information as to the Lord's people in a town in which the brethren at Chicago profess to have had the greatest interest and this information indicated plainly the possible 'sorrow' of the discontinuance of the meeting there, nearly all of the saints having moved or were about to move away. It was addressed to the corresponding brother and most active one in Chicago, and so it could be rightly expected that through him it would
{312}
reach all. If not the said brother would have been neglectful in a most serious matter -- I am speaking from the point of view of the letter of January 5th. But you do not say that my brother failed to make the information known. Mr. H------ states in his letter to Chicago that my brother conveyed it in a letter to Columbus on November 24th. As a matter of fact the purposed movement from Michigan City was advertised more widely than I have known of any occurrence of the kind, and so the question may well be asked: Had Chicago not heard? The word had certainly "gone out" (@Romans 10). Admitting that it was not addressed directly to you there, even a report should lead to inquiry, seeing you were so responsible, as the letter of January 5th states. A report reaching the ears of the assembly at Jerusalem led to earnest action (@Acts 11), and Paul was moved to act seriously by a report (@1 Corinthians 5).
From the facts available it is clear that if the movement of the saints from Michigan City was fraught with such consequences as your letter of January 5th states, the brethren in Chicago (at least the one who received Mr. H------¬s letter) were very remiss in not seeking to save their brethren. Neither the assembly at Jerusalem nor Paul (in the passages quoted) waited to be 'consulted' before acting. But on the other hand, if the brethren late of Michigan City moved to Columbus believing they were subject to the will of God in doing so, the meeting at Michigan City thus necessarily discontinuing, they having made known their purpose to their brethren, including Chicago, as said above, having thus violated no scriptural principle, the brethren in Chicago, by telephoning to Columbus to prevent the breaking of bread there and in the course that followed, have disregarded Scripture, having interfered with matters beyond their local responsibility. The remaining matters under section 8 I do not touch, having reference to local conduct and relations. These must be settled in a 'lawful assembly', that is Columbus.
Ninth and Tenth: The same may be said of these sections, as we who have not been among the saints at Columbus cannot rightly judge of the state and spiritual ability among them. There seems to have been hesitancy in the nearby meetings as to the J------ brothers, but as I said, it is a local matter. I cannot see the force of the brothers asking for fellowship by themselves. There is no suggestion of special importance
{313}
attached to long residence in a place in the Acts. Aquila and Priscilla had "just come" to Corinth and would have assembly status there. Later they had a status at Ephesus. That some in Columbus resided there only a week and others years, they all have to be regarded as calling on the Lord there out of a pure heart, and so of His assembly. Any brother or brothers interfering in any way with His rights among them will meet with His stern disapproval, although it may take time for this to work out.
Eleventh: You enquire, 'To whom did those remaining at Michigan City commend those who moved to Columbus?' To the saints in Columbus, of course. Paul says, "To all that are in Rome, beloved of God, called saints", and he commended Phoebe to them. This would hold, however few or many, it is quite in order to commend a saint to another, the latter being alone in a place. There would then be "two of you". The divine nature operating in us makes us very simple and practical. In Columbus there are several ostensibly holding together in the light of the assembly.
Twelfth: 'Where did you get the idea of disciplinary authority you speak of?' I got it from Mr. D------. He says, 'It was quite understood that the brethren at Chicago had expressed themselves that no encouragement should be given to them (the H------ s) to move about'. Mr. D------ was instrumental in putting this into effect as to ------ and ------ at Hamilton on New Year's Day, causing much feeling and resentment among the saints.
Thirteenth: I cannot enter on Mr. H------¬s reasons for leaving Michigan City. What you say of Michigan City reminds me of a remark made lately that the Chicago brethren seemed to be more concerned about the town than about the saints who had resided there. These, however, are loved by Christ and are like the apple of His eye at Columbus. There are hundreds of towns in this country much less cared for in testimony than Michigan City -- Chicago perhaps relatively. In judging our brethren's legitimate movements we are disregarding that in this respect they stand to their own Master.
'Suppose', you enquire, 'that Staten Island had acted as Michigan City has acted ... would you consider it an act of a neighbour if they sought the fellowship of brothers, not meetings, at a distance and never asked for the fellowship of Brooklyn?' You apparently overlook that Staten Island is
{314}
part of the City of New York, so that the analogy does not hold, as Michigan City is not part of Chicago. But let take the meeting at Clifton, New Jersey, to which, I understand New York is the nearest city with a meeting. The brethren meeting there used to meet at Passaic, but there was no question of making the matter known formally or of fellowship being involved when they moved, and yet Passaic, where a meeting had existed for many years was now without one. The same is true of the meeting at Chatham; it used to be at Summit; and some years ago the bulk of the meeting at Waterbury, Connecticut, for some reason moved to Stamford, Connecticut, a long way off, and started a meeting, leaving brother and sister in Waterbury, without a meeting. These have now moved to Plainfield and the others continue happily at Stamford. I never heard of any claim by other meeting that they should be 'consulted' in such cases. As far as I remember, these occurrences were simple and I never heard it hinted that the discontinuance of a meeting because of brethren moving away legitimately was 'a breach of fellowship' or 'a great sorrow'. There was no loss, for in each case, as a Columbus, a meeting was started elsewhere. I could also cite many instances of meetings discontinuing, saints moving away and none formed elsewhere and no question of fellowship was raised -- as Dover, N.J. (where ------ used to live a good part of each year), Newark, and Seabright, N.J. I am speaking only of this neighbourhood.
The L------ s¬ case is to be regretted as was the case of those left at Waterbury. Of course, they live at South Bend. I think Mr. H------¬s letter to Chicago covers this matter. They are now your care.
The fact that Chicago did not know of the proposal to break bread at Columbus until the news was ¬phoned from Indianapolis is not of special consequence. New York did not know till several days later, but no one here thought of complaining. The same may be said of Rochester and Detroit, I believe. What Chicago has to do in this respect is to bow to the facts of the case, that Michigan City was not under consideration, but Columbus, and so the matter was scripturally in the hands of others.
In what I have written, dear brother, I wish to say in the most positive way that I am not taking up any personal cause, I am considering entirely for the truth of God affected by all
{315}
that has happened. I should not have acted as Mr. H------ did in the circumstances, but Mr. H------ is Mr. H------ and not I, and has his own way of action, which we must leave between him and the Lord; there was unquestionably want of wisdom in some of the things done, but nothing that I know of that could not be met in grace and adjusted almost instantly. I find him constantly ready to take advice and submit to correction.
Please pardon me, dear brother, for the length of this epistle and bear with me in what I am about to add: I am assured it is according to the mind of God. Having weighed the facts of this whole matter before Him, I believe it is the outcome of strained unbrotherly feelings long existing between some in Chicago and some who resided in Michigan City. I am not justifying or condemning either side as to this, I am stating the fact having seen the correspondence and having seen a letter of Mr. Gill's commenting on a meeting of brothers from Chicago and Michigan City which he attended about a year ago. These strained relations prevented the practical fellowship and brotherly counsel that are needed among saints for mutual growth and blessing, and so Mr. H------ was not as communicative as the nearness of Michigan City to Chicago required, the latter brethren not provoking him in this direction. All the claims by Chicago as to what they considered due, and of those elsewhere who supported their contention, ignored this strained feeling and sought to compel those at Michigan City to comply with their claims, which even if scriptural, could hardly be expected if active mutual love did not exist.
Under the circumstances those at Chicago entered on the line of innovation, interfering beyond their appointed range and advocating the unscriptural principles and methods which have been pointed out in this and other letters.
I am grieved, I assure you, that I should be at such variance with you and the saints at Chicago, from whom in earlier days I received such kindness, but you and Mrs. McA------ may be assured that there is *nothing whatever* personal as to you both, nor indeed in regard of any of the saints there.
As I said in my previous letter, I have always found you ready to bow to Scripture and so I am the more distressed that you do not "see all things clearly" in this serious matter.
Affectionately yours in the Lord,
James Taylor.
{316}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 6th, 1931.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Being much pressed, I have been unable to write, but I was very glad to receive your last letter.
I wish now to send you copy of the withdrawal by the brethren at Chicago of their letter, copy of which I sent you. This is a matter of great thanksgiving to God, I need not say.
You will observe that they place the onus of their first letter on the visiting brethren who attended the so-called Council, whereas they had full part in the proceedings and had not previously said their judgment was different. However, we can leave this with God, who will not fail to place error where it should be. Mr. H------ has answered the letter graciously. The Cincinnati brethren have extended fellowship to those at Columbus.
With love in Christ to your sister and you,
I am, affectionately,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- I am uncertain as to when we shall be sailing to your side.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 9th, 1931.
Mr. Wm. Bingham.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter and enclosure from Endbach were a great cheer to the brethren here as well as to Mrs. Taylor and myself. It was good of you to send the good news.
I am very thankful also to hear of the cheer in Dundee. The work among young people is a feature of the times and would show that if the Lord comes soon it will not be because He has not the means to carry on His testimony. I heard from Mr. Ruckbrodt lately speaking of the work in Germany; he mentioned particularly an opening made in Dresden. A meeting in that city will be of considerable importance.
In this country the work of God goes on, especially in this district. We have been going through much conflict during the past three months on account of an action in Chicago very similar to that of Glanton twenty-two years ago. The Lord has helped in a striking way and the Chicago brethren have withdrawn the letter that was *immediately* the cause of the difficulty. Although there is not much evidence of true self-judgment
{317}
before God, yet there is enough in their letter of withdrawal to enable the brethren to leave the matter in the Lord's hands. The destruction of the gold calf and the slaying of 3,000 by the Levites cleared the way, but in addition *Jehovah* plagued the people because of the calf.
I trust the matter of Burnbank is out of the way. I heard it had become acute, but that the Glasgow brethren and those at Burnbank had come together and that some settlement had been reached.
With love in Christ to you both in which my wife would join, also to the brethren,
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 16th, 1931.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I much appreciate your kind letter. All the news you give is most interesting and indeed cheering.
The incoming of Eltham to the London circle of meetings was anticipated, but that it has actually come about is additional cheer. Poor Forest Hill! Its position is due to the determination of *one* brother. His responsibility is serious. My prayers for him and all there go up. As the brethren are firm and patient, waiting on *Him*, the Lord will give deliverance.
In this country and Canada we have had an anxious time, as you know, but God has definitely come in and a great change has occurred. The Chicago brethren withdrew the letter that was the immediate cause of the trouble and now the meetings near to Columbus have extended hearty fellowship to the brethren there to begin breaking bread. They are, D.V., to do so on the 29th inst.
Mr. G------ has written Chicago making full acknowledgement of his part in the objectionable meetings and has sent copies of his letter to the meetings which had been represented at Chicago. Others who took more or less of a lead at the meetings have done the same. Mr.------, who at an early date had withdrawn the 'counsel' he gave at the meetings as wrong, still holds that the meetings themselves were scriptural, although it has been unmistakably shown that they were not -- being practically like that held at Glanton. His attitude is the outstanding remaining difficulty, but hardly anyone sees with him, as far as I know.
{318}
You will thus see that God has given His people in this country and Canada a great deliverance, and I need not say that we thank Him and take courage.
I am thinking prayerfully of the dear brethren in Great Britain in view of the many purposed meetings during the coming holidays. You did not say where *you* hoped to be. I trust the Lord will support you wherever you may be. I did not think it right before the Lord to leave New York while the Western matter remained open and now it is urged that I should remain for the usual meetings at Rochester at the end of May. At any rate, I am assured I shall get over in time for the purposed meetings at Bristol.
I shall gladly visit you at Streatham if I can, but I must leave this open until I am on your side of the ocean. We appreciate the wish of Mrs. Gardiner and you to have us under your roof again.
Thanks for your interest in our grandchildren. They are still very ill, but making some progress, thank God.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you all.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 16th, 1931.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for further letter. I am thinking of you in view of your coming service in Scandinavia with Mr. Seville; also of the many meetings purposed to be held in Great Britain during the Easter holidays. I hear Mr. Ware is to be at Belfast and *possibly* Mr. House. I hope to be at Hamilton, Ontario, where three days¬ meetings are being arranged for. Considerable feeling was stirred up in that district by the attitude of Mr. D------ and Mr. W------.
I enclose Mr. H------¬s reply to the letter from Chicago. The letters to Columbus from Cincinnati, Indianapolis and Cleveland extending fellowship are very cordial and the answers reciprocate fully. The breaking of bread at Columbus is, D.V., to begin on the 29th instant. Mr. G------¬s letter of acknowledgement of his part in the Chicago proceedings is the fullest and most acceptable of all. Thus you will see that God has come in for His people. But the want of priestly grace and intelligence in the *Chicago* communications is humbling.
Mr.------ is holding out tenaciously for the *legality* of the
{319}
Chicago Meetings, refusing to admit what is obvious -- that the *three* meetings held, the advice given and the result -- the Chicago letter -- formed a whole.
With love in Christ to you all, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Hamilton, Ont.
April 9th, 1931.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for yours of the 17th instant and enclosures. We thought of you in the meetings you were to attend, especially in Scandinavia, also the other meetings held during the holidays, a list of which you kindly sent.
We are here visiting the meetings in this province and we are much cheered. There was a conference in this city, April 3rd to 5th, and a goodly number came together. The Lord graciously helped. We had at the five readings the Spirit as mentioned in @1 and 2 Corinthians. There was a very good 'open meeting'. Arthur Walker preached the gospel with striking ability. There was also help in an address on @1 Samuel 19 -- showing the instrumentalities God may use for the preservation of the testimony, the spiritual system as active (Samuel presiding over the prophets) nullifying the opposition, at the same time the instrument of it (Saul) *exposed*.
We go from here (Ontario) to Detroit, Indianapolis and Columbus. The breaking of bread began in Columbus on the 29th ult. Brethren from Cincinnati, Cleveland, Indianapolis and elsewhere, including Mr. Magowan, were present. They had remarkable cheer, I learn.
The brethren urge us to remain on this side for the Rochester meetings, and we have decided to do so, please God. We have booked tentatively to sail to Glasgow on June 13th. Suitable accommodation is hard to obtain at that time of the year.
Our united love in Christ to your dear sister and you,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- Mr. W------ has been quite dark as to the Chicago -- Columbus matter and you can understand the disadvantage of this. Mr.------ has finally owned formally that the meetings held as well as the counsel given were wrong. -- J.T.
{320}
London, Ontario.
April 13th, 1931.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- For long I have been wishing to write you.
We are thinking now of Ethel in view of her marriage and we trust God will bless her and Alec.
It is likely you are now in Ireland. We had understood Mr. Ware was at the conference there, but today I heard he was unable to be present on account of illness. Mr. R------ was there, I hear. I have no doubt the Lord would help him.
In America we have been going through stormy weather, as you will have heard. The Lord came in for His people in a definite way and now I may say general adjustment has taken place. Mr. G------ and others who led in what was unscriptural have made more or less full admissions. This includes the leading brothers in Chicago, but I cannot say that they have bottomed the evil as before God. I believe the state of the meeting there afforded the enemy the opportunity he sought.
You will see that I am in Canada. My wife and I came here to attend a conference at Hamilton at Easter. It was a remarkably good time -- three days. We read in @1 and 2 Corinthians the parts relative to the Holy Spirit, and what came before us bore on current exercises. We remained to visit the meetings in the district, and we have found much joy in mingling with the dear brethren. Mr. W------ had taken a wrong view of the Chicago matter and occasioned damage, but I trust this has been largely undone, and I am assured the Lord will efface the darkening thoughts and impressions conveyed. Besides Hamilton, we visited Toronto, St. Catherines, Woodstock, Galt, Harriston and now we are in London. Today, please God, we go to Detroit; then Indianapolis and Columbus. The brethren in the latter city began to break bread on March 29th and we hear they were greatly supported of the Lord.
We have been urged to remain in America for the conference at Rochester at the end of May and we have decided, as under the Lord, to do so. Thus we shall not be in Great Britain before June 20th. Our present thought is to sail by the Cameronia for Glasgow on June 13th. We cannot obtain suitable accommodation on ships to the south of England, the traffic there being very heavy in June.
I trust Mrs. Ide keeps well, also yourself and all. My health has been good during the winter, thank God, but my
{321}
wife has suffered considerably from recurrent headaches. Our grandchildren are making *some* progress in the hospital, but it is very slow and so we are constantly cast on the Lord as to them and their parents.
Our united love in Christ to you both and all your family and to the brethren at Teddington.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
May 1st, 1931.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of the 25th ultimo was received late as I was away from New York and did not return until last week.
I am sorry you are so seriously troubled over what has been said recently about our Lord's sonship. I am assured you will find in time that there is no real cause for this. What was said at Barnet conveyed what had long been in the minds of many brethren, the expressions 'Eternal Son' and 'Eternal Word' being regarded as questionable as wanting of scriptural warrant. I have weighed the matter much before the Lord since, especially in regard of what has been advanced in support of the expressions, and I am confirmed in what I have held.
It has often been said that we should get thoughts *from* Scripture and not take any to it. In the latter case we are exposed to the danger of forcing Scripture to our view. You quote @John 1: 14, 18 as 'ample proof' of your view. Then you proceed: 'The Greek words for' who is 'in @John 1: 18 are equivalent to' I am 'or the Eternal One -- the One who is, and do not refer to time at all'. This statement illustrates what I said. The verse treats of *relationship and position*, not eternal existence as in chapter 8: 24, 58. Thus "who is in the bosom of the Father" is a *present* fact in regard of the matter to be spoken of -- the declaration of God. Earlier in the chapter references to the Lord's eternal existence are in the past tense and we damage the truth and ourselves if we do not pay attention to this. In considering a subject so profound, holy and delicate, it is of the utmost importance to observe
{322}
every word and all that attaches to it that the Holy Spirit uses.
And so the preposition "in" in verse 18 must be noted. It denotes motion towards -- that thus the position was reached. Added to the tense of the verb governing it and the relationship of Christ to the Father, the preposition conveys that He is viewed as Man.
Of this preposition you say, 'It has recently come to light and I think has been thoroughly well established that in *New Testament* Greek' eis 'is used in @John 1: 18 without any idea of motion at all, but rather of proximity to'. This reminds me of the 'higher critic's' way of furnishing evidence -- 'It has recently come to light ... thoroughly well established'. But by whom? How? 'Eis' is employed about 1,600 times in the New Testament and in the vast majority of instances, including passages similar in structure to @John 1: 18, it expresses motion towards (compare Englishman's Greek Concordance). How then does New Testament Greek show that in @John 1: 18 it is just proximity? If position *only* were meant, 'en' would be more intensive as proper to the relation of sonship and is indeed used in chapter 14 -- "I am in my Father". 'En' is also used in @John 13: 23 to convey the beloved disciple's position; 'epi' in verse 25. If proximity were in view, 'para', as in @John 1: 14, would be appropriate. 'Pros' is used in verse 1 as more intensive, implying association in equality, essential being, with God.
As I said, we must observe carefully the words the Holy Spirit uses and if, as in the present case, He uses a preposition implying motion towards when He could have used others, we are bound to own that He did so with a purpose; He knew that Greek readers would necessarily regard the word according to its ordinary or general meaning. Ellicott in his Commentary says, 'The' is in 'is probably to be explained by the return to, and presence with the Father after the ascension'. I believe they refer to the Lord as Man before and after the ascension, but I quote the commentator to show how a scholar regarded the verb and preposition here.
You say, 'The words "only begotten" in the same verse have no reference to being born at all ... the words convey the thought of "darling" or "only one"'. Here again is a statement without adequate proof. I have not 'Greville Ewing's Lexicon' but I have Strong's 'Exhaustive', G.V.W.¬s and Young's, and none of them indicates that the words "only
{323}
begotten" 'have no reference to being born at all'. On the contrary, they all give the words as including the idea of birth. Besides, according to G.V.W., the word 'monogenees', other than the references to Christ, is only used in the New Testament in connection with children. Then the context helps. The only one of a *father* (and @John 1: 14 is illustrative) would be a son or child. If a *husband* speaks thus (as in @Song of Songs 6: 9) he would refer to his wife. Another thing to be noted is that we must not assume that the Holy Spirit is not loved of other Divine Persons, and this would be at least beclouded if we say that one of the Persons *viewed as in the Deity* is an only one to Another. Applying the term of endearment to Jesus as Man is intelligible, for He only became flesh; as Man He was contemplated in this blessed relationship. When this is made to apply to Christ as in the *form of God*, describing His relationship then with Him whom we know in revelation as the First Person of the Trinity, I cannot follow -- I feel forbidden by Scripture.
The chapter we are considering (@John 1) is expressly intended to instruct us -- in relation to others, of course -- on this great subject of our Lord's Person, and we must err unless we pay strict attention to the order in which it presents it, and, as I said, the words used. In verse 1 His essentially divine eternal Personal existence is stated; in verse 14 the condition He took or "became" -- He was a Man among men, and contemplated by some as an object of the intensest affection to the Father; verse 18 presents Him further as Man, the Holy Spirit formally designating (verse 14 is a description by others of what *they saw*) Him as 'The only begotten Son', and the position reached (redemption as well as incarnation included) in connection with the declaration of God. It is *present and abiding*. Except verse 18 all the references to the Lord's sonship in the chapter are to what *men saw*, verse 18 being a formal designation by the Holy Spirit, but in keeping with the others. To make what men saw descriptive of relations in essential Deity is, I am certain, going beyond Scripture, it being expressly stated that no one had seen God at any time, indeed that He cannot be seen by men.
The designation "Word" is characteristic, referring to the Lord as speaking or expressing the *mind* of God. It has an active and necessarily mediatorial significance, for in making known the mind of God He was acting for Him. John uses
{324}
it obviously not as a title revealed by his gospel but as one known amongst saints. The Lord was that practically and known as such. His Sonship was announced at His birth and later from heaven; then too Emmanuel, Jesus, Christ, Saviour, Lord, etc., are divinely announced in the gospels but not the Word. In @Revelation 19 He has a name written which no one knows but Himself, but His name is *called* The Word of God. This is characteristic -- it is not said to be written -- and so known. It agrees with the use of the term "Word" by John and Luke. Therefore, to apply this designation to the Lord as in absolute Deity is unsupported by Scripture to say the very least. It seems to me that the word 'Logos' being so much used in the Lord's service and so characteristic of it, so commonly used, so to speak, and applied to Him, that the Spirit employed it instead of Son in @John 1: 1 to preclude the idea of it being applicable to essential Deity. When there was no speaking or revealing the mind of God (and there could not be the need of this as between divine Persons as such) the designation "Word" could have no place, but it had force when God began to operate.
And this leads me to another important consideration -- the mediatorial sphere, which existed before incarnation, but necessarily had the incarnation in view. All God's operations, as far as Scripture shows, were on the mediatorial principle, and the Son was the Mediator. Thus looking back we have to take account of absolute Deity outside the mediatorial sphere and beyond creature understanding; and then we have to consider "the beginning", which implies the mediatorial system which looked on to and centred in Christ as Man. He was no afterthought, Adam being but a figure of Him. Whatever the instrumentalities used, the Son was the Mediator. This relationship being in purpose, He was in the mind of God in this light, although it cannot be scripturally said that He was actually in it while in the form of God, for Scripture presents sonship as implying subjection and obedience. There was the promise -- to someone -- of life before the ages of time and a choosing in Christ before the foundation of the world. All centred in Christ become Man, the material creation itself being preliminarily essential to this.
Having looked into the matter of 'eternal sonship' and 'eternal word', I am persuaded they originate in theology. As creed-making began, there was a felt need of definitions,
{325}
and theologians did not hesitate to attempt to define the relations existing among divine Persons as in absolute Deity. This resulted in much blasphemous error; but even orthodoxy is not free from this as is to be seen in the 'Creed of St. Athanasius'. Here it is stated that our Lord was begotten of the Father before the worlds and begotten of His mother in the world; 'one, not by confusion of substance, but by unity of Person'. He is 'of a reasonable soul and human flesh subsisting'. God and man (dual personality) is 'one Christ'. The thought conveyed is that the Lord was personally a man with 'reasonable soul', as we are, and *besides* this is another 'substance', God, *another* Person, the unity was not 'confusion of substance', but of Person. Thus Christ was a union of God and man, a dual Person, *not* a divine Person become flesh; the latter is the truth Scripture presents. There is no change in the Lord's Person, but in His condition. "The word became flesh". As in this condition He could say, "Before Abraham was I am" -- the Person is unchanged: "the same yesterday, and today and forever".
I mention all this because of the place the Creed has or had with some who have objected to certain features of the truth of our Lord's Person from time to time since 1890. Mr. J. A. Trench was one of the most able of those, and perhaps the most highly esteemed of those who led in the Glanton movement. The following will show the importance he attached to the Creed. The meeting room long used by the brethren in Sligo was his and leased in the usual way. The brothers who signed the lease did not read it, assuming its contents to be such as a brother would ordinarily require. A few days after the Glanton division occurred, however, Mr. James C. Trench, acting for his brother, served a notice of ejection on the brethren who signed the lease. When they remonstrated he directed them to read the lease and it was found that it required that the room was to be used for the breaking of bread, preaching the gospel, etc., by brethren *who held the Athanasian Creed*. As it was judged the brethren did not now hold this Creed, the lease was cancelled. The brothers (now with the Lord) who signed the lease and who had directly to do with this transaction told me of it together, and I am sure it will be confirmed by brothers in Sligo.
I make no apology for relating above incident because I believe it to be a background to the present attitude of some
{326}
who are, or were, in the Glanton fellowship. I do not, of course, apply this to you, but I think you should be on your guard as to what comes from the direction I mention.
With love in Christ to you and yours in which my wife joins, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board S.S. Cameronia.
June 16th, 1931.
Mr. Arthur J. H. Brown.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter was very welcome and interesting. First, I would say that I am glad you purpose visiting South Africa. You will find ready interest among the dear saints there, although you will miss Dr. Elliott much. I shall be remembering you in prayer in view of this service.
I agree with what you say as to @Romans 3: 25 -- the new punctuation seems forced. Faith is a principle in a person, and while Divine Persons are properly the objects of it, it includes all that is presented on their part. Thus as the blood of Christ is said to effect certain things I believe what is said and in this sense believe in it. Hence "The faith" -- what is believed. The blood (@1 John 5) is one of the "three" that bear witness and I believe *its* witness.
As regards 'Eternal Sonship', I am assured the Lord is through the exercise asserting the authority of Scripture and that in due course its teaching as to His Person and revelation generally will be much more clearly understood. Hitherto much had to be *assumed* in treating certain passages, such as @John 5. I cannot find that John 5 deals (save as accepting what was generally held) with the Lord's statements of Himself as Son in this and kindred scriptures. Nothing has exercised me more than this matter, but as waiting on the Lord I am confirmed that what was said at Barnet is in accord with the teaching of Scripture and makes for a clearer and truer apprehension of Deity and of revelation.
One is, however, greatly afraid of extremes and so cast on God as to this as to himself and others.
The Chicago matter is so far settled, but I am uneasy as to
{327}
the attitude of the Chicago brothers, as in their letter of withdrawal they placed the onus of the withdrawn letter largely on others. There has been much cheer lately in America, especially at the conference at Rochester the end of last month.
We hope to land at Glasgow on Lord's Day and later go to Bristol.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Brown and you all.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Oldham.
September 21st, 1931.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Many thanks for *all* information. I earnestly hope the brethren will go forward definitely in what is clearly of the Lord. I am thankful for the M's attitude. On their part it is sound business to be favourable as the new Depot will be a customer, but it is also an advantage generally and will remove occasion for complaint from some who are glad to have it.
I gave Mr. Ide your and A.E.M.¬s letters as he has good opportunity of making facts generally known. Mr. Ide promised to send needed information to Mr. Davidson. The latter is a good man in such matters. It will be a great disadvantage if the shop you mention is not secured. It will be a great pity if brethren are diverted from the course in which the Lord is so plainly helping. I note that A.E.M. is going to Newport and I am looking to the Lord as to this, and indeed the whole matter.
Thanks for information as to sailings. Please God, I shall see the Liverpool people and let you know what they say. It is likely we shall take the Lancastria. There was an excellent season here over the week-end. For the reading we had the Jordan in 2 Kings. The address was on 'enlargement'.
My wife unites in warm love in Christ to your sister and yourself and Lois. We think of Lois and are thankful for good news of her. Again thanking you all for your great kindness to us.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
{328}
Cranleigh.
October 17th, 1931.
Mrs. Consuelo Taylor.
My Dear Consie, -- It was very good of you to write such a sympathetic letter. Mother and I much value it. I know you can speak feelingly of operations and the after effect. I was about eighty minutes on the 'table' and perhaps three and a half hours under the ether. It was a considerably more serious matter than we had expected. It was comforting indeed to have Dr. Elliott present with Drs. C. and Hervey Bodman, besides the house doctor. The hands of faith and love were attending to me and so we could count on God with all the more confidence.
We came here two days ago to rest and recuperate before sailing. It is a beautiful, restful place and Mr. and Mrs. Elliott kind beyond words. So also were Dr. and Mrs. Bodman where Mother stayed while I was in the hospital.
During my time in the hospital and here I have been preparing the Bristol Conference notes for the press and hope to complete them before sailing.
I shall not write more now as I hope to be seeing you all shortly after you receive this.
We are thankful Jim and you and the dear children keep well. We have been so concerned lest any of the grandchildren should get the paralysis.
Mother unites in love to you all.
Affectionately,
Father.
Thank Jim for his letter to Mother -- the account of the monthly readings is very interesting.
<hr>
Cranleigh, England.
October 17th, 1931.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I am very distressed to learn from a letter from Mr. Coates that ------ has recently written him reasserting his views as to London. You may know of this, but I feel I must write to say that I have the whole matter much before the Lord and I am earnestly asking for wisdom from Him for you all who are to meet the Forest Hill brothers.
Through God's great mercy to me I am making steady
{329}
progress. We purpose staying here with dear Mr. and Mrs. Elliott until Thursday and then, please God, go to Teddington to start for Liverpool on Friday.
I am working on the Bristol notes and hope to complete their revision before sailing.
I trust Mrs. Gardiner and the children keep well, also yourself. My wife unites in warm love in Christ to you all.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board S.S. Adriatic.
October 29th, 1931.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- We are drawing near New York and I am glad to report a good voyage and that we both have kept well generally, although my wife had a turn of her recurrent headaches. I am gaining in strength steadily and I believe that through the mercy of God the operation will prove a blessing.
We wish again to thank Mrs. Ide and you for all your great kindness to us and we trust you will understand that we value it fully and that our prayers are that you both will have the sense of the Lord's approval in thus serving His interests. We hope you had a safe journey back to Teddington and that you found all well, also that you found cheer at Chester.
Looking back over the late months, I am assured the Lord graciously helped His people in Great Britain and indeed generally for there were many visitors from the Dominions and elsewhere. I believe the Bristol notes will be blessed of God as they circulate among His people. And there can be no doubt that Mr. House's ministry if carefully revised will be of great general help. The reports of its power are insistent.
The Lord has given His people and the truth itself a great advantage in the new Depot and I am much cast on God that the enemy may not in any way defeat the end in view. One danger in this respect will be in personal motives entering into the management of it. There will be great need of grace and patience, for the Lord will be active and will check later what at the outset may seem threatening. What was stated at the Park Street meeting and afterwards at Teignmouth, is essential if the service is to prove all that is desired -- that it should take on its own proper level as *Merarite* and should not be in the
{330}
hands of those whose service is distinctively that of Kohath. I believe Mr. J------ is the brother the Lord will support for the active management of the Depot and so it should be gradually placed in his hands. As I said, great grace and patience will be needed in those who are now helping him, the assurance being ever kept in view that the Lord will give effect to His mind as we give Him place. You may be certain of my constant prayers both for yourself and all engaged in this work.
The news from America is fairly cheering. They are considering *food* at the monthly fellowship meetings in New York and it is said they got on well at the first reading -- @Genesis 1. The second reading will be, please God, next Tuesday -- Joseph.
The Chicago brethren propose to have fellowship meetings again this winter and this is menacing as certain things still remain unjudged there.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you all.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board S.S. Adriatic.
October 31st, 1931.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- We have been thinking much all the week of the meeting with the Forest Hill brothers and we earnestly look for a good result.
We are thinking of you too in view of Valence, also Mr. House.
I was thankful indeed to receive your note on the steamer. We both wish to thank your dear sister and you again for all your kindness to us. You will be much in our thoughts and prayers.
I am thinking much of the new Depot. I am assured that Mr. J------ will be helped of God in its management. I hope A.E.M. will, as the hymn-book is completed, draw out, as I urged him. The work is that of Gershon or Merari and is not suitable for him.
The news from America is fairly good, save that Chicago proposes to have special meetings again this winter, notwithstanding the widespread feeling or knowledge of wrong conduct and principles remaining unjudged. I understand A.M.H. suggested to them to invite me, evidently being
{331}
unaware of underlying conditions. In his letter to me A.M.H. attacks H------ as if he could inform me about him. The enemy would make H------ an issue so as to divert from conditions in Chicago.
We have had an excellent voyage, thank God, and we both have been well, save that my wife has suffered from earache. I am gaining strength steadily, thank God.
Our united love in Christ to you all,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 14th, 1931.
Mr. Arthur J. H. Brown.
My Dear Brother, -- Thanks for yours of the 24th and enclosure.
I am glad you questioned Mr. B------ - as to his statement and I quite believe he will not make it again. I ventured to write him as to it.
The remark, even with the word 'absolute', cannot be supported, I am assured. The Lord in manhood said, "Before Abraham was *I am*", and this cannot be separated from Deity. In a *guarded* way, we may say He left the *status* of Deity as taking a bondman's form, for we must not weaken or minimise the tremendous change involved in His down-stoop. The guard and balance are that as Man He is addressed as God and as The Same. Observing the statements of Scripture our minds and affections, in spite of their weakness, are preserved in right channels. There is no other path of safety -- when considering the truth relative to Divine Persons we must let Scripture think for us, as it were; a Divine Mind is behind Scripture, able to compass all; our minds, being finite, can but grasp one side of the truth at once.
We surely need to be keenly on our guard at the present time -- the Lord is helping in a marked way and so the enemy is all the more ready to mar what we have gained, or rob us of it. If the unchangeableness of the *Person* of Christ is maintained in our souls it steadies us as to the condition He has taken and that He has left.
There is much cheer in these parts. Difficulties as to
{332}
fellowship which have existed, are being removed and there is much blessing in the meetings and increase too.
I am thinking much of the dear brethren on your side of the water in view of the many meetings arranged for the holiday, of which I have a list.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Brown and you.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
December 17th, 1931.
My Dear Brother, -- Yours of the 15th inst. is just received, for which I thank you. I am thankful for your statement, 'If anything I have said has seemed to convey a slight upon, or indifference to, the' powers that be 'it is not meant and I would regret it;' but the following from 'City Boundaries' will show that it does not meet the exercises of your brethren: 'I am clear that the saints in a given place ... are clothed with responsibilities ... peculiar to that locality ... but one does question whether the import of this is made to depend on bounds and limits imposed by temporal powers. I think not, but that we are left in liberty to decide the question according to our own perception of what results from contact with our brethren and our community of interest with them; in short that the' powers that be 'are as much unrelated to this matter as they are, for instance, as to where we meet for the breaking of bread or for prayer'.
Whatever you may have had in your mind or overlooked when you wrote, these are your words, and they take definite issue with what we in New York have acted upon for years as a principle divinely obligatory and which saints generally recognise. What I have quoted disregards the plain fact that Scripture regards cities as having definite boundaries, measurements being taken from them to other places. There is not the slightest hint that these boundaries were other than those set by the authorities.
Saints, as far as I know, have no idea of the powers that be *controlling* them in an *active* way as to the spheres of their assembly responsibility, it is a question of God and what He orders; He addresses His assembly *in Corinth;* He did not build Corinth nor set its boundaries; He recognised the city
{333}
*as it was* and His people in it. This is the whole matter; and the principle involved remains. There is no analogy between it and @2 Timothy 2, for the latter has to do with the ruin of the church, whereas the world is not in principle any more ruined now than it was in the apostle's days. Cities are, of course, larger generally and more irregular, but we cannot make this an excuse for disregarding a scriptural principle.
The application of it may be difficult in some places, and of course we must leave with our brethren in each locality the determination of the limits within which they are to maintain their local assembly responsibilities, but if they avow in doing this 'that the' powers that be 'are ... unrelated to this matter', then a protest has to be entered, for issue is taken with God's way. They are making their own boundaries of 'Corinth' instead of accepting what exists.
From the outset I have felt it necessary to speak or write frankly as to this matter, and I would suggest now that the only way to meet effectually the consciences of the brethren as to 'City Boundaries' is to withdraw what remains -- you have already withdrawn some of it -- of the paper unequivocally.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 26th, 1931.
Mr. McB------.
My Dear Brother, -- I have to acknowledge receipt of your letters to Mr. Higgins. They are sad reading to me as from one who, as confessedly restored from an erroneous position, promised to be, under God, of service in the testimony of our Lord.
What is particularly distressing is that what you are combating now as serious error was for a considerable time before your reception known to you to be held among the brethren whose fellowship you sought and obtained. You were present at the conference at Barnet where the statements you now refuse were openly and frankly made, and afterwards took your place in fellowship with those who made them. I had conversation with you during the meetings at Barnet and later in Scotland, and you made no adverse comment on what others and myself had said on the great subject of our Lord's sonship.
{334}
Surely you must see, as you consider it, that there is a moral defect here.
The first intimation I had of your adverse attitude was in a long controversial letter from you which came early this year -- more than a year and a half after the Barnet meetings.
Added to above is the unseemliness of one who had been admittedly in an unrighteous association for twenty years, returning to the saints whom he had erroneously left, and then almost immediately taking a lead in controversy against them, and this in regard to a subject requiring the most mature spiritual judgment. Thus aside from the matter of contention, there is a moral incongruity in your position of which you seem entirely insensible.
I would suggest -- without any bitter feeling, I assure you -- that this is the outcome of the leaven of your recent association. I firmly believe this.
Reviewing your history from the time of our meeting at Barnet, I am convinced that you failed to judge as before God the evil principles and conduct of the system you had left, and correspondingly you did not face, so as to understand them, the truths and principles maintained amongst the brethren into whose fellowship you came.
I do not write to condemn you, dear brother, far otherwise -- I wish to help you, and to this end I must tell you the truth. I gather from your letter to Mr. Higgins of November 30th that you have not returned to those with Glanton and so I would fain hope that you may be saved even yet for the testimony.
I do not enter on the contents of your letters, save to observe that you do not allow in your conscience the full weight of what has been said by others and myself as to the subject in question. I should, of course, gladly review the truth of Christ's sonship with you in a brotherly way if opportunity offers. You may be interested to see a letter I wrote Mr. Allen Oliver on the subject which conveys the truth, as I understand it, fairly well; if so Mr. R. Besley would, I believe, supply you with a copy.
I would also point out that you build too much on @Hebrews 7: 3, which, according to right exegetic principles, has to be considered in its context; otherwise it will be made to clash with other scriptures. This indeed is what your use of it does. Scripture abounds with references to God being Father to Christ. The designation "Son of God", employed in the
{335}
verse, implies it. Compare also @Galatians 4: 4. Besides in treating of Melchisedec in Hebrews our Lord's Sonship is taken up from @Psalm 2 -- "Thou art my Son; *I* this day have begotten thee". It were serious indeed to deny Him *this* Parentage!
What is alluded to in the verse is clearly the parentage or genealogy needed by Aaronic priests (see Ezra and Nehemiah). Melchisedec had none as far as Scripture shows (and the facts, positive and negative, of @Genesis 14 are under review) and yet he was priest of the Most High God. His priesthood did not depend on his genealogy but on himself, hence the greatness of this person as compared with an Aaronic priest. But while the designation "Son of God" implies that God is Christ's Father, it also denotes the greatness of His Person -- who He is. He is derived from no one. He is "I AM". He has neither beginning of days nor end of life -- "Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come". This statement, @Hebrews 13: 8, shows that names applying to our Lord in time may be employed to designate His Person as in the past eternity without intimating that they applied to Him *then*.
I have written more than I had intended to write, but I am sure you will not regard this as a blemish.
Faithfully your brother in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 29th, 1931.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- We were very glad to have yours of the 2nd with enclosures and containing so much that is most interesting relative to the work of the Lord.
You are remembered in our prayers in view of Glasgow and Saltcoats, and indeed we have thought of all the dear brethren according to the list of meetings you sent. J. McB------ sent me lately copies of his letters to Mr. Higgins and I have written on *moral* lines, feeling that I should not let him go without an appeal, having had so much to do with him -- at Barnet and later in Glasgow. Some of the dear Scottish brethren have ground for thinking that I was 'too easy' with McB------, but I cannot complain that they are guilty of this! I have told him that he seems not to have judged the Glanton principles and conduct, the leaven of Glanton thus remaining with him and
{336}
that consequently he was unable to judge and value aright the principles and truth maintained by those amongst whom he came.
The work of God here prospers -- there is steady increase in New York City, although we can hardly think we are any more lovely than the "Ethiopian woman" -- less, I am sure, than our *big* London sister! It is comforting to notice that Moses had *taken* the Ethiopian; Zipporah had been *given* to him.
My wife and I spent a week-end at Rochester lately -- very happy. There are three meetings there now, as you will know. It is more than we might have asked or thought as to Rochester, and thus according to divine doing. At Detroit there are two -- one in Highland Park and one in Royal Oak. The energy thus shown is pleasing to the Lord, I am sure.
Mr.------ continues to cause concern, although I believe he is now shaky as to his view of those who have fallen asleep. He is still holding out on his statement that we need not regard the authorities as to City boundaries. H.G., after long silence, wrote en route to Barbados, that he thought I was too severe as to Chicago and too lenient with H------, but that I was gracious with himself! Still he wrote in a brotherly way (he always does indeed -- usually lacking salt) and I am glad to note that he took issue with those at Chicago himself as he passed through.
I wrote a short paper on the hymn book revision, which was not acceptable to some, and so I am preparing a more comprehensive one, which I hope will be. A.E.M. may show it to you.
We called to see our dear grandchildren at Ithica -- they are making progress, thank God. The sorrow to Georgina and Allen is great indeed, as it is to us all; but I am assured of a desired end, although it may have to be long waited for.
Our united love in Christ to you three.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- We are very concerned by the news that Mr. Coates was very poorly and our prayers go up.
Mr. L------ has taken up a trying attitude regarding his alleged statement that the brethren in Great Britain were not standing on their own feet. He refuses to face the matter, alleging that I should have *seen* him!
{337}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 7th, 1932.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I fear I did not acknowledge your kind letter of November 4th -- but even if I did another line will not be amiss.
It was good of you to write so fully as to Forest Hill. I valued the information much, as I was very concerned as to the meeting, which was pending at the time of our sailing for New York. It seemed clear from your letter that the trend of the meeting was in the right direction; but there has not been much to confirm this, as far as I have heard, since. But we must be patient, for God will certainly bring to a right result what He has begun. It was a good sign that ------ sent a message of love to the brethren coupled with a reference to @Ephesians 1: 1, 2. Disregard of this scripture has marked his whole course in this sorrow. He is peculiarly determined, and his brother,------, is like him. When the latter was here last he alleged to Mr. H------, the latter's two sons being present, that my influence prevented brethren in Great Britain forming judgments of their own -- or words to this effect. When I heard this I wrote him at once, but I cannot get an answer from him as to whether he made such a serious statement or not. He wrote me during my illness for an interview, but I was unable to meet him before sailing, and begged him to meet the matter in writing. He refuses -- charging that I had promised (of which I have no recollection) to meet him and failed to do so. A similar way marks Mr.------¬s brother-in-law on this side of the Atlantic. During several recent years he has said and done things that are out of keeping with Scripture, and when they are -- one by one -- brought to his attention he will defend them to the last ditch. Happily, in some of the most serious cases he has surrendered. Would that his brothers-in-law would do the same! I mention ------ because his way, coupled with theirs, marks a family vein of opposition which is noticeable, and has been a source of deep concern to me, at least, for many years.
The work of God in America has many cheering features. In Rochester and Detroit meetings have increased through 'swarming', and in *this* (N.Y.) district excellent interest is manifest and considerable enquiry and additions from those 'without'. At our monthly fellowship meetings we have been considering *food* and the Lord has helped us. I think of
{338}
the dear London brethren much and my prayers constantly go up for you all. I am thankful to say that our special collections are well maintained and the local need is not much in excess of the ordinary, so that something is being done for the Levites near and far afield.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and each of the children, also to yourself.
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- Our dear paralysed grandchildren are making *some* progress, thank God.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 9th, 1932.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter is very interesting to me, and I desired to reply at once, as it was received, but my hands have been more than full. Even now I can write but briefly.
The distinct impression your letter makes, is that you do not allow full weight to the facts which Scripture presents as to our Lord's sonship. I refer particularly to John's gospel, which, as you say, 'presents Him as Son of God. He comes, as it were, out of eternity, touches the earth, and then goes back into eternity', you rightly say; but this is the *Person*. If it were intended to be conveyed that His relation in the Deity was that of Son, the Holy Spirit would surely say, 'The *Son* became flesh;' but He does not, but "The Word", etc. Not indeed, that if He did say "The Son", this would be conclusive, but the fact that He did not, indicates clearly that He is guarding against the thought of eternal sonship. What John says he and others contemplated is not a *formal* statement of our Lord's sonship, but that His glory was *as* the glory of "an only-begotten with a father" -- it is descriptive. With the exception of verse 18, the references to Christ's sonship in @John 1 are records of what others saw or discerned in Him. In verse 18 the only-begotten Son *is* in the bosom of the Father -- not *was*. In verses 1 and 2 it is "was".
You write, 'So when He comes to speak of those divine relationships He still uses human terms and calls them Father and Son. This is not a new relationship'. How do you know
{339}
that it is not? Your further remark (as to the relationship not being new) 'No more than in the Man Christ Jesus do I see a new God', does not help for we are definitely told in Scripture that there is but "one God" (@Ephesians 4: 6).
Then you go on to say, 'It is the human expression that God has used to convey to me the wonderful relations of divine Persons, I cannot comprehend it, no more than I can comprehend God'. Here again Scripture is not allowed its force. We are told by it, that no one has seen God -- "Whom no man has seen, nor is able to see" (1 Timothy 6: 16) but of the Son it is said that His glory was contemplated by men as the glory of an only-begotten with a father -- they saw the relationship (@John 1: 14). You urge that we must guard against materialism, but to what materialism do you refer? The disciples (some of them at least) saw the Word as become flesh as in the relation of an only-begotten with a father. They saw Him as become *flesh* not as in the form of God, this being beyond the creature's vision. Surely, 'all these terms', as you write, 'are used to convey spiritual ideas', but sonship in Christ is an actual reality brought within man's range in Him as Man, and so is more than a spiritual idea.
You write, 'If you say it was not till He reached earth that He became Son, it loses its lustre'. In @Psalm 2 Jehovah says, "Thou art my Son; *I* this day have begotten thee". This is used in @Hebrews 1: 8 as expressing sonship in the fullest sense, e.g. "as to the Son, Thy throne, O God", etc.; you will not, I am sure, deny that Psalm 2 refers to what took place on earth, nor affirm that because it did take place in time and on earth the sonship of Christ has lost its lustre. If you say it is *another* sonship you are at variance with Scripture. All that our Lord's Person is, enters into the sonship according to the epistle to the Hebrews. *How* a divine Person, being thus God ("The Word was God"), could be born or 'come of' a woman is infinite mystery, but it is a fact and we bow in worship in the presence of it. It seems to me that this stupendous transaction has but little place in the minds of the saints. As here God says to Christ, "Thou art my Son, *I this day* have begotten thee". This clearly guards against the error of the 'Creed' that He was begotten of His Father before all worlds, but begotten in time by His mother. "*I* (emphatic) *this day*". One saying, because Scripture does not show it, that He was not in the relation of Son before, cannot weaken
{340}
the sonship of @Psalm 2 or that of the epistle to the Hebrews. All that our Lord is personally enters into it, as I said, and all that He was to the Father before incarnation enters into it. What is involved in @Psalm 2 is infinite mystery, as I said; the divine history looking forward to it stretching back into eternity, the communications between the divine Persons bearing on it, and the power engaged in the wonderful transaction are infinitely beyond the ability of men to grasp. There is also to be taken into account by us as priests the reciprocated affections and communications between the Persons in this relation of purpose (before the public announcement, @Luke 3) such as are conveyed in @Psalm 22: 9, 10. What transpired in this respect in the 'thirty years' who can tell? But all entered into God's estimate of His Son; so He says, "Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight". The reference here is clearly to Christ as Man.
The early part of paragraph 3, page 3 of your letter is a convenient way of settling a matter, the understanding of which requires the most profound spiritual thought, and weighing of one Scripture with another. According to your remarks here @Psalm 2 is Messiah, @John 14: 28 is Christ in manhood, and @Matthew 11: 27 as in Deity. The first as I have shown, is regarded in the New Testament (and the New Testament gives the full bearing of the Old Testament) as sonship in the fullest sense and so cannot be *limited* to the thought of the Messiah. Then while the Person of the Son is in view in @Matthew 11: 27 and while He, of course, has part in the Deity, yet He is speaking of Himself as He then was -- He was inscrutable save to the Father. To say that this is Sonship before incarnation is simply to *add* to Scripture. You say, 'To infer from this verse (@John 14: 28) that the Son of God is inferior to God', etc. I certainly have no such thought that there is, or could be any *absolute* inferiority; but *relative* inferiority, involving subjection, is implied in the relationship of Son and constantly applied by the Lord to Himself in this relationship. This is undeniable and it is also undeniable that the thoughts, relations, etc., thus involved and expressed cannot be applied to Him as in the form of God, i.e. before incarnation.
As regards @Hebrews 1: 2 (page 4), what you remark is just building on the title, or designation of relationship, rather than on the *Person*. "By whom" is the Person. But in saying this I am jealous not to weaken the great force of the passage,
{341}
for while other designations are used to indicate the Lord's glorious Person, "Son" is usually employed by the Spirit to convey it fully; e.g. "unto the Son he says". What you say as to Wellington does not set aside M.W.B.¬s thought. That he was the son of Wellesley at Eton and 'ever since he existed' is true, but to apply this to our Lord is just 'begging the question' and hence valueless. You say, 'Son expresses relationship and that cannot be made'. 'Made' is vague, but sonship is in Scripture, the result of begetting or adoption; in either case it is the result of a transaction. Christ is the only-begotten Son; we are adopted.
I have written much more than I set out to write, but as I proceeded I found more detail was needed than I anticipated. I am assured you will give full attention to what my letter contains; if you do, God will, I believe, make our correspondence profitable.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
January 15th, 1932.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for sending me Mr. W------¬s paper, which I had not seen.
The weakness of the writer's position appears at the outset (page 4), as he is compelled to put something into the quotation he gives from the 'prominent leader' so as to make it the subject of adverse criticism. The quotation in part is, 'The essence, or being, of God is not a subject of revelation;' the criticism in part is 'He ... confuses the ... essence of God and the relations between divine Persons in the Godhead'. The *quotation* says nothing about relations. Mr. W------ says the 'prominent leader' writes thus of sonship, but the quotation refers to 'essence or being' which is not relationship. The paper then goes on, 'To advance the thought that in the Godhead ... such wonderful Persons have no relationship the one with the other'. Who has advanced such a thought? I certainly have not heard of it. Then follows, 'And ... to deny to such Persons, if relationship does exist, the ability to reveal Themselves in that relationship is unconsciously to assume a knowledge that has placed a limit even upon God Himself'. Who has made such a denial? The writer adduces no evidence that anyone has done so. He is
{342}
thus in the position of publicly charging his brethren with most serious error without furnishing proof of it, and it may be assumed that if such proof had been available he would have produced it.
On page 5 we have, 'This glorious Person is in this theology reduced to a nebulosity; for it is part of the teaching that not only as Son, but as the Word, our Lord Jesus became such at His birth'. Think of one charging his brethren with reducing their Saviour to a nebulosity on *such* evidence! I use the word evidence, but there is none brought forward. Saying that our Lord became in *fact* the Son and the Word as becoming Man cannot affect His Person as in the form of God -- He is *the Same*, yesterday, today and forever. Mr. Raven held and taught (as can be shown from his printed ministry) what Mr. W------ says reduces Christ to a nebulosity -- yet Mr. W------ remained in fellowship with him! F.E.R.¬s thought was mentioned at the Barnet meetings, the notes of which Mr. W------ has evidently seen. What is objected to is not 'new light'. Mr. W------ says (page 1) that the Lord, as a distinct Person in the absolute Godhead is not challenged by those who offer us 'new light'. How then are they reducing Him to a nebulosity? The charge is absurdly false.
On page 6 we read, 'It is wrong for any one, however gifted, to say that nothing can be known of Godhead in His eternal Godhead glory'. Here again is an implied charge without proof. The quotation from the 'prominent leader' speaks of 'the essence or being of God' not being the subject of revelation (Mr. W------ admits this in part), but this is not saying 'that nothing can be known of Godhead in His eternal Godhead glory'. God is, and ever was love; we know this blessed fact. We know, too, that there are and were three Persons in the Deity. No one with whom we are walking denies these things. They are not in question, but rather: *Does Scripture warrant us in saying* that the relationships taken by divine Persons with each other so that God should be known and His counsels in Christ (involving sonship in Him and His own) carried into effect, are the relationships of Deity in the past eternity? That these relationships were in purpose and so existed in the Divine Mind from eternity is true; it is also true, I believe, that being in purpose (involving the family thought) they entered into the creation from the outset, as we learn in Proverbs. But from the time Mr. Raven spoke of
{343}
the matter in America I have shrunk from applying such relationships to divine Persons as in absolute Deity (i.e. before incarnation) as would imply that One of Them was in a position of relative inferiority. I said little or nothing as to this important matter for many years, but the more I weighed it the more assured I was of the truth F.E.R. advanced. It can be seen as to the "Word" in his Readings on John, and as to the Son in his printed letters. To say, as those who object are obliged to do, that "Son" and "only-begotten" do not imply relative inferiority (subjection, etc.) is simply to discredit the language that God has been pleased to use. These expressions were understood in this sense, and to say that God used them as stripped of their ordinary meaning is surely not right.
@Proverbs 8 is appealed to as treating of our Lord's sonship before incarnation. This is natural, for it has certain expressions that seem to favour the thought. The understanding of the chapter, however, requires special attention and dependence on Divine teaching. That wisdom, as seen there, refers to Christ in a certain sense, has been recognised by Christians generally. It has also been used derogatorily by His enemies; the Arians alleged that the chapter showed that our Lord was a creature. In the paper before us (page 6), wisdom is viewed as a divine Person, in whom another divine Person objectively delights, and this, notwithstanding that wisdom is said in this chapter to be "possessed" by Jehovah and "brought forth". Although I gladly observe that Mr. W------ is emphatic as to our Lord's eternal Personality, yet his treatment of @Proverbs 8 weakens this, and lends support to the error of the 'Creed' that He was begotten of His Father before the worlds.
In this chapter wisdom speaks as on earth, active in a world of sin. She speaks as a person and refers to prudence in a personal way, saying she finds the knowledge that comes of reflection. In verses 22 - 31 she gives an account of herself in the past; Jehovah possessed me in the beginning of His way; I was set up from everlasting; before the hills I was brought forth -- this expression used twice. It is clear, therefore, that we must view wisdom as active here on earth, but supremely in Christ, who, as Man, is said to be the wisdom of God, and made to us wisdom; and then to trace it from eternity. From the way this part of the chapter is introduced, there can be no doubt that wisdom comes in in view of divine operations. It is relative. It was in God integrally, but comes into evidence
{344}
as needed. Jehovah "possessed" ('acquired', "set up") me in the beginning of His way; before the hills I was "brought forth" (referring to birth). The effort (pages 19, 20) of Mr. W------ to get rid of the serious obstacle in his way expressed in the words "brought forth" is exceedingly weak and futile. He tries to show that the words express the 'exercise' of God in the creation; that it involved emotion, solicitude, etc. -- whereas, the chapter connects the expressions "possessed", "set up" and "brought forth" with wisdom before the creation. Then in verses 27 - 31, as the creation is proceeding, Jehovah is the worker, not wisdom, although elsewhere in the book wisdom is very active here on earth. Hence it is obvious that verses 22 - 31 are intended to enhance the position and service of wisdom among men. It was ever in and of God as a supreme quality and regarded in a personal way by Him, evidently in view of Christ becoming Man, who, as Man, is said to be it. In the New Testament it is also treated as a Person, the Lord saying, wisdom is justified of all her children. It was active in its infinite perfection in Himself. Christ was always in view in the purpose of God, and so we can understand that wisdom's account of herself alludes to Him in this light, and hence the beautiful spirit and touches in it throughout. But to make the passage apply to a divine Person in absolute Deity before incarnation is, I am assured, forcing it. The Jehovah who is presented in it as operating is Christ, for "*The Word was God*", by whom all things were made.
I may explain here as to the alleged remark at Bristol (page 14) that in making statements or answering questions in a large meeting a thing may be said, the meaning of which is quite clear to those present, but when reported *by itself* may be wrong. Any one who reads @Proverbs 8 knows that wisdom loves and can be loved; but he may know also that wisdom, while personified there and elsewhere, is properly a quality or attribute, being possessed, brought forth, etc., and so does not love in the sense that Christ loved and is loved. This is what was intended to be conveyed at Bristol, and I believe, understood by the brethren present at the reading in question.
The next subject in the paper is @Proverbs 30. In keeping with the book, this chapter has a prophetic outlook. Agur's question (verse 4) is fully answered in the New Testament. The passage proves nothing as to the subject treated. Mr.
{345}
W------ says, or implies, that the names taken by God in the Old Testament applied to Him before He took them; but it should be noted that they are relative and come in as needed. "Jehovah" is hardly an exception to this, but almost personal, equal to "I Am". What the names denote was, of course, in God inherently, but this is another matter. The Father, Son and Spirit formally come into evidence as Christ was baptised. That there are three Persons is plainly alluded to in the Old Testament, but now that One of Them has become Man, He is owned as Son by the Father, and the Spirit comes upon Him. This is how Scripture presents the facts. We must not intrude into the things we have not seen and say that Divine titles which are relative, applied formally to the Persons as in absolute Deity before the things to which they relate existed. To be clear in our minds as to these wonderful things we must apprehend Deity by Itself; then Deity in relation to its counsel and purpose; then in relation to creation; and finally to redemption. In connection with the last we have the relationship of Father and Son, which enters into the eternal counsel of God. The relationship was in counsel and purpose from eternity, but as One of the divine Persons became incarnate, it took actual form, and attention was called to it at His baptism. It had been announced prophetically in @Psalm 2, "Thou art my son; *I* this day have begotten thee". It may be said by some that this is another sonship, but this cannot be shown from Scripture. Hebrews treats it as the sonship of Christ in the fullest sense; e.g., "as to the Son, Thy throne O God", etc.
What I detect in the papers urging so-called eternal sonship is disregard (unconsciously, I believe) of the magnitude of the incarnation. The enemy is in this. How little the bearing and greatness of the wonderful transaction enters into any of our minds! It was in the divine mind from eternity, cherished there, we may say. What the communications between the divine Persons were, who can say? Then the emptying of Himself and the inscrutable transaction which enabled our adorable Lord to be in man's estate! and the communications between the Father and the Son from the outset of the Son's humanity as seen in @Psalm 22: 9, 10! All this, and indeed all that the Lord was personally, all that He was in Deity, entered into the position He had thus taken in obedience and love. All was in the Father's heart as He said, "This is my
{346}
beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight". In saying these things, is one denying the Father and the Son, as is hinted on page 8 of this paper? I trow not; it is rather that the truth of the relationship as presented in Scripture is asserted. This page asks, 'Have they also dropped the Triune God, the Trinity, because the term is not in our Bibles?' The answer is that the Trinity is formally stated in our Bibles to exist and so true Christians believe in it; eternal sonship is not. The absence of the term 'eternal Son' in Scripture, although important to notice, is not the determining factor, but *the general teaching of Scripture*.
@Hebrews 7 is introduced (pages 15, 16). 'The idea conveyed by Mr.------ seems unavoidably to involve the error that the Son of God had beginning of days'. But we are not told what the 'idea' is. When something is combated publicly, fairness requires that the words conveying what is alleged to be erroneous should be given. Throughout this accusatory paper I cannot find a quotation, which justifies or gives any ground for the comments which are made upon it. That on page 4 is evidently from a private letter, the intent of which is said to be to discredit the term eternal sonship; but the quotation itself treats of the inscrutability of 'the essence or being of God', not eternal sonship. Why not quote what was written to 'discredit' this? Instead of a plain (however brief) statement of what is attempted to be controverted in the actual words of those whose teaching is impugned, innuendo marks the paper. It is sorrowful to have to make such a statement regarding one highly esteemed in the past, but I believe no unbiased reader of his booklet will fail to own the truth of it.
Returning to @Hebrews 7, I suppose what is alluded to in the quotation given above from page 16 is what appeared in the Barnet notes as to the Lord's sonship, but the eternal *Personality* of our Lord is most emphatically stated in these notes and elsewhere, and this is fully admitted by Mr. W------ (page 1). How then can what is conveyed 'involve the error that the Son of God had beginning of days?' @Hebrews 7 treats of the Person of the Son of God, who is ever the same -- "Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today and to the ages to come". In this section of Hebrews the Son is introduced from @Psalm 2. "Thou art my Son; *I* this day have begotten thee". Here His sonship begins in time, but this, of course, cannot affect His
{347}
eternal Personality. "Son" or "Son of God", though titles referring to our blessed Lord here as Man, usually denote this in Scripture, and evidently it is so used in Hebrews 7: 3.
As to revelation (page 16), while the word is current amongst Christians, it is worthy of note that when the thought of God being made known is formally introduced (@John 1 18) the word is "declared", not 'revealed'. No one has seen God at any time, but the Son has declared Him. Revelation is used as to the Father, but to *certain* persons, not general, as far as I can find. The Son, as to His Person, is not said to be revealed. He is known to the Father only. "To reveal his Son in me", does not, of course, weaken this, and cannot include the inscrutability of our Lord's Person referred to in @Matthew 11: 27. The rolling away of a veil from before an 'existing object' does not accurately describe what is said in Scripture of God (the Deity) being made known. It would imply, the veil being removed, that the Deity could be seen by the creature, which @John 1: 18 denies. The Only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, has declared God. It is not the removing of a veil, but One telling of God, bringing Him out. He is thus through a Man (the Only-begotten Son) brought within the range of man's apprehension. It is a question of God's nature and attributes, not, of course, His essential being and form. While God is thus declared He, in His essential being and form, remains inscrutable -- "Whom no man has seen nor can see".
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
February 3rd, 1932.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- It was good of you to write as to Windsor. I am very thankful there was practical unity as to the commencement of the breaking of bread there. Mr. Clews also mentioned the matter, in a recent letter, and I was especially pleased that he was free to be present at the first meeting. Having lived in Windsor, he is conversant with conditions there. Now that a start has been made, we must count on the Lord to make them stand, all aiding as much as possible. It seems the Lord took a hand preliminarily to indicate that Mr. D------ is not one to lead among the saints.
Three households, so to speak, in the Detroit region instead
{348}
of one implies a certain weakness at the outset, but as each uses its feet and balance there will be power to move on. To maintain practical unity among the three meetings will be of special importance; also that unspiritual elements should not be allowed a place of influence.
The Lord is helping much in *this* area -- quite a good enquiry from 'without' is manifest and several coming forward -- two of whom had been active in so-called gospel work.
My wife would unite in love in Christ to you both and to all the saints.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
February 5th, 1932.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- I had been looking for a line from you, not having had one since we left England, and so I was very glad to receive yours of the 5th.
We are sorry that Betty had been so ill, but thankful she has recovered. Evidently Mrs. Ide and you have kept well through the winter which you will regard as a signal mercy from God for at *our* age the cold and damp weather tells. My wife and I have had a good winter, thank God. My wife's headaches have not disappeared but have lessened considerably. My health has not been as good for years as it has been lately and you may be sure we are grateful to our God for this. He evidently answered the prayers of His people for me in blessing the operation.
The work of God is *very* cheering in these parts. The regular and special meetings have been remarkably well sustained; besides, there is a good enquiry from those 'outside;' two brothers who have been occupied in 'service' among the sects are, with their families, moving in the truth. One of them was a Lutheran minister, having had charge of two congregations. His letter of resignation is excellent. We are cast on the Lord for them, that the enemy may not darken and divert them from 'the way'.
The good news of the Stow Hill Depot had reached us from time to time, and is now confirmed by you. Our prayers go up constantly for it and all engaged in the service there. Evidently the Lord is blessing you in it. Of course, the holiday season would afford more demand and hence your good
{349}
receipts; but the hymn book sales will help now; afterwards there will probably be a lull. But the support the Lord has granted and the general interest in this service are most gratifying and should urge us on to greater activity. The night comes when no one can work!
The Depot here was puzzled this week by the cable from Stow Hill saying that the booklet on 'Food' published by it (the N.Y. Depot) would need to be sold at five pence in London. The cost mentioned was 'about' two and a half cents -- a little over one and a half pence, plus 15 percent carriage, etc. As the Consul says there is no customs duty in England on such literature, it was thought right to forward 2,000 at one and a half pence, N.Y. paying all charges. A copy of this publication has just come and I quite believe it can be circulated at two pence. The brethren here wished to have these Notes published and I am quite in sympathy with them. The Notes (Readings in Judges) of the meetings at Rochester last May are ready for the press. We shall need to consider whether they should be published here or in England -- of course the brother in the N.Y. Depot (Mr. B. Midgeley) will be writing Mr. J------ as to above.
Our present thought is to sail on the Cameronia on March 12th. We may land in Belfast!
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you all.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
February 8th, 1932.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- Answering yours of the 4th inst., I would say that the disaffection in Scotland through McB------¬s influence is, as far as I know, confined to those who returned from 'Glanton' along with him, and this only at Kilmarnock. *They* (five or six, I think), left and went back to Glanton; he was, I believe, withdrawn from. Others in Scotland, particularly Mr. P------ of Edinburgh, are objecting to what has been said about so-called 'eternal sonship', but they are few, and are not affiliating with McB------ as far as I know.
Mr. W------, one of the Glanton leaders, has published a bad paper on this subject, but it is self condemnatory. It has been answered. Thus a concerted attack is being made, but I am assured God will turn it into a fresh exposure of the Glanton spirit and position.
{350}
There has been and is much honest difficulty in regard of the truth in the Barnet notes, but the Lord has helped wonderfully. The great truths involved are clearer and the greatness of Christ is more and more apprehended.
With love in Christ,
Affectionately,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- I enclose a copy of a letter to McB------, -- please return.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 18th, 1932.
Beloved Brother, -- I return herewith the paper on the hymn book revision and the other papers you sent.
I have made all the changes C.A.C. suggested for 'smoother reading', also nearly all those of the same character proposed by D.L.H. The paper is improved by all these changes.
As regards @Hebrews 7 (your notes), the chapter begins -- "For this Melchisedec" -- thus a personage is before us, concerning whom certain things are said, including the fact that he was priest of the Most High God. Although the *word* personage (verse 4) is not in the original, it is clearly implied, and this is confirmed by the personal pronoun "whom" immediately following. I do not see, therefore, how "this" can be made to refer to "the system of priesthood". What is in view is the person who is described in @Genesis 14 as bearing the office of priest, so as to emphasise the force of @Psalm 110. The thought of Melchisedec's (Christ's) personal greatness runs through the chapter, culminating in verse 28 -- "the word of the swearing of the oath ... a Son perfected for ever". We must distinguish between the Person and the office or offices He bears. Melchisedec had several, including priesthood, and all added to his greatness. Besides, he was without father, mother, genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life. All these features enter into his assimilation to the Son of God.
Your remarks as to assimilation being official rather than personal do not agree with what the passage states. "Son of God", although involving His mediatorial office, is a personal
{351}
title of Christ as Man and it is to Him Melchisedec is assimilated. That is, the Person of Christ is in view. His priesthood is based on this, not on parentage or genealogy.
What I have written as to @Hebrews 7 bears also on Mr. Higgins¬ thoughts. While, of course, priesthood is in view, the assimilating characteristics are personal. It is "this Melchisedec", not 'this priest'. "This Melchisedec" links with "abides a priest continually", what lies between is characteristic of the man, and shows that he was "likened to" the Son of God. I am afraid of the statement, 'He was not assimilated to Deity, but to the Son of God'. It exposes the one who makes it to the charge that he does not regard the Son of God as a Divine Person. Hebrews expressly attributes Deity to the Son (chapter 1: 8), and the fact that chapter 7 treats of priesthood does not make sonship in this chapter inferior. In both chapters, He is Man, but withal a Divine Person. If we keep the great fact of our Lord's unchanged Personality steadily before us, we shall be preserved from error in thinking or treating of Him in His forms, offices or positions.
It is clear that the Spirit of God designed the description of Melchisedec in @Genesis 14 so that it should convey the thought of a Divine Person on earth as Man. It is true that Christ's official priesthood required that He should die, rise and ascend to heaven, but His sonship existed from the outset of His incarnation. Hebrews stresses the Deity of the Son, and it is to the Son of God that Melchisedec is assimilated. In this connection it is important to note that John does not give the Lord's conception or birth, but a Divine Person becoming flesh. He owns His mother in John and so it is recognised that He came in through her, but still it is a Divine Person coming in and going out.
In view of what I have written, I have left the paragraphs of the paper dealing with @Hebrews 7 almost as they were. I am assured they convey the truth, and I trust you and others will agree as you reconsider the subject. You will observe that I have added something to paragraph 1, page 3, as to @Hebrews 13: 8. I never understood the verse otherwise, and after weighing it with similar passages I am assured that what I have stated is right. You will also see that I have accepted C.A.C.¬s suggestion for paragraph 3, page 4.
The Lord has helped in the mutual preparation of this
{352}
account of the hymn book revision, and I have not a doubt that it contains generally the truth of Scripture as to the subjects treated.
With love in Christ to you all in which my wife joins, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 3rd, 1932.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- I am very glad to have yours of the 18th inst. and I write at once to say that it will be *quite unnecessary* for you to take your car to Ireland. Our thought is to visit Dublin only in the Free State and it will be cheaper to go by train than to ferry your car from Liverpool to Belfast. After Dublin -- which would be the week after Easter -- we think of Scotland. We should cross from Belfast, after Dublin.
We shall be looking forward to seeing Mrs. Ide and you at Belfast and we are glad you hope to be there. Mr. Williams writes that they may attend the Birmingham Conference also. I hope they will.
We purpose to sail by the Cameronia on the 12th inst. -- we land at Belfast, which is very suitable, arriving there probably on the 20th, Lord's Day. I shall have business to attend to that week.
I note your remarks as to sonship and I trust the special meetings held have been supported of the Lord. I have heard of such meetings as profitable in many places. If the Lord is calling attention specially to Himself in this respect it is important that the saints should know. The truth as to His Person is very poorly understood. I have, at the request of the brethren, written a paper as to the hymn book and also a letter in answer to Mr. W------¬s naughty paper. Some on your side are carefully going over these, and I believe the Lord is making the truth clearer. All do not see eye to eye, as new features have come up, but ground is being gained.
There is *much* cheer here -- another meeting is under contemplation, our meeting dividing. I am assured the Lord will bless this movement -- and a remarkable interest has sprung up in the New Jersey area.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you all.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{353}
March 3rd, 1932.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for writing so freely as to your local matters. I am much concerned as to the conditions you mention. They suggest great need of patience. There is, no doubt, some ground for the feeling of R.O. as to the three brothers you name, but evidently they, the three brothers, are not violating any principles nor marked by any objectionable conduct and so you must go on with them as in common fellowship. The Lord alone can adjust such circumstances.
It is always wise and tending to make for mutual confidence and peace to keep as near as possible to brethren in another meeting who may differ from us; that is, attend their meetings, etc. I have found this way to be blessed of God. You may be assured of my prayers.
My hands are very full, so I cannot add more. Mrs. Taylor and I purpose sailing for Ireland -- landing at Belfast -- on Saturday, please God.
Our united love in Christ to you both.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Belfast.
March 24th, 1932.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- I was thankful to receive your letter. The report of the meetings in the Nelson district is most cheering and I thank God for it.
As to Dunedin, I hear some fifteen have withdrawn from the others. This, I hope, may imply something for God -- what the Lord may be free to own. From facts available it would appear that old unjudged roots remain in the primary meeting. It will be a question for those *immediately* responsible to decide as before the Lord *how long* they can wait before proceeding without those who have not judged themselves. The Lord would encourage long patience, but not *indefinite* waiting. In dealing with evil in a gathering, such as Dunedin, it seems to me that those immediately (that is, those nearest) should be taken into account in any action taken. A meeting at a distance acting to protect itself is doubtful procedure, and *tends* to independency. There is no doubt that @Deuteronomy 21 affords the principle and this plainly points to the "nearest
{354}
meeting" being directly responsible. A person presenting a letter of commendation in a distant place from the suspected meeting *might* be requested to refrain from breaking bread as a precautionary measure, but certainly no final action should be taken; this should be left with those nearby. The Lord has definitely owned this recognition of local responsibility.
The Chicago affair lately came to the front again. Dr. McA------ wrote me asking for my difficulties, which I immediately conveyed to him; but what I wrote was just a repetition of what I had laid before him a year before. They have not (as the others who had part in them have) owned their part in the unscriptural procedure in the council held there, and they have allowed certain false principles and statements written by my brother to remain unjudged. In his final reply Dr. McA------ indicated that no effort whatever was being made to meet these matters. A.M.H. is also in correspondence with them and Mr. G------. The latter, however, has receded from the apparently honest judgment he reached as to the whole matter last year. While all this causes serious concern, there is no likelihood of a situation like that of last year arising.
I am assuming the usual Easter meetings are being held at Wellington and we are praying for you all.
There is a good interest in the New York area. A new meeting began in Flatbush lately and another is in prospect in the Plainfield area.
You will see that I am in Europe again -- looking forward to the usual meetings here.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea and you and the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Glasgow.
April 11th, 1932.
Mr. A. P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- -Many thanks for all news and letters forwarded. You may be assured we are thinking of you all *much*. The Flatbush and Kings Highway meetings also are much on our hearts. The open air preaching will now be on and will occasion the brothers engaged in it much earnest concern.
I could fill many pages as to the work of God in Great
{355}
Britain. The meetings at Belfast I mentioned to ------ briefly. They were supported in a remarkable way and largely attended.
The season in Dublin was also most cheering. In spite of outward conditions the saints go on and there is a measure of increase, although, in the government of God, it is not likely that there will be much extension of the testimony in the Free State. God began there and so it had an immense opportunity.
There is a great general interest here in Glasgow. The special meetings over last weekend were very largely attended. At the reading we had the undoing of the works of the devil by the Son of God. One of the addresses was on the combination of spiritual life and intelligence -- @Revelation 4 and 5. In Ayrshire I find a divided state of things and so arranged for three meetings, and therefore shall not go north until the 15th inst. As there is a low state in some of the meetings near Kilmarnock, McB------ has found troubled waters to fish in, and so a few are disturbed. It is likely the Lord has a controversy with them on account of their state. Mr. Coates is writing an excellent paper answering the attacks of the Glanton leaders as to the truth of our Lord's sonship. My paper regarding W------¬s paper is being circulated in typed form -- I hope to have some copies sent to New York. There is abundant evidence that the Lord is blessing the exercise concerning this great matter to His people. I hope brethren in America will not miss the gain of it. We expect to remain in Scotland until May 1st, then south, please God.
Mother unites in love to Ruth and the children and all.
Affectionately,
Father.
<hr>
Dundee.
April 18th, 1932.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother. -- I am very glad to have your letter. The news of the Depot is cheering. I am assured there will be help as the service is pursued simply and in dependence on the Lord. It was inevitable that difficulties would have to be met, but experience has helped and will help. Under God it is a sure teacher. That two brothers with current business experience are free to devote needed time to the management of the Depot is an immense advantage and in time will ensure
{356}
its success, I am assured. For this my prayers will constantly go up.
There has been notable help from the Lord in the meetings we have attended in Scotland so far. The situation in Glasgow is more promising than it has been for a long time; a new meeting has recently begun and two more are in prospect, please God. The difficulty now to be overcome is mainly the procuring of halls. A strained relation has long existed between the Glasgow meetings and those in Hamilton, involving meetings elsewhere also. Last Thursday I was present at a meeting in which the occasion of the difficulty was reviewed and much of the darkness seemed to be removed. I look for an immediate settlement. There had been darkening influences at work in Ayrshire, somewhat through Mr. McB------. We had three meetings there in which there was help and I am quite hopeful that no serious damage will be caused by McB------¬s activities, although many of his relatives are breaking bread with us. A disjointed state of things exists in that district, however.
The meetings here over the weekend were very enjoyable, a large number attending from many parts. We are leaving today for the Moray Firth; Peterhead next weekend, Edinburgh the following one and Newcastle on May 7th, please God.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and yourself and all,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Peterhead.
April 22nd, 1932.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Pardon delay in answering your very kind letter of February 23rd. I send just a brief line now.
I cannot say yet whether we can accept your invitation. If at all it would be for a Lord's Day. I hope to be in London for a week in the beginning of June -- Saturday, June 4th, at Stoke Newington, please God -- and I shall try and see you and Mrs. Gardiner there. It will be just to spend a little while with you -- not for a special meeting. I shall let you know in due course.
Places where the enemy has been working have been specially on my mind and so I am spending more time than usual in
{357}
Scotland. During the first half of May I am to be in the north-east coast district including Newcastle.
I am most thankful for the Forest Hill result and earnestly hope that those there will be with their brethren in a whole-hearted way.
The Lord has graciously helped in Scotland. There is a change for the better in Glasgow. Ayrshire is low down and has cleavage, so that McB------ has had troubled waters to fish in: but I do not think much damage will accrue. The truth is prevailing. I had three meetings there. McB------ is now with Glanton again, but in spite of the darkness exhibited in his wanderings he is seeking to teach generally! Such is the result of self-importance being before one instead of Christ.
There has been a most refreshing time -- although tiring physically -- on the Moray Firth.
My wife unites in warm love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and you all.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Jedburgh.
May 3rd, 1932.
Mr. A. P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- We are just finishing a month in Scotland. It is a longer time than we usually give this part of the Kingdom, but the enemy had been working here and I had this in mind. The Lord has helped in a remarkable way. I covered the area of Glasgow down as far as Ayrshire; then Dundee, the meetings on the Moray Firth, Peterhead, Boddam, Aberdeen, Fifeshire, Edinburgh, and now we are in the 'border' meetings. At Edinburgh last week-end a large number -- over 800 -- came together. We had a reading on Wisdom's house (@Proverbs 9), and an address on the Inscrutable. Considerable time was given to the great subject of *Who* Christ is and *What* He is. On the Lord's Day afternoon there was an address on the *Lord's* Day and *first* day of the week.
Yesterday we came here to stay with Mr. and Mrs. Harkness for a few days. Then we go to Newcastle for meetings next week-end. There is some disturbance in that district and we are much cast on the Lord as to this. While there we shall,
{358}
please God, visit Darlington and Scarborough. Then we go to Peterborough for the weekend of the 14th -- Whit Monday being on the 16th. There will be special meetings there on that day. Afterwards we go to Birmingham for the Conference.
Mother unites in much love to you all.
Affectionately,
Father.
<hr>
Scarborough.
May 11th, 1932.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- It was good of you to write me so fully and I much appreciate too your steady service in sending on our mail.
Please God, I shall try and be in the London area during the week of the 24th and the following one, but I have promised to call at Bath, as I wrote you, and I have not cancelled this yet. If I am equal for it -- Purley coming on the Saturday -- I shall be at the A.M.H. farewell meeting. We are thinking of spending a few days with Mrs. Jerrard during that week, but we have not enquired of her. I hope to know all more definitely next week at Birmingham. At any rate, we hope to be with you on the Monday after Purley.
There was much help at Newcastle and great interest, but the local condition is distressing beyond words. The Lord was surely good to give us such a season in spite of this. The trouble no doubt dates back to ------¬s time, but the present acute form of it is due to the pressing of Mrs. D------¬s claim. I felt it laid on me to point out that the general fellowship was affected, asking the brothers to meet. J.H.T., A.N. and others from different meetings were present. As it was manifest that God was not helping those who were acting for Mrs. D------ and as Bangor, Croydon as well as Newcastle were involved, some qualified brothers acceptable to both sides should be asked to examine the whole matter and if any unrighteousness was found by them it could be dealt with in an orderly way. I am hopeful that this suggestion may finally be accepted. It was pointed out to W------ that he is acting as a solicitor for Mrs. D------ and combining this with his part in the meeting. The former should stand by itself -- he is, in principle, Mrs. D------ *demanding* payment, which element should not be admitted into the
{359}
assembly. You can understand what I mean. I think W------ sees this. But I must leave for the meeting.
Our united love to you all,
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- J. M------ acknowledges the debt as a *moral* obligation and has paid more than half and purposes to pay all, but this is not accepted as satisfactory -- he must own the debt as *legal*.
<hr>
Abridged Notes of Reading on @Philippians 2: 1 - 11, at Mr. Percy Lyon's house, London, England, June 2nd, 1932.
The epistle starts with Paul referring to himself and Timotheus as *bondmen* of Jesus Christ. This is significant in view of what is before us in the verses read, indicating the kind of spirit necessary in approaching a subject so profound and holy. The supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ (@Philippians 1: 19) combined with that lowliness of mind referred to in chapter 2: 3, are both essential if we are to apprehend the truth the Lord is developing as to His Person at the present time. The merely natural mind and intelligence must be excluded and a state of soul found with us giving liberty to the Holy Spirit to impress us with His thoughts and to form us intelligently as to them. This state of soul was found amongst the saints at Philippi, giving the apostle perfect freedom to address them, not as apostle but as "*bondmen*".
*The mind in Christ Jesus* is as He became Man. The designation "Christ Jesus" does not apply to Him as in absolute Deity. "Did not esteem it not an object of rapine to be on an equality with God" has to do with the mind of Christ Jesus in manhood. He was consciously "on an equality with God". The mind of humiliation does not properly belong to God *as God*. @Psalm 113: 6 no doubt anticipates the incarnation. There is a tendency with us to put back into the Deity human thinking. The mind in Christ Jesus does not refer to human thoughts as in Deity. It is the mind that is proper to Man, and is undoubtedly mentioned here in comparison with that of Adam -- one Man in contrast to another.
{360}
*Subsisting in the form of God*. We have to leave that as beyond us. The expression of His substance (@Hebrews 1) is not what we have here. The expression of the thing is not the thing itself. Substance denotes what God is *essentially*. Christ as Man was the expression of this. It is not a superficial thing. What God is was there in its root principle. @Philippians 2 is the form of God, conveying not merely what is external, but what is substantial. Subsisting in the form of God conveys that it is not an appearance taken on. *En morphe Theou*. It had no beginning; it was *not* taken. The form of a bondman *was* taken. "Subsisting in the form of God" has a past setting in @Philippians 2, and so the passage does not warrant our saying it applies now. The Lord may take up the form of God -- who can say? though not permanently, as we should never see Him then. We cannot limit Divine Persons. The form of God is a condition which was never taken -- it was always there. The statement as to it here shuts out speculation. It is not said that the Lord left the form of God, but a change in this respect is clearly intimated. Inscrutability enters into the passage, and we are unsafe if we do not bow to this, maintaining it in our minds. This chapter does not permit us to say that Christ *subsists* in the form of Man, and yet it shows in the strongest way that He took human condition in the fullest sense -- sin apart. As to the glory referred to in @John 17: 5, we do not know what it was, we can hardly say it was the form of God.
*But emptied Himself*. We cannot say He emptied Himself of anything. This refers to the taking of the bondman's form; two sides, as it were, of the same thing. The Scripture makes the emptying Himself synchronise with taking a bondman's form. To make it an act of mind in Deity is too definite as making the Lord do something in the sense of humbling Himself as in Deity, before taking the bondman's form, which does not seem to conform to the way Scripture states the truth. We cannot use the word "emptying" without modification in our minds. As already said, we have to leave "subsisting in the form of God" as beyond us. His Personality does not alter. Equality is bound up with His Personality. @John 5 stands as manifesting in the Lord a marvellous blending of equality in subjection. The emptying Himself is a divine pattern for us, but seen in manhood. There could be no pattern for us in Deity (the inscrutable).
{361}
*Form of a bondman* is not only physical but involves attitude of mind. Primarily human form was not bondservice. In @John 13 when the Lord sits at table it is not in bondman's form, but when He rises from supper and girds Himself to serve it is. But then, the service concluded, He resumes His place as sitting, and He is then no longer in that attitude of mind. We cannot say that bondman's form *may not be taken* by the Lord now. @Exodus 21 would show that it may. Bondman service involves the extent to which love will go and we cannot limit the Lord in the exercise of His prerogative to serve in this way even when in glorified condition (see @Luke 12: 37). He is Bondman to His Master, but Husband to His wife, and Father to His children (@Exodus 21: 5, 6).
*Taking His place in the likeness of men* would be that He was outwardly like an ordinary man, as one of the race. It would no doubt specially be seen in His private life. "Is not this the son of the carpenter? Is not his mother called Mary, and his brethren James, and Joseph, and Simon, and Judas?" (@Matthew 13: 55). He was distinguished amongst men at His baptism when He was anointed, the Spirit descending upon Him in bodily form as a dove.
*And having been found in figure as a man*. God says at His baptism: "In whom I have found my delight" (@Matthew 3: 17).
*Humbled Himself*. This is connected here with the figure of a man, not with the bondman's form, which is surely significant. The glory of His humiliation was seen from the outset, but it is not the Babe nor the Youth of twelve years, but the *Man -- found* here in figure as a *man*, who "humbled himself, becoming obedient even unto death", and would go with the anointing of Christ at His baptism.
*Taking* -- the word implies that it was His prerogative to take.
*Creation* is not infinite, but God is infinite, and He having come into the creation, we are in an environment in which we shall be fixed eternally. We are in infinity, not lost in it, we are there intelligently, being "filled even to all the fulness of God".
@1 Timothy 6: 15, 16. The Lord Jesus Christ, it would appear is included in that. The inscrutable enters into the passage.
@Ephesians 4: 10. He has ascended up *above* all heavens. Though Man, it involves His Deity, as *filling* all things.
{362}
*@John 5: 19*. "The Son can do nothing of Himself" is not a reference to His power which is ever undiminished, but to His choice. Having taken up the position of subjection and relative inferiority to the Father, He is in keeping with it. Reference to the Triumvirate at one time ruling over the ancient Roman Empire is illustratively helpful. One of the three might be a general and he would go down to the battlefield and serve and give his orders as such. In serving thus he did not cease to be Emperor or on equality with the other two, nor did his prerogative as such cease, although in abeyance. This is suggestive of what is found in @John 5 where the beautiful blending of equality in subjection is seen in the Son. He asserts there they must honour the Son as they honour the Father.
*@1 Corinthians 15: 28*. The *place* the Son is in is not imposed upon Him. It says, "Then the Son also himself *shall* be placed". It does not say who does it. He will represent the great principle of subjection, but we cannot say He will always (during every moment, so to speak) be that.
As already mentioned, the apostle in writing to the Philippians speaks of himself and Timotheus as *bondmen*. It is blessed to be such and maintained as such, as we are not likely to vie with one another as bondmen. The verses read (@Philippians 2: 5 - 11) are intended to impress us in this way. They are like a jewel of gold set in its right place -- not in a swine's snout (@Proverbs 11: 22) -- coming as they do in an epistle addressed to a company of saints such as was found at Philippi. Lydia would be amongst them. She was one who attended to the things spoken by Paul. She would be a most attentive listener to him. The letter would be read perhaps in her house. They might say, 'Well, evidently the Lord left the form of God', but Lydia would say, 'No, Paul does not say that', and if one said, 'the Lord would give up the form of a bondman', she would use the same negative words. She *attended* to what he *spoke*. We likewise want to habituate ourselves to attend to what Scripture says. We get more disclosures as we continue to listen. The Lord will go on speaking as we go on listening (see @Luke 19: 11).
Revised by J.T.
{363}
London.
June 6th, 1932.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- The Birmingham conference was greatly blessed of God. The numbers attending were large and representative. A definite sense of the presence of God prevailed throughout. Mr. Lyon wrote an account of it to Mr. Fawcett, which I hope you will see, and so I will not repeat here.
Since Birmingham we have been to Malvern, Barnet, Croydon, Enfield and now we are in London. There has been remarkable support from the Lord. At Euston Road Hall last Tuesday a very large number attended an address on the Holy Spirit as seen in Matthew -- a time to be remembered. Thus the Lord helps His people. While in the London area I have been present at very profitable conversations as to our Lord's Person -- @Philippians 2: 6, 7 and kindred passages. You will see Mr. Coates¬ tract in answer to A.J.P.¬s. I am sure God will bless it. The effort of the Glanton leaders against the truth, and with the intent of dividing the saints, has utterly failed. They have exposed themselves again.
Affectionately,
Father.
<hr>
Stockport.
June 21st, 1932.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for three letters and enclosures. I have read all with interest. We note all your remarks as to your sister's mentioned visit to America and quite understand. We are in full sympathy with the exercises of you both.
Newcastle is very cheering -- thank God! Mr. W------ says Mrs. D------ is agreeable to having the matter placed in the hands of one or two brothers. He has asked about Mr. Davidson and I have given W------ his address. I have also written Mr. D. I purpose writing Mr. Malpas.
I am most thankful to know of the help the Lord has been affording you. I have been thinking of you all as at Park Street this evening. I shall also remember you as in the West.
There was a good season at Nottingham. You will know that Mr. James Cumming of Glasgow was buried yesterday. Mr. Arthur Moore is in a nursing home at Hastings. There
{364}
have been remarkably good reports of R.B. No doubt he will be at Park Street tonight.
The O.B. and Glanton papers which you sent are indeed sorrowful reading. The Lord will have to say to them. I believe we may count on @Exodus 23: 22.
Our united love in Christ to you both and Lois,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
August 1932.
Mr. T------ 1.
My Dear Brother, -- I duly received your letter of the 29th ult. and your 'observations' of the 12th inst. These are saddening reading, for they show unmistakably that you have not yet faced as in the presence of God your part in the sad condition that has existed in the meeting in Newcastle during recent years. I felt constrained as before the Lord, while at the meeting convened at Newcastle in May, to tell you in the presence of the brethren that I believed you were largely to blame for it; the letter and paper from you, referred to above, confirms me in this serious impression, and I proceed to explain.
You told me last year that the matter against Mr. M------ was settled, that he (M------ ) and others -- I cannot say whether one or more -- had been formally told that they were unrighteous persons and that God would not be with them. That is, as I said to you in the presence of the brethren, you were by your own showing going on in fellowship with unrighteous persons.
Then when a local suggestion was made that a meeting should be held while I was in Newcastle, and when I wrote you as to this, you objected, saying in your letter to me there was no difficulty in Newcastle that could not be settled locally, and in the same letter asked me to meet some brothers at your house. Now before reaching Newcastle I had learned through conversations with several, including yourself, that a most deplorable state existed in the meeting, and on arrival this was confirmed, and the meeting of brothers which I attended disclosed such a state of feeling and cleavage that brought out the remarks made, that its assembly status was doubtful, and
{365}
that fellowship in a general sense was involved, this divided state having existed for more than two years and was growing worse rather than better. Thus your statement that there was no local difficulty that could not be settled locally was misleading as disregarding facts mentioned above. It was because of having confirmed on the spot the sorrowful information I had previously received that I felt I could not leave Newcastle without placing on the conscience of the brethren the serious exercises which burdened me -- that the state of the meeting involved general fellowship and that if it continued, the most serious consequences must ensue. How you could, as speaking before the Lord, refuse a meeting between some local and visiting brothers to take counsel as to this sorrow, saying it could be settled locally, and ask for a meeting in your house to talk over another matter, is quite inexplicable.
At the meeting of brothers referred to it was suggested that two or more competent brothers, acceptable to both sides in the financial dispute, should be asked to look into the purely business feature. This was not accepted then by Mr. W------, but it was by Mr. M------, but after a considerable time Mr. W------ cordially fell in with it, and the three brothers were invited to go to Newcastle with the knowledge and, as I understood, the concurrence of all. I cannot therefore accept your remark that the three brothers acted in the matter 'over the heads of local brethren'.
In your observations you say, 'this report has no authority whatever except what our Lord may give it in the consciences of the saints'. The report is the testimony of three witnesses, admittedly competent to testify as to the matter in question, competent to determine the truth as to it. Scripture (Deuteronomy) enjoins that a matter be established at the mouth of one or two witnesses. The reports of our three brothers, reached on scriptural grounds, contains the truth, needed for the consciences of the saints, as to the matter of controversy and so in itself has authority -- truth involved in matters to be judged always has authority, must have, there can be no true judgment without it -- and a refusal of this is a refusal of what God orders through His word as an all-essential means of arriving at a righteous judgment by the assembly (compare @Matthew 18, @John 8: 17 and other similar passages). Saying that the report has no authority save what the Lord gives it in the consciences of the saints is simply weakening the importance that He
{366}
attaches to the truth itself, as the scriptures I have quoted show. The statement, if accepted, would enable one to avoid the conviction which truth imparts by saying that the Lord had not given it authority in his conscience; on this line no true judgment can be attained. The determining factor in all matters of adjudication must be truth. The Lord helps His people, but in doing so He insists on the authority of established truth.
The report of our three brothers establishes the truth as to the matter of dispute, and refusal of it is the refusal of the Lord's authority conveyed in the above scriptures, and those who take this attitude may be assured of encountering His resistance and they will find that He is stronger than they. In the meantime, as refusing to judge themselves as disregarding the truth, they will continue to maintain the sorrowful condition that has existed in the Newcastle meeting, and this will bring a severer judgment. The complaint that the report is not signed has no weight, for its contents were stated verbally by its authors (Mr. Biggs being the speaker) in the presence of the brothers gathered at Newcastle, Mr. W------ at the same time making his confession. The truth was then put on the consciences of the brothers at Newcastle as before the Lord by three scripturally competent witnesses aided by Mr. W------¬s confession and *there it stands*. Refusal to be governed by it on the part of any in the Newcastle meeting, thus occasioning the continuance of the cleavage, etc., will certainly incur for them the Lord's stern resentment. The written report of what was verbally presented to the brothers of Newcastle really needed no signatures, for its authors were well known to all for whom it was written. Confirming what was verbally presented to the brothers of Newcastle, it bears the stamp of truth throughout and, as I said, disregard of it is disregard of the Lord's authority and ordering.
As I urged you in my last letter, I urge you now to face as before the Lord, your part in all this sorrowful history at Newcastle, not sparing yourself. If you do you will discover, I am certain, that you have not been "a son of peace" in it. When others have been for peace, you have been for war. You had part in an effort to prove unrighteousness and conspiracy in this, on the part of certain brothers, throwing the whole meeting into confusion. Whatever the discrepancies in these brothers, the charges which occasioned the sorrow, in
{367}
which you had part, have proved false, owned so by Mr. W------ and now it is the manifest obligation of all who had part in the charges, especially yourself who led in them, to humble yourselves before God and your brethren and own your wrong.
Faithfully yours in the Lord,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 9th, 1932.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- Since we parted at Southampton, Mrs. Ide and you and all yours have been in our minds, and we trust you all are proving the mercy of God in your health and circumstances generally, also that the work of God progresses in Teddington and district.
I have been hearing a little from ------, but nothing as to the general business at the Tract Depot. I earnestly hope there is a sense of the Lord's help in the service rendered and that it commands more generally the confidence of the brethren. I requested the brethren in this district to come together so as to convey the sense of the meeting held at Park Street on July 26th, as I thought it right and advantageous generally, that they should know of it. I also communicated to the saints gathered at Detroit for the special meetings last weekend an outline of the progress of the Depot. My impression is that while there has been defectiveness in the service, considerable of the criticism arose from other causes, and that however good the work done these will more or less remain. Thus, while those engaged in the service must necessarily pay attention to complaints and seek urgently to remove the cause of them, they will steadily go on, counting on the Lord to show to all that the principle they are acting on is of Himself.
We found evidence that God had been helping His dear people in these parts, and all spoke most approvingly of Mr. Besley's service. The tidings of our beloved brother's removal from our midst comes as a shock, but the Lord's way is perfect. He would, however, have us to *feel* what He does. I am looking to Him to raise up others to fill the serious gap caused in the ranks of those who serve in a special way.
My wife and I attended the special meetings held at Detroit and found more cheer than I can express. The meetings were, I believe, as good as any I have attended on this side of the
{368}
ocean, and financially better than any previous occasion. At the readings we had teaching, from @Acts 11 to 20. The Lord was good to us throughout, although the Chicago-Columbus matter which still drags to final settlement, cast a certain shadow on us.
The next special meetings are purposed to be held at Toronto the weekend of October 8th and I hope to attend; later I purpose, please God, to attend meetings at Council Bluffs at the end of November and I *may* go to Los Angeles for New Year's meetings. The need is great everywhere.
My wife would unite in warm love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you all.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 16th, 1932.
Mr. T------l.
Dear Brother, -- Your letter of the 3rd inst. came today and its contents are so diverse from the spirit and letter of the truth that enters into the government and order of the assembly, I am compelled to send you a further line.
In my last I reminded you of your statement to me last year, that the matter of the charges against Mr. M------ was settled by a formal pronouncement that he was unrighteous and that God would not be with him, etc., etc.; and that I pointed out to you at the brothers¬ meeting I attended at Newcastle that in formally pronouncing a man unrighteous and continuing in fellowship with him, you and those with you who did this constituted yourselves unrighteous (@2 Timothy 2: 20, 21). You had also introduced a false principle among the saints; viz. that sin can be dealt with in the assembly by formally stating that it exists in a certain person.
You confirm all this in detail in your letter just received, and add that in the minds of the brethren the matter is thus 'closed'. That is, a man is formally and solemnly charged with unrighteousness (included in the list of sins in @1 Corinthians 6: 9, 10) and nothing more done, the persons who so charged him continuing in fellowship with him, and thus the matter is regarded as closed! This is a temerity I have rarely met with in those having to do with holy things.
In the above remarks the unrighteousness alleged as to Mr.
{369}
M------ is assumed, but the report of Messrs. Davidson, Malpas and Biggs, and the facts appearing at the meeting I attended, show conclusively that it did not exist. Mr. M------ did acknowledge the debt to Mrs. D------ and paid the major part of it, and the report also says that under the circumstances the withholding of the balance sheet 'was not unreasonable'.
Thus the position is reversed: those who charged Mr. M------ with unrighteousness on the two counts mentioned (the non-acknowledgement of the debt and the withholding of the balance sheet) are themselves constituted unrighteous, if they refuse to own their wrong (@Deuteronomy 19: 16 - 19). Added to this was the false charge, as the report shows, that there had been improper dealings by Mr. M------ with the partnership funds and that there had been deliberate conspiracy by Mr. T------. All this places those who made these charges in a most serious position, out of which there is no escape save by unequivocal confession.
Besides all this, in your own case, the statement that the matter is regarded as *closed* -- underscoring yours -- after all these facts have been laid on your conscience, is a bit of effrontery to the Lord and the upright intelligence of those who know the facts of the case, to be matched only where the Lord's authority and the holy Scriptures are not regarded.
Your effort to place the case of Mr. M------ in @1 Corinthians 6 and not chapter 5 fails of value, for the part of the former you refer to is to direct that adjudication between Christians is to be by the saints and not unbelievers, whereas the case at Newcastle is the pronouncement of unrighteousness in a brother, which according to verse 9, i.e., would place the case in chapter 5.
As regards my suggestion that some qualified brothers might be asked to investigate the purely 'business side', this was not carried out over the heads of the brethren, as I also said in my last letter. It was put into effect at Mr. W------¬s initiative some two months after I left Newcastle. If Mr. W------ did not acquaint the brethren with his purpose to act on the suggestion, the omission would be his; but I believe he did tell them of it.
You say the body of the brethren here '... are going on in peace:' if they are going on thus with the sin of false accusation unjudged among them, it is a false peace and so will not stand. But the remark sounds sinister to ears like mine, that have heard the sorrowful mutual recriminations that were
{370}
current in Newcastle in May both inside and outside the meeting-room, and there is no evidence that a real change has come about.
Your statement that the examination by the three brothers 'completely set aside the nearest adjacent meeting, Wallsend', is extraordinary. Messrs. W------ and M------ requested the brothers to look into a cause of dispute between them, with the knowledge and consent, as I understand, of the Newcastle brethren, and which was carried out and a report rendered to the Newcastle brethren -- how does this completely set aside the Wallsend brethren? I feel morally certain that they do not think it does. I spoke to Messrs. Peart and Knight of Wallsend as to the brothers¬ meeting held at which I was present, suggesting that they might attend, but in the most sympathetic way they said they thought it wise not to.
I have written in plainness, dear brother, but you may be certain with nothing but kindness for you in my heart. Do not turn a deaf ear, I entreat you.
Affectionately and faithfully your brother in the Lord,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 24th, 1932.
Mr. B------.
My Dear Brother, -- I duly received your letter of the 10th inst. You have evidently received a wrong impression from my letter to Mr. T------ 1. I stressed the authority of the truth which the testimony of the three brothers (as to the matter committed to them to examine) established. I quoted certain scriptures which show that *truth* as to matters requiring adjudication by the saints is arrived at in the mouth of two or three witnesses, and that such truth has authority in itself. This was over against Mr. T------ l's statement that such truth -- referring to the 'report' 'has no authority whatever except what our Lord may give it in the consciences of the saints'. This principle, as I said in my letter, would enable one to disregard the authority which obviously truth has in *itself* on the plea that the Lord did not give it authority in his conscience.
The statement in my letter as to the Lord's authority is: 'The report of our three brothers establishes the truth as to
{371}
the matter of dispute, and refusal of it is the refusal of the Lord's authority *conveyed in the above scriptures* ... the written report of what was verbally presented to the brothers at Newcastle bears the stamp of truth throughout, and, as I said, disregard of *it* is disregard of the Lord's authority and ordering'. You will observe that there is nothing said of authority 'conferred upon the three brothers', nor is there anywhere in the letter; it is a question of the authority of the truth established on the scriptural principle of testimony of two or three witnesses. I have no doubt you will recognise the truth and importance of what I write, as you compare it with my letter. Besides, you will, I hope, have opportunity of seeing my letter to Mr. T------ 1 of the 16th inst. Your letter seeks to make out that the three brothers were biased and implies that I was the author of this bias. You furnish no facts, for generalities, such as the 'report' being faulty, reflecting 'cruelty', 'injustice', etc. etc., are of no factual value whatever. What could be the occasion of bias in me as in favour of Messrs. M------, T------ and against Messrs. T------ 1 and W------ ? The latter two have always been most friendly to me and supported in attitude and words most heartily what I have sought to minister as from the Lord, whereas I do not recall (although no doubt I had met him) even speaking to M------ until we met in the brothers¬ meeting in May. Mr. T------ l I have long known, of course, but I absolutely deny that I am biased in his favour as over against, for instance, yourself, T------ 1, W------, the D------ s, etc., etc.
No, my dear brother, there was no bias in me in favour of any brother or brothers; I am perfectly clear as before the Lord that I was concerned for what was right and true, and if I *appeared* to have prejudged the matter it was because the facts which came to my attention from all sides, especially what I saw and heard at the brothers¬ meeting, showed unmistakably that righteousness was wanting. You speak of a 'boastful remark' that a matter such as the one before you at Newcastle would be settled in New York in twenty minutes. I had no thought of calling attention to New York, for we have our own troubles and there is nothing to boast of. I might have named many other meetings, only wishing to emphasise by a known form of speech that the 'business' matter (which was the one before us) could ordinarily be quickly disposed of, and why not in Newcastle? You go on to say that my remark
{372}
showed how little I knew of the burden you had to carry for three years, indeed extending back 17 years. Why speak thus when the matter before us at the meeting was a financial dispute, the facts of which have been determined by competent persons? This is seen in the work of the three brothers. I had in mind this one thing, as you must know, for I recall saying, when it was intimated that anterior difficulties existed, 'let this be taken out of the way'. You agreed, I believe, with my suggestion at the time, and now that our three brothers have brought in the truth you are not accepting it! Why should the three brothers be biased? Messrs. Davidson and Malpas scarcely knew any of you and surely Mr. Biggs, well known to you all, could have no personal feeling against any. There was no bias in any of us, I am perfectly assured, save *in favour of the Lord and the truth*, and the findings and all that has happened since confirm me in this assurance.
If other difficulties, extending back 17 years, exist in Newcastle, let each be taken up according to the facts entering into it; but let this dispute between Mrs. D------ and Mr. M------, now that the facts are known, be taken out of the way. Let the truth have its authority, including the establishment of the guilt of those who falsely accused Mr. M------ and others. I do earnestly urge you -- I may venture to say in the Lord's name -- to clear yourself of this guilt by owning your part in it. If there are other difficulties let them, as I said, be dealt with on their respective merits, but delay not to deliver yourself as to this long-drawn-out dispute. If you see all things clearly as to it, you will, no doubt, see all things clearly as to remaining ones.
I do not see any grounds for your alarm as to what the Lord may have ministered to the saints through me being discredited. If you can show that I have said or written anything contrary to the truth I will confess my wrong, but, as to the matter in hand, what is discrediting what the Lord is giving His people, through whomsoever, is *the state of the Newcastle meeting* -- the conduct of those -- or some of them -- in it. Because of this its status, as bearing the character of the assembly, is much more than doubtful.
Affectionately yours in the Lord,
James Taylor.
{373}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 27th, 1932.
My Dear Mrs Morford, -- I have to thank you for your letter of the 18th ult. I was about to write you, giving a list of notes then missing, so that you might kindly ask for them, when the sad news of dear Mr. Besley came, and so I sent the list to ------. I did not like to trouble you on account of the family sorrow.
Mr. Besley's departure from us all was keenly felt by my wife and myself and by all the brethren in these parts. He became greatly endeared to them during his visit to this country. We deeply sympathise with Mrs. Besley, Philip, Arthur and May and you all. I trust Mrs. Besley is sustained of the Lord, and guided in all her affairs. *You* can enter into her feelings, which, as you know, are not strange to me. Such a bereavement affords a peculiar opportunity both for the Lord, who would come in and fill the void made, and for the bereaved because nature is weakened and spiritual affections are the more released.
I note your remarks as to @1 Corinthians 12: 18, 28 (Eastbourne address) -- God setting gifts in the body and in the assembly. The notes were defective (although Miss R's are always good) on the point you mention. I am sure I did not say that the gifts were set in the body; I say this because I have often commented on the distinction between the verses -- that the gifts are not said to be set in the body, but in the assembly. Of course the *persons* who are or have the gifts are set in the body as *members*, but the assembly involves intelligent control and administration and the exercise of gift is properly connected with it.
I note your suggestion as to the gospel addresses and I shall, please God, follow it; although my hands are so full I cannot do so immediately. But I am afraid you are appraising these gospel addresses too highly.
Perhaps you will have opportunity to ask ------ for any notes he may have secured and revise them as usual.
We found all well here, thank God, only the dear crippled children, although greatly improved in their *general* health, are not making headway as to the paralysis. This is a constant sorrow, as you can understand. Lately Jim and Consuelo have been given a baby daughter, who is the
{374}
occasion of much joy -- their first girl, making *seventeen* 'grands' for us.
My wife unites in warm love in Christ to you and yours.
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 14th, 1932.
Mr. W. S. Spence.
Beloved Brother, -- By this time you and your son will have reached home -- the American trip having gone into history. I had hoped to say good-bye to you, if only on the telephone, but no doubt you were busy before sailing. I trust you had a good voyage.
I am writing particularly to thank the dear brethren in Wallasey for their gift, through you, of £10. As heretofore, I value this practical thoughtfulness, assured that it is the outcome of interest in the work of the Lord.
You would know when there of the meetings to be held at Toronto. They took place last week-end. A large number came together -- some of the meetings running to 500 -- and the Lord graciously helped us. At the readings we looked at *life* in the book of Revelation.
I hope to see you all at Wallasey, please God, during my next visit to your side of the Atlantic.
You will be sympathetic as hearing that our little grandson, who had been so long crippled with infantile paralysis, fell asleep a week ago. As it was known that he could not live long, not only because of the paralysis but also because of a bad heart, we are thankful the Lord was pleased to take him, but he was a *very* loveable child and his removal affects us.
My wife would unite in love in Christ to Mrs. Spence, yourself and all your family, also to the brethren,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 12th, 1932.
Beloved Brother, -- I am still interested much in your enquiries and shall gladly lend all the help I can in answering your letter of the 9th ult. I have been in the West, attending special meetings, or I should have written earlier.
As regards unholy marriages, as you say, each has to be
{375}
viewed by itself. If a brother or sister is warned and in spite of this contracts marriage with an unconverted person, I have no hesitation in saying that she disqualifies herself for Christian fellowship and should be excluded from it. While "*unbelievers*" in @2 Corinthians 6: 14 refers immediately to persons who made no profession of Christianity, the force of the *word* within the sphere of profession would be the absence of faith and what accompanies this.
Marrying a person known to be a believer, but not recognising fellowship is different, of course, but under certain circumstances not very different. If the person has had the light presented to him and persistently refuses it, such a union could not be "in the Lord", and so would call for discipline. The discipline might bring out a state of rebellion which could be met only by withdrawal. There is always an underlying condition in such cases and the Lord will expose this if the saints are faithful in dealing with them. One faithful step after another, as seen in @Matthew 18, leads to a result according to God.
As to @John 18: 16, of course Scripture does not say "the other disciple" was John himself, nor does it say definitely that he wrote the gospel; but internal evidence in the gospel indicates both, especially the latter. If chapter 18: 16 said, 'the disciple whom Jesus loved', the evidence that it was John would be the same as chapter 21: 24 affords as to his authority of the gospel.
What is to be specially noted is that "the other disciple" *followed Jesus with Peter* (verse 15); besides the article ('the' ) points to a particular or known disciple and this is in view in John's references to himself throughout the gospel. Although Judas is mentioned in chapter 18 it is as betrayer, and it is utterly unlikely that the Spirit of God would call him *here* 'that other disciple' or say that he followed Jesus with Peter. The omission of the Lord's love for "the other disciple" in this passage corresponds somewhat with chapter 21: 2, where he is just one of Zebedee's sons. The connections in both instances did not admit of the mention of this love, whereas, it is mentioned in connection with John discerning the Lord (chapter 21: 7).
I hope above remarks will be of service to you. With love in Christ to you and your house and to the brethren, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{376}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 13th, 1932.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I have been wishing to write you, but much pressure hindered, especially my visit to the West.
Your letter from Zurich was very welcome and many have seen it. The news was generally most cheering, although Novi is distressing; another local eruption. Our prayers go up for recovery. This marks the enemy's efforts as the Lord mercifully prevents an extended scattering.
You would have returned to London last week and I trust you found all well and general cheer among the brethren. You will be glad to have H.H. back. He was much enjoyed here.
There is general encouragement in America, although some dark spots appear in the horizon -- bright in the main. The meetings at Council Bluffs were good. We considered at the readings the Holy Spirit in @1 and 2 Corinthians. The subject yielded well through the Lord's help. H.G. was freer than I have seen him and so helped greatly. He laid himself out for this. Samuels also helped. He gave a good address on one of the evenings. H.G. spoke on 'Silver and Gold' and I spoke on 'Treasuries'. The expressed affections of the dear brethren were most touching. The number present would be about as usual, I think, besides the nearby meetings brethren came from several places in Canada, Knoxville, Rochester, Minneapolis, Ashland. None from Chicago, which somewhat distressed me.
The Lord is definitely working in Chicago, however. I spent two days there -- with Dr. McA------. I gave an address and attended their care meeting. They wished to get my views as to the present relations with Columbus. As far as outward facts show, all support the letter sent out in July condemning the whole proceedings two years ago, except ------. While ------ made some admissions, his attitude was generally distressing, indicating darkness in his soul, no doubt through not habituating himself to self-judgment. The most serious side to his attitude is that his refusal to judge what is seen by nearly all his brethren to be a violation of right principles, is considered by him of little consequence, so that he takes his usual place and part among the saints. This is felt by the rest of the brethren and I am assured the Lord will help them to face it.
I found a happier state of things at Indianapolis. I also saw them at Columbus, where there is remarkable interest. There were 31 outsiders at the Gospel meeting, and two
{377}
requested to be allowed to break bread the Lord's Day I was there. These will make 8 or 9 received since the meeting began.
Mr.------¬s position in Westfield is unchanged. There was a long session with him last week, but no satisfactory result I heard. In his relations with his local brethren he betrays a poor sense of the dignity of the assembly.
The news from China is affecting and leaves us in no doubt that the work is of God. But the responsibility attaching to it is grave and calls for the most serious consideration by all, so that the Lord may stand by it and shield it from the enemy. If the Lord graciously raises up a brother or two spiritually qualified for such service with linguistic ability to acquire a knowledge of Chinese one would be most thankful.
With love in Christ to you all in which my wife would join,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- I should much like to attend meetings at Valence and Leipzig as you suggest, but it seems that the Edinburgh dates will interfere.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 28th, 1932.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter was much valued. I regret the delay in replying, but I was in the West when it arrived -- attending the special meetings at Council Bluffs.
I am thankful for the interest in the 'Open meetings', for much more enters into this means of edification than is generally understood. It involves subjection, not only to the Lord, but also to each other; and those who serve in such meetings will seek to acquire the confidence of those they serve and not abuse it. Indeed mutual confidence must be promoted if 'open meetings' are to prosper.
As to @1 Corinthians 14: 23, it seems to me that, comparing this passage with chapter 11: 18 - 20, we may gather that the former is to show that in meetings for ministry numbers are not restricted, whereas the latter, contemplating saints together "in assembly", and omitting the word "whole", makes room for the thought of sub-divisions.
Ministry of the word in meetings for the breaking of bread would, of course, be subject to the Lord and He would surely take account of the state of the saints as gathered. A comparison
{378}
of @Luke 24 and @John 20 would help, I think. In the former adjustment was needed as the Lord stood in the midst, and it was applied; but in John 20 this is left out, the disciples being viewed in the light of the message sent by Mary. For myself, I am increasingly encouraged in conveying anything I may have early in the meeting after the breaking of bread.
We have been thinking of our beloved brethren (yourself and many others) in Great Britain who minister the word, in view of holiday meetings, assured the Lord would hear and bless all. News of the different convocations will, no doubt, come later.
We have been *much* cheered in these parts so far, and we look for help next week-end. Excellent news from the West came lately. ------ and ------ in Chicago who have been justifying the wrong actions there as to Columbus two years ago, have capitulated, joining with the rest of the brethren there in condemning those actions. And Mr. H------ of Columbus has written the Chicago brethren owning his wrong, and that of the others there, in refusing to accept fully the letter of acknowledgement written by the former (Chicago) in July last. Thus this long-drawn-out sorrow seems to be at an end, causing much thanksgiving. The case of Mr.------ at Westfield is nearing a somewhat satisfactory close. He seems ready to meet his brethren in every way. Surely we may say, 'The Lord has triumphed gloriously'.
Newcastle is a great sorrow, but God is working there. If the nearby meetings see where He is and what He has brought to light and move *with Him* there will be deliverance with the least loss.
My wife joins in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and all yours,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- If you see Mr. Lyon kindly tell him of what I write here.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 30th, 1932.
Mr. Arthur J. H. Brown.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 16th inst. is just to hand and it is all very interesting.
The Herstmonceux matter is peculiar and somewhat sorrowful,
{379}
for the cessation of a meeting is usually defeat. But as to the difficulty arising, it seems to me that 'the nearest meeting' must imply convenience of access; in this sense *time* is a factor as well as mileage. If there is subjection in all concerned such a difficulty is easily overcome, but it often brings out the working of will. As to responsibility -- if any exercise of it is now called for -- it would seem by what you say (Herstmonceux being two miles nearer to Bexhill than to Eastbourne) that it lies with Bexhill, and if the saints at Herstmonceux are subject they will recognise this; thus the question as to whether Eastbourne is more conveniently reached can be easily determined. If Eastbourne is more easily reached, the simple thing would be to allow them to go there.
I follow all you say as to extreme or unscriptural statements in circulation. These are to be deplored, but I think the Lord is helping and there is a readiness for adjustment, which is a great matter. I have written Mr. H------ as to the Melbourne remarks, and he regrets them. The book has not been circulated in this country, but we are trying to cover or delete the objectionable statements so that what is good may be available. Wisdom and example are essential if help is to be rendered in meeting such conditions.
We are thinking of you in view of your service in Scotland and we trust there will be help. I have a list of the meetings to be held during the coming week-end, which is an advantage.
I attended the meetings at Council Bluffs late last month and the Lord gave a good time. H. G. was free and fresh, the Lord helping him. Certain clouds that have darkened the horizon in the West during the last two years have recently lifted, and this is the cause of much thanksgiving, as you can understand.
As to the remarks as to "corner-stone", "head-stone", had I used it, could not be objected to. @Zechariah 4 indicates that the top or finishing stone is in mind. I am thankful for your remarks; they confirm my general understanding of the metaphor so frequently employed in Scripture, but it (the metaphor) must not be carried too far. In @Isaiah 28 the corner-stone is to convey the idea of foundation, but in @Ephesians 2 it is more personal -- not what Christ is *made* -- and so general prominence, supremacy and binding influence are in view. The mind has to rest on what is actually conveyed and not on the figure. If we understand generally a thing
{380}
presented we shall not rest on the figure employed to present it. While @Zechariah 4 has finish in view, @Ephesians 2 is *growing*, but it is not '*on* whom', but "*in* whom".
Thanks for the expression of sympathy as to our dear little grandson. The little girl remains paralysed, with but little hope of recovery. We are seeking to obtain the gain of the sorrow -- especially that the parents should.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 9th, 1933.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I am indebted to you for sending me interesting letters, also for two of your own. We were thinking much of all the dear brethren on your side in view of the many special meetings and I have no doubt the Lord helped.
I am very interested in all the letters from the Continent, especially in the marriage of A. Wellershaus. I am assured this is wise in view of the long engagement. I trust they will find help in every way.
Here there was cheer during the holidays and I hear good reports from other places. Mr. Gill has been in the Middle West since Council Bluffs. He was in Chicago for the week-end of December 25th and writes most cheerfully of the season there. My brother has now fallen in with his brethren as to Columbus and G.W.H. has written Chicago a good letter which has been accepted on its 'face value' there. H.G. speaks of peace reigning. Old Mr. Turner is very poorly, Mr. G. saying he feared he would not see him in the flesh again.
I am much concerned as to the doors open in view of my coming visit to your side, wishing to find the Lord's will and use the time to the best advantage. I am inclined to Valence for the Ascension meetings and Germany for Whit Monday. They wish me to attend meetings at Knoxville, where I have not been for many years, and as I cannot be with them in July they are arranging something for April.
I am grieved because of Mr. N------¬s sorrow. I earnestly trust he will find help from God. How many are the sorrows of the saints at the present time! But we are in the hands of the Lord in them and not in the hands of men. How dreadful if we were in the hands of the wolf!
{381}
I am writing Wellershaus, also Pfannerschmidt, that I am thinking of Germany, trusting that the Lord will make my way plain.
Dear Mr. Fawcett was seriously hurt in a motor collision and we are concerned about him -- especially in view of his age. Mr.------¬s case still stands, but we are looking for an early adjustment. He is concerned about brethren at a distance rather than his local brethren.
With love in Christ to you all in which my wife joins,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 10th, 1933.
Mr. Alfred Wellershaus.
Beloved Brother, -- I have to thank you for two letters, all the news of which being most interesting to my wife and me.
The work in the Eastern parts calls for careful consideration. Unless care is used, persons may be allowed to break bread who have not the Spirit and who thus do not see all things clearly (@Mark 8). This will mean trouble later. On the other hand, we must be on the lookout for every bit of the work of God and carefully garner it. John's ministry helps especially in this respect. It is possible for a company of saints to be so manifestly the subject of the work of God that we may link with them as already in fellowship, but this is very rare; hence the safe way is to examine each and commit ourselves accordingly. The brothers who visited China decided that those meeting there were the fruit of the sovereign work of God and so linked with them en masse, but this is a very special case and should not be taken too much as a precedent. The impossibility of communicating with *most* of them because of language makes the acknowledgement of the Chinese brethren most singular. The Lord, I am assured, will confirm what has been done knowing the difficulties better than we, and causing His grace always to abound.
I am not surprised at B------ going with Niedershelden, for he had not been walking with God. B------ s and G------ are likely to find him an uncomfortable bedfellow. We may be assured that a bad root exists in those who turn aside into error.
The Lord is helping greatly in a *general* way in this country and Canada. There had been occasions for anxiety for some
{382}
years, especially in the Chicago region, but the clouds have lifted, thank God.
We learn through Mr. Lyon that you purpose being married soon, and my wife and I are thankful for this, indeed we have been praying that the Lord would make a way for Mrs. Noske and you. I enclose cheque for $25.00 as a wedding gift from us both to you both with our much love.
I am thinking seriously of attending the meetings at Limbach at Whitsuntide and trust the Lord will make way for us, also Valence at Ascension time.
With our united love to the brethren, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 23rd, 1933.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- I believe I owe you a letter, and I am glad of the opportunity of sending you a line. My wife is thankful to Mr. Helen for his interesting letter, which we both were glad to receive. We were thinking of you all and wondering how you all got on during the holidays. Mr. F. Willy was telling us a little of you and your kindness to him; I believe he said Mrs. Ide and you had entertained him for a week-end, and that you had driven him to see Mr. Coates. He greatly valued your kindness. We enjoyed his visit here and we hear he was a cheer to the brethren in the West.
Since I wrote you last I visited several gatherings in the Middle West, also attending the usual special meetings at Council Bluffs. The Lord gave us a most cheering time there. Mr. Gill was very free and helpful at the readings. We looked at the Holy Spirit in @1 and 2 Corinthians.
The dark clouds that have been hanging in the West have cleared, I may say, and general confidence is settling down among the dear brethren. Mr.------¬s matter still hangs; he seems unable in simplicity to meet and satisfy his local brethren.
Our visit to your side will be somewhat late this year -- we think of early May. It is likely the Mayos will be crossing at the same time. Mr. Mayo had suggested that any of the Chinese brothers visiting England should travel via U.S.A. --
{383}
I doubted the wisdom of this for financial and other reasons, and if they come they will, I have no doubt, travel via Suez.
We shall not be at Belfast this year. They wrote inviting me lately, but I had heard in November that Mr. McBride had been invited, which met my exercises, and so my mind was in another direction. I am very glad Mr. McBride is to be there. I hope to be at Knoxville, Tennessee, at Easter, where I have not been for many years. I am also thinking of Valence for Ascension time and Limbach for Whitsuntide. I am sure I may count on your prayers for guidance from the Lord.
We trust Mrs. Ide and you all keep well, as we are generally. There is much financial pressure here and, I believe, much blessing through it.
With our united love in Christ to you all, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- I am thankful to have good news of the Depot through Mr. Elliott, to whom I hope to write shortly.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 9th, 1933.
My Dear Mr. M -- -- , -- I duly received your letter, also Mr. P------¬s paper.
I regret you have such serious apprehensions as to what I have said about the sonship of Christ, and I shall gladly be of service to you if I can, so as to relieve your mind.
But the position created by your letter is peculiar for, while you wish me to write something 'simple' on the subject, you show that you radically disagree with me. While I quite believe that some may not understand fully what I have said, *you* cannot be included, for your letter makes clear that you quite see what is meant and you seek to combat it as wrong. How then can a simple paper help you? Of what good can any paper do that aims to promote what is unscriptural? Still, as I said, I am ready to help if possible, but I can hardly undertake to express what I hold as the truth more plainly than what I have already said or written. However, you may
{384}
not have heard or seen all, and so I give below a list of *unpublished* papers of mine on the subject in question:
A letter to Mr. A. Oliver.
A letter to Mr. Besley re W. H. W------¬s printed letter.
A letter to Mr. P------.
A letter to Mr. Carter -- which you have seen.
What is in print is in the Barnet, Bristol and Birmingham notes, and a late paper entitled 'Inscrutability'. I believe ------ of the Stow Hill Depot can supply copies of all -- published and unpublished; if not, I shall try and procure them for you.
I believe almost all the 'difficulties' you mention are dealt with in these papers.
I note in your letter: 'If I say three persons live in a certain road I should at once be asked, What persons do you mean? What are their names?' This, I understand, is intended to illustrate that the Divine Persons had names -- the names by which they are now known -- before incarnation. But there is no human analogy of this great matter, for we cannot say of any man that no one has seen him at any time. In coming into His creation God has taken names that are *relative to it*, and obviously we cannot assume that those names applied to Him before there was a creation. "I AM" is no exception, for it is to convey to the creature mind that God *is*, which would be unnecessary if no creature existed. Father and son are terms that in Scripture are first connected with creation. *As so known* they are applied to Divine Persons as One of Them became Man. This is God coming in in love -- taking relationship and names intelligible to the human mind. To say that they existed before without the thoughts that attach to them, as seen in Scripture -- generation, subjection, etc. -- is surely not right. Of course, if Scripture says they did, those who love God will gladly bow to it, but it does not.
As regards Mr. P------¬s letter, I may say that he wrote me at length and I replied in detail, but he did not acknowledge my letter. His paper just received reveals a mind running contrary to the scriptural presentation of fatherhood and sonship. But while his effort is to show that a father and son are necessarily equal, he is obliged to say 'as nearly ... as possible'. He says, 'When I call on Brown &amp; Son I would just as soon see the son as the father, other things being equal'. Thus the firm might as truthfully be called Brown &amp; Father! Whereas the title of the business implies that Brown is the
{385}
father and senior partner. This surely involves superiority. He further says, 'When the king cannot attend a function ... he sends his son ... his son is himself, only another person'. This is all contrary to fact. The king's son, as in his house, is subject to him as a father, and as in the realm he is a subject of the king. The king is 'supreme' as Peter says. 'Was Solomon inferior to David?' Mr. P------ asks. He certainly was, for he made him king. He was superior as his father, as king and by spiritual experience and dignity with God and in the testimony. That Solomon was king while David lived does not alter this; it involves other typical considerations. But @Hebrews 7: 7 settles the matter conclusively. "Beyond all gainsaying, the inferior is blessed by the better". Noah, Isaac and Jacob as fathers blessed their sons.
But while our Lord's sonship is regarded in this sense in Scripture, as many well-known passages show, this does not touch His Divine Personality, for He is ever "The Same;" the position of inferiority is *taken* and not obligatory. It was morally necessary that He should take the position of subjection in the relation of Son, among other things, that man and his place as in the divine counsels should be fully set out.
Mr. P------¬s illustration as to sending serves him no better than the other: 'I send my solicitor' -- 'My' here implies a right of *some kind* over the solicitor. It is simply that Mr. P------ has hired the professional man and so as far as the matter on hand between them goes, he has the right of initiative and direction -- the solicitor is *serving* him. Indeed it seems clear that the idea of sending always involves a right or power in the sender over the one sent -- however attenuated or modified it may be or whatever the obligation or motive which induces one to take the position of being sent.
As regards @John 1: 18, I know of no 'new translation' of it different from J.N.D.¬s. Attention has been called to the preposition "in", having in the original the well-known meaning of 'motion towards', and so precluding the occupation by the Lord of the position mentioned before He became Man. Mr. Darby calls attention to this preposition in this verse (in a note) and so do other scholars. Alford warns his readers as to it, and Ellicott's Commentary connects the position indicated with Christ's return to the Father after He arose from the dead. Our Lord's eternal Personality is stated earlier in the chapter and is not specially the point of verse 18,
{386}
but rather the Only-Begotten Son as in (having come into it as Man) the bosom of the Father. Referring to the words "Who is in", J.N.D. says, 'The *place* where or the state'. "Who is" here is not to establish eternal existence in Deity, as in @John 8: 58, but used subordinately to convey the position of the Only-Begotten Son as declaring God. In @John 3: 13 we have "who is in", referring also to place, but here "in" (original) does not signify motion towards, and so does not imply that our Lord reached a place in heaven. His Person is involved. Mr. P------¬s deduction (page 2) that brethren 'have had wrong thoughts regarding the deity of Christ', as looking on Him as in an inferior position, being Son, in the past eternity, includes himself, as his words 'nearly as possible' and his illustrations show unmistakably that, however much he seeks to avoid this, *some* idea of inferiority in sonship as related to fatherhood exists in his mind. He says, 'Father and son is a human relationship that expresses as nearly equality as is possible'. Being a human relationship, well known, especially as regarded in Scripture, and taken up by God to make Himself known to men, it cannot be right to rob it as used by Him, of the features that mark it, especially as seen in Scripture. And the fact that our Lord regards His own sonship as retaining subjection and obedience makes this incontrovertible. I need not cite passages.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
February 10th, 1933.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for your inquiry -- as far as I see, I shall be free to attend meetings at Detroit in September. I hope to return from Great Britain late in August. Please God, we purpose sailing for England in late April or early May.
I thank God for the energy that is seen in the proposal to have special meetings in your district. I am sure this is pleasing to the Lord, who will help all upon whom special burdens will fall. The meetings and you all will have a place in our hearts and prayers.
My wife would unite in love to you both and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
{387}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 10th, 1933.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Many thanks for two letters and others enclosed. I am very glad to have all information.
I appreciate, too, your suggestions as to the Continental visit. I shall be unable, however, to start as early as May 10th. I have tentatively agreed to sail with Mr. and Mrs. Mayo about May 6th, and I wish to stay in the London area a few days before leaving for the Continent. Thus my thought would be to go almost direct to Valence, afterwards St. Etienne and Bronac; then Geneva, Zurich and Limbach. Perhaps we could leave London on Monday the 22nd, returning about June 7th to 9th -- or, may be, spend the week-end June 11th in Rhineland. I shall be thankful for any further suggestions.
It is good of Mr. Leflaive to offer to translate, but it is rather an undertaking and expensive. Can some French brother not perform this service? Of course Alfred Wellershaus will translate in Germany. Perhaps we can call at Rotterdam, but this may not fit. I am much cast on the Lord as to the whole matter, and I thank you for assuring of your prayers. I am not clear as to Italy.
You will be glad to learn of Mr.------¬s final letter to his local brethren. No doubt a copy will be sent by him -- I enclose one. The Lord has been very good to us in America during recent months, in bringing about peace.
Newcastle is still dark. Mr. T------ 1 sent me copies of his printed paper, which I am sorry he has issued -- not that it contains what is so objectionable in itself, but because of the circumstances. I am doubtful of the fairness of reverting to the relations of Mr. T------ with R.D. -- s seen in A.M.H.¬s letter to you. The Lord would stress what is *manifest*. But I am sure it is right to give abundant opportunity for recovery.
The pressure continues here and several are suffering although acute need is generally met; indeed there is not much of this, thank God.
We are most thankful to hear of you all and our prayers for you are constant.
My wife joins in love to your sister, Lois and you,
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- We are dividing our house, so as to let the upper part. We really only need the first floor and we must contract.
{388}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 24th, 1933.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I note your reference to a letter circulated by Mr. C------. A copy came from him this week. I had some correspondence with this brother about three years ago, and I then gathered that he was satisfied with my explanations relative to the statements to which he had objected.
His letter reveals a mind moving in opposition, based mainly on orthodoxy, to a presentation of a certain feature of the truth. Almost the whole letter is taken up with what others have said, which shows that, like several that have taken part in the current controversy, his soul in regard of the truth in question is not buttressed in the word of God. In citing the 'fathers' he ignores that in asserting so-called eternal sonship, they also asserted (as the Creed shows) that our Lord was begotten by His Father before the worlds.
Mr. Darby stands by himself; spiritual instinct is not evidenced in linking him, as this letter does, with Athanasius, Augustine and Luther. The plane on which Mr. Darby served, as having judged as contrary to the mind of God the whole clerical system beginning with the early so-called fathers and extending to the present time, was altogether above that of those who preceded him since the apostles went to be with the Lord. Those who keep the Lord's commandments as loving Him, regard J.N.D. in this way, valuing his ministry as marked by the energy and wisdom of the Spirit; being without an equal since apostolic times.
But there have been efforts to make his writings, directly or indirectly, equal with Scripture and this is a most serious matter; the enemy has been in it. No one would admit that he so regards Mr. Darby's writings, but the use made of them by many, especially since 1890, conveys that they are final, and this false principle exists in several quarters. No one, I am sure, would refuse it more strenuously than the great servant himself. His writings abound with appeals to the Scriptures, as the sole divine test to all teaching.
In a sense nothing has concerned me more in presenting the truth than the plain statements in Mr. Darby's ministry in support of eternal sonship, especially because I knew how they could be used. I have constantly owned that it was in his mind in a general way, as an accepted truth. But it is clear he was not satisfied as to it. The statement in 'Notes and
{389}
Comments', Volume 7, page 7, is proof of this, in spite of the effort to neutralise it. Mr. Darby weighed it after writing it, fearing, as the 'note' shows, that it might be used to favour Sabellianism, but left it in the text notwithstanding. Without the note it would lose somewhat of its importance, for it could be said that it was a remark unpublished by the writer, but the note shows that it is his considered statement. It appears in his meditation on @John 1, as he reaches verse 14 (verse 18 being also in view, as later remarks show). It is: 'Nor do I see that in this character He is spoken of as Son save as known in the flesh. He is spoken of previously as the Word, etc.: now as Son'. Later (pages 8 and 9) we have what is in keeping with this: 'There is another thing: no man has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son', the subject now in treatment, 'who is in the bosom of the Father', that is His place, 'He hath declared Him -- this then -- He is, as become flesh ... the only-begotten Son'.
These remarks have not been brought forward as a basis of what was said at Barnet, for I had not noticed them till many years after I saw more clearly the truth of our Lord's sonship. I have thought it right to call attention to them because of the use made of J.N.D. on this point by others. But no unbiased person who carefully reads them will fail to see that Mr. Darby's mature thoughts bore in the same direction as current teaching amongst us. His letter as to our Lord being sent into the world (Volume 3, pages 468, 469) shows this also. It is dated 1881. Mr. Darby's remark in the 'note' on page 7, 'Notes and Comments', is not in *literal* agreement with the text, but obviously should not be used to discredit the latter. That the writer, after careful examination, allowed the statement to stand should deter us from weakening it. May we not fairly assume that in view of the clearer light He has afforded on the subject of His sonship, the Lord caused His servant to note down the thoughts I have quoted -- so that other statements of his could not be righteously used against it?
Referring to the details of the letter I am dealing with, I would notice the strange objection to my emphasis on @Luke 10: 22 (in the paper 'Inscrutability' ) because this scripture does not appear on the head of the tract. In ministry we must be ready to emphasise whatever the Spirit may press on our hearts.
There is a further strange objection to the remark I made in
{390}
this tract as to attaching names to Christ as in absolute Deity -- that 'multitudes of Christians do attach names to Divine Persons in absolute Deity'. The usage of the multitudes cannot settle anything. I was referring to Christ in His pre-incarnate form, as is perfectly evident, pointing out the error of applying certain names of Christ viewed as Man to Him viewed in absolute Deity. The distinction I made was between pre-incarnate Deity and manhood; and of course this distinction could not apply to the Father or the Spirit. The Father and the Spirit remain in the form of God, and while this is inscrutably absolute, it is also relative. The titles Father and Spirit ('wind' ) are relative. Indeed all the names taken by the Divine Persons are relative. The writer of this letter does not show by what he writes that he distinguishes between the absolute and the relative. To speak of the Deity apart from its relation to creation we must use the word absolute. The tract says, 'The truth is to be lifted out of the hands of men and maintained in the hearts of those who love Christ'. This is wholesome and needed truth; but not so to the writer of the letter, and he ignores what the context clearly shows, that 'men' in my remark referred to theological leaders. The truth is, alas, in their hands for many Christians even now. I have no hesitation in saying that one who can treat the teaching of page 8 of the tract, as the writer of the letter does, is not with God, but on the contrary is refusing practical and essential truth. He is trifling with divine things in asking (in large letters), 'Has the truth been in the hands of those who are not lovers of Christ until 1929'(Barnet Readings).
Those who took part in those readings recognise as much as the writer of this letter does, the revival of a hundred years ago, and there is not the slightest hint to the contrary in the readings. Besides, what he is objecting to is only a phase of 'the truth'. Also it is stated in the Barnet notes that what they contain as to Christ's sonship was learnt through Mr. Raven, who fell asleep through Jesus, many years before. We see in this question of his how the writer's mind runs in the current of false accusation. The whole letter is of a sinister character; not only is there opposition to the truth but an evident effort to influence others against it. The Lord will surely have to say to all this, especially in one nominally (as I understand) in fellowship with us. May he recover himself from the snare of the devil.
{391}
I do not enlarge upon the truth of sonship, especially as it has been treated somewhat fully in current ministry; I am desirous particularly that the relation of Mr. Darby's ministry to it might be clear.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 27th, 1933.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I think it well to write as per enclosed letter relative to C------¬s production. If you approve what I have written you may think it wise to show it to persons who have been affected by C------¬s paper. I send some copies.
I also send copies of a letter I wrote Mr. M------ of Malvern, which may also be of service. P------ seems determined to push his views, and the Lord may have to say to him. His letter -- which has the character of a circular -- indicates the action of will. Darkness of mind shows itself in him and also in C------.
I thank you for further letters, all of which are of interest.
As far as I understand your remarks as to @Hebrews 7, I agree. The *description* given of Melchisedec can apply *only* to a Divine Person. As far as I understand it, Mr. Darby's note agrees with this, although his remarks as to 'but' are somewhat vague.
I am trusting to your kind help, as usual, as regarding Valence and Limbach. I am hoping to write Mr. Blanc.
I received from Mr. T------ last week copies of correspondence between those at Heaton and those at Wesley Street. I also received T------ l's paper, and later a copy of his withdrawal. What is of prime importance is that what has been made manifest as to Wesley Street should be recognised. All that I hear and see confirms that evil is there. It is a grave situation and calls for workers who work with God.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you all,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{392}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 25th, 1933.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your letter and enclosures -- the latter are sorrowful reading.
The pamphlet from Ayr, which you sent, advances the principle that the ministry of a previous generation is the test of a current one. What has the stamp of a ministry of the Spirit at any time will, of course, agree *generally* with such ministry at other times, but to make the teaching of uninspired men a standard is false and pernicious, as placing it on the level of Scripture, the only true standard. No one would admit that he regards such teaching in this way, but while not formally stated, evil is implied in the manner in which the earlier ministry is used. Quotations from Scripture are meagre, whole pamphlets being almost made up of quotations from servants who ministered to a past generation. Were one inconversant with Christianity, to read most of the papers I am referring to, he could not but assume that its late teachers are regarded as more authoritative than those of the beginning.
As you will know, I am not questioning that the ministry of the servants mentioned in the main, was of the Spirit. I am writing of the use made of it. For instance, this pamphlet from Ayr has 22 pages, and in only three of them is there any attempt made to bring in the *direct* teaching of the Scriptures. I have no hesitation in saying that one who premises mainly on writings other than Scripture is disqualified to deal with divine things and has no moral right to address the people of God. He is not speaking "as oracles of God".
Another feature marking some of the papers dealing with the Lord's sonship is the placing of Mr. Darby along with Mr. W. Kelly and Mr. F. W. Grant. It is well known that J.N.D. had serious conflict with the former and that he refused the views of the latter as to the Spirit and eternal life. There is a moral defect shown in grouping the servant whom God so honoured and who continued faithful to the end, with men who divided the saints in turning away from the truth. We also find Mr. Raven quoted as supporting 'eternal sonship' although the writers, as having read the Barnet Notes, must be aware that in his later ministry he refused it. Thus a moral defect in them appears here also.
The effort to make the ministry of a past generation the standard of what has followed is a notable trait of current evil.
{393}
Those active in it, doubtless, do not mean to weaken Scripture; they assert that Scripture alone is authoritative, but the constant profuse citation of writings other than Scripture, overshadowing the latter, is, by *implication*, leaven which works in the minds of credulous readers, and the authority of the inspired word is weakened. The enemy is unmistakably in this. The statement (often given out of its contextual meaning) of an honoured servant is accepted as final and thus the soul is robbed of the gain of arriving at the truth, as seeking prayerfully the direct teaching of Scripture as to the subject in question. His soul would be tested by the word of God, which is sharper than any two-edged sword; he would not only acquire a clear view of the truth in question, but also an increased knowledge of God.
I need not say that I am far from discrediting the previous delivering and constructive ministry of the last century. I owe too much to it under God to do this. It marked a great movement of the Spirit; but this movement continues, and so the word is, "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies". Those working with God today will gladly own the distinction God gave Mr. Darby and others of an earlier day, but they will not, cannot, admit that the ministry of the last century was final, or that the Holy Spirit has ceased to speak. Indeed no one would refuse more vehemently than Mr. Darby any such suggestion.
As regards ministry, the most advanced and honoured of those who have part in it would never abandon the *learning* attitude; and so constant adjustment goes on. Thus a servant's later ministry may in *detail* vary from what he presented earlier. This may be seen in Mr. Darby's writings. That he held and urged the eternal sonship of Christ as an accepted truth is true, but that he was satisfied with it in his later years is more than questionable. 'Notes and Comments', Volume 7, page 7, affords undoubted proof of this. Great efforts have been made to neutralise it, but his statement, 'Nor do I see that in this character He is spoken of as Son save as known in the flesh' stands. The 'note' makes this statement specially important, for it shows that the writer *reconsidered* it fearing that it might be used to favour Sabellianism, as like statements today are alleged to do. The note indicates that Mr. Darby had not committed himself to the full significance of the text, but that he left the latter unaltered
{394}
shows how his mind was moving. Sabellianism, it may be remarked, was not simply the denial of the eternal sonship of Christ, but His eternal distinct Personality -- dreadful error. Hence the unfairness of those who seek to fasten this error on others and myself now, seeing we assert the eternal Personality of our Lord in the strongest possible terms. The statement of J.N.D.¬s referred to above is enhanced as we follow his meditation on @John 1. He develops sonship in the saints from the sonship of Christ as seen in verses 14 and 18. He says, 'This, then ... He is as become flesh, (page 11). If we look at it simply in His divinity all this is lost'.
As to Mr. Raven -- whom the Ayr paper quotes in support of eternal sonship -- it is well known that his mind became altered as to it. Besides myself, there are many witnesses to his refusal of it, say from 1898 to the end of his service. It is also a fact that Mr. Reid in a magazine article in 1878 -- four years before Mr. Darby's death -- questioned the scripturalness of eternal sonship. There is no evidence that it was denounced as an error. These remarks are not made merely to support the truth as I understand it, but to show the misleading character of the current profuse reproduction of the writings of the Lord's servants no longer with us.
Mr. Coates¬ earlier ministry is adduced as opposed to what he holds now. This proves nothing save that Mr. Coates has clearer light now on the subject in question than he had earlier. To say that he was right then in following unquestioningly what was generally accepted and wrong now, is just 'begging the question'.
As to myself, the excerpts furnished in page 5 of the Ayr pamphlet to show that I held earlier as to sonship the opposite of what I hold now fails of the object intended. In using the designation "Son" in the older ones I simply meant to convey the *Person*. In using a title or name applying to our Lord as Man to designate Him before He became Man I followed scriptural example: e.g., "Christ Jesus; who, subsisting in the form of God". It is over thirty years since the Scriptural untenableness of the term 'eternal sonship' became fixed in my mind, and while the truth of the Lord's sonship is much clearer to me now than it was then, I cannot find that I have said or written anything inconsistent with what I held.
What has been asserted as to the original of the preposition "in" in @John 1: 18 is the well-known fact that it implies
{395}
motion towards, and no 'scholar' (Ayr pamphlet, page 12) will deny this. The Holy Spirit used it in this most important verse knowing well how Greek readers would understand it. The passages quoted from Mark do not ignore this meaning. If the Spirit meant to convey that the Lord had always been in the Father's bosom as *Son*, He would, according to the general usage, have used 'en' as in @John 3: 13, "in heaven".
I am grieved because of the brother whose letter you enclosed. He is affected undoubtedly by the unbalanced quotations to which I have referred. If he searches the Scriptures daily as subject to the teaching of the Holy Spirit he will, I am assured, find with many of his brethren that they (the Scriptures) do not apply the relation of sonship to Christ viewed as in absolute Deity -- that is before incarnation.
In the foregoing not the faintest thought to discredit the ministry of the last century is intended to be conveyed. I am sure I value it as much as anyone. I use it constantly, but as provided of God to help -- to edify, confirm, and sustain us in the truth -- not as a basis of my faith. What I have written is to show the misuse of it currently made, and how those who fall in with this are being drawn (unconsciously no doubt) from the infallible ground of "the law and the testimony" to a lower plane. I do not go into the subject of sonship now, as what is already in circulation from me conveys my mind pretty fully.
Affectionately yours in the Lord,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 31st, 1933.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Many thanks for all letters, which I value. I am indeed indebted to you for all the pains you have taken in my interest. The accommodation you have secured on the Franconia is most excellent. No doubt the tickets are on the way. I am sorry Mr. Mayo cannot get the benefit of your service -- he had already booked when he wrote me. Mr. Myles will not be returning until June. Unexpectedly I saw him and his wife in Boston, as they landed there instead of St. John. He thinks of remaining on this side until the Rochester meetings (if they are held) are ended.
I greatly appreciate also your service as to the Continental visit. We shall, please God, follow your suggestions as far as
{396}
Limbach -- leaving the remainder of the journey for later consideration.
As to England -- after arrival -- we shall probably remain in Devon until Tuesday morning. If the brothers¬ meeting is on that evening, I shall, please God, attend, but would prefer not to attend an afternoon meeting. I shall be free for an address on the Friday as you suggest, but *not* on Saturday. We should be leaving on Monday for Valence. I am hoping Mr. Leflaive will travel with us.
I am much cheered by your news of Newcastle and earnestly hope for the recovery of all.
I enclose copy of a letter re Middleton's pamphlet which I trust you will approve.
Our united love in Christ to Miss Lyon, Lois and you.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
April 11th. 1933.
*Extract -- Re The Ark at the Crossing of the Jordan*
As regards linking the ark with the Lord's supper, it has ever to be borne in mind that the latter is a *memorial*, also food, in a scene out of which Christ has been rejected and from which He is thus absent. These facts should ever be present and *dwelt* upon by us as gathered to eat the Lord's supper. It is thus properly in the wilderness. In the types @Exodus 32 - 34 answers to it -- these chapters are full of instruction. The ark is *not* there. At the end of Exodus, the tabernacle being set up, the ark thus in its place, the glory comes in and *Moses* cannot enter. *Movement* is immediately in view, but not by the ark going before but by the *cloud*. The thought of *authority* gives place to the general thought of the glory, movement and guidance being connected with the latter. But when actual movement begins, the ark, of itself, so to speak, takes the lead (@Numbers 10). This leads to Canaan; but note that the ark is connected with conflict, including death -- Jordan -- and that it is not mentioned after the people enter the land until Jericho is to be taken. In @Joshua 4: 19 and 5: 12 our resurrection with Christ is in view, and with this position @1 and 2 Chronicles must be connected to get the full thought of the assembly. Thus as partaking of the Supper we are *here* and Christ is *there* -- in heaven.
{397}
April 21st, 1933.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- I have been unable to reply to yours of the 6th inst., as I have been much pressed, but especially because I have been at Knoxville.
I regret what you mention and hardly know what to advise, as the matter is one to be decided at Highland Park.
It is wise to consult nearby meetings, especially as circumstances are so unusual and general fellowship must be in view in arranging for special meetings. But while it is wise, as promoting confidence and unity, for you to take counsel with a nearby meeting, it will be equally wise for it to defer to the exercises of those immediately responsible. However sure I may be of the rightness of my judgment it is never right to impose it on those who are directly and immediately responsible. A father may be correct in his judgment of something pertaining to the house of his son or daughter, but wisdom will restrain him from insisting on it -- the separate institution is immediately responsible.
The main question now for you at Highland Park to decide is whether you have faith for the undertaking, and of course faith is not mere theoretic assumption but based upon the knowledge of God in the soul. In matters of the kind under consideration it is accompanied by experimental knowledge of God.
You may count on my continued prayers and steady interest in all this.
I earnestly trust you and your dear wife are finding mercy from God at this time of great outward stress.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you both.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
May 8th, 1933.
*Extract*
As to @1 Corinthians 11 and 14, it is to be noted that in the former the word 'whole' is omitted, but it appears in chapter 14: 23. Moreover, the article is rightly left out before "assembly" in chapter 11: 18. Thus chapter 11 is assembling *characteristically;* "one place" being, as you say, in contrast
{398}
to their houses. Chapter 14: 23 would require the *whole* assembly in the locality or place; that is, all the saints in principle. I have no doubt the assembly as the *vessel of testimony* is contemplated, because of the presence of God being mentioned. Prophetic ministry brings God in as a testimony to men in His assembly. This was an important feature of that which was then established -- "the assembly of God" in a given place. This should be borne in mind as the saints come together for ministry in a local sense. Verse 26 is simply "when ye come together". The local assembly had an official position, having part in the anointing. God's presence there was felt through the exercise of the gifts which He had set in the "assembly". While chapter 12: 28 refers to the *whole* assembly, *administration* is in the local setting. All this, I believe, should be in the mind when meetings for ministry -- for the exercise of gift -- are arranged.
<hr>
Teddington, England.
May 18th, 1933.
Mr. Charles A. Coates.
Beloved Brother, -- It was good of you to return the MSS so promptly and by registered mail. I shall make the changes you suggest.
I am helped by what you propose to add to your tract.
But I am afraid trouble will arise from the statement on page 8, paragraph 2 -- 'Never acted as on equality with God'. I doubt that it can be sustained. What our Lord says in @John 5, quoted in the previous paragraph, *literally* supports the statement, but we must it seems to me, read this with *other* statements. He is still Man, but yet "over all God".
Also page 8, paragraph 3 -- 'Never departed from the place which is suitable to a Son with a Father'. I do not think we should say anything indicating that He had not the liberty of acting *as God*.
Page 9 -- 'His eternal Person as in Deity is greater than anything which attaches to Him as viewed in the place and relationship of Son'. As said above, although Man He is said to be "God" -- "the true God".
It seems that in stressing the general position in manhood as marked by subjection, room should be made for the *inscrutable*. Thus we make allowance for the presence and
{399}
action of Deity in Christ even as here in the flesh. Deity is asserted when He said, "Before Abraham was I am". Also when, as He said, "I am", His enemies went backward and fell to the ground.
You could, perhaps, say something like this -- 'Although ever remaining, as to His Person, in the inscrutableness of Deity, and retaining liberty to act in it, He had taken a subordinate place as Son, for the effectuation of the Divine thoughts, and He maintained it throughout'. Here @John 5 could be brought in as setting forth equality in subjection; for while He says the Son can do nothing of Himself, etc., He says, "That all may honour the Son even as they honour the Father". Also, "Whatever things *He* does, these things also the Son does *in like manner*". There is wonderful interweaving of His personal dignity and subjection to and dependence on the Father. As you remark, we must think as Scripture does, and this is nowhere more needed than in @John 5 and @Mark 13.
I wish I had opportunity to go over this supreme matter with you "mouth to mouth", as I am very conscious of how weak in mind and heart I am as to it.
The Lord knows that the truth only is aimed at and He will not fail us. He is working to rescue the whole of it -- parts being still in dark settings.
There is *much* going on in the London area in which the Lord is helping. The practical unity among the dear brethren and the interest in divine things are most touching. There was a very happy and good time in Park Street on Tuesday -- @Hebrews 11. P.L. was much helped, I hear, at Cranleigh yesterday and there was support at Kingston in an address I gave. I was pointing out how poorly sisters function in the meetings. There is a large affair, please God, tomorrow evening at Kingsway Hall. Then a meeting with brothers at P.L.¬s on Saturday.
There is improvement at Newcastle. Dear Mr. Davidson was buried today. Brethren keenly feel the loss sustained as Mr. Davidson was evincing a practical interest in the Lord's work.
The news of Teignmouth is cheering. You are always in our minds and prayers.
My wife unites in warm love in Christ.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{400}
August 4th, 1933.
Beloved Brother, -- As promised, during our recent conversation, I now send you the following remarks on the tract entitled 'The Divine Sonship of the Lord Jesus Christ'.
The tract is based upon the statement that 'He is God in His eternal Nature. And His sonship, which subsists in that eternal Nature, must be itself eternal' (page 5). There is also the further statement on the same page, 'This sonship ... must subsist in His own eternal Divine Nature'.
Note the phrase 'eternal Divine Nature' -- the last word written with a capital. Where is it obtained from? In the tract it appears (in several forms) something like 120 times applied to the Divine Persons as in absolute Deity. Scripture employs the expression "divine nature" but once (@2 Peter 1: 4), to teach that believers partake of it. The tract uses the expression in a sense that is not scriptural, for otherwise it would make us partakers of Deity. Thus a scriptural expression used in the tract unscripturally is made the basis of its teaching! In this manifestly wrong way is the so-called eternal sonship of Christ sought to be maintained by the writer of this tract.
Of course the tract assumes to support its teaching by Scripture, and so, in part one, five passages are adduced from the gospel of John. The first is @John 5: 21. Much that is said of this verse could be accepted if presented apart unscriptural intent indicated above. But there is nothing here to show the pre-incarnate sonship of Christ. The chapter teaches the personal equality of the Son with the Father, but also that, in sonship, He has *taken a place* of inferiority in subjection to the Father. The writer of the tract vainly endeavours to shut this fact out of verse 21, by saying, 'Neither does the scripture say here that He receives this from the Father, as in verse 26'. Scripture need not always repeat itself; but on this matter of our Lord's sonship it teaches throughout that, while He is personally equal with the Father, He has in it taken a subject place -- the relationship of Son implying this. In @John 5: 19, 20, that is to say, immediately preceding the verse quoted in the tract, this truth is stated in the plainest manner, but while verse 21 indicates our Lord's deity, it cannot be used to deny the subject place He has taken as Son.
'He exercises His own will because He is Son' (page 6). Why '*because* He is Son'? The truth is that He exercises it
{401}
as a *Divine Person*. Then we have stated the truth (?) assumed to be arrived at: 'Here, then, is shown forth the sonship of Jesus as *that in which lies* the right and power in quickening of Divine Sovereignty'. Note, 'Sonship ... *that in which lies* the right and power in quickening of Divine Sovereignty'. But the Father quickens, as the verse states, and sonship is not in Him. The Spirit quickens also. Scripture teaches that the right and power referred to lies in Divine Persons -- in God -- not necessarily in sonship.
The next Scripture brought forward is @John 8: 14, the 'tremendous significance' of which, according to the tract, nothing could exceed. Like all statements of our Lord's deity, it is of course of great importance; but in it the Lord points out His competency to witness of Himself, as He knew whence He came and whither He was going. His adversaries did *not* know. He is a Divine Person, saying later on, "Before Abraham was, I am", and so knew whence He came. But the Lord's words are not enough for the tract, for we read (page 6), 'This marvellous conscious knowledge lies in His eternal Divine Nature'. The truth taught in the chapter is that the knowledge referred to speaks of His deity. Again (page 7), 'Thus, His knowledge of His own eternal place with the Father lay in the holy consciousness of His Divine Nature'. Note here the use of 'Divine Nature' where Person should be employed -- if indeed we are justified in speaking of Divine Persons in this way. To my mind the statement I quote is irreverent and presumptuous. How does the writer know that the infinite knowledge a Divine Person has lies in His 'Divine Nature'? What divine nature is he speaking of? It cannot be that of which Scripture speaks (@2 Peter 1 -- enlarged on in @1 John 4) in which we have part. He must have in mind what God is essentially as in absoluteness. Does the writer know what this is? Certainly not; God's form and essential Being are altogether beyond us. Nature is not essential being or form. This is true, even when applied to a creature. We speak of God's nature being love, as seen in Christ, but this does not refer to His Form or essential Being; and we cannot say 'love is God'.
'For that Nature remained in His Incarnation ... though having united to it His holy sinless Nature as Man, in His ONE eternal Person' (page 7). The reader will note the confusion of thought in this statement. *In* our Lord's 'ONE
{402}
eternal Person' two natures are united. Thus, according to this, in *Person* He is changed, whereas the truth of Scripture is incarnation; that is, a Divine Person becoming flesh whilst in *Person* He remains unchanged, for He says (in manhood), "Before Abraham was, I am".
@John 10: 30 is the next scripture under review -- "I and the Father are one". The Lord is asserting the perfect unity between the Father and Himself, applying this fact to Their service, having said that His Father was greater than all. But the tract must, as usual, introduce 'Divine Nature'. The passage, like so many others, asserts the Lord's deity, as the Jews understood (verse 33), but why base this on the 'Divine Nature', a misused expression as already pointed out? Page 8 says, 'Thus, as the Son, He claims this oneness with the Father by virtue of that eternal Divine Nature which was His, even as it was the Father's'. Where does He claim oneness with the Father 'by virtue of that eternal Divine Nature which was His?' The statement is gratuitous, and obviously, is made to fortify the unscriptural basis -- 'eternal Divine Nature' -- on which the teaching of the tract rests. The Lord, in the passage, claims oneness with the Father being a Divine Person, the Jews understanding by it that He made Himself God. In the presence of the foregoing consideration of what the tract calls 'simple yet evident facts', you will know how to regard the question asked at the bottom of page 7.
Of @John 17: 5, the tract says (page 8), that the glory of which the Lord speaks is a *condition* proper to its (Godhead glory) manifestation on high. How does the writer know this? 'He had the right', the tract says (page 8), 'being the Divine Son, to ask to be glorified again with that glory'. Why not say, 'Being a Divine Person'? As a Divine Person He is God, which is manifestly greater than sonship.
'His Person is not complete without that (Divine) Nature', (page 9). Do not these constant references to the 'Divine Nature' indicate an obsession of spirit on the part of the writer? A Divine Person *must* be complete.
Again, 'In that eternal Nature lay those ineffable affections. They had their source in that Nature' (page 9). They had their source the *Persons*.
Much more could be pointed out as to the character of this pamphlet, but what I have written will show how unscriptural
{403}
and misleading it is. It has a tinge of mysticism, and this very feature is calculated to deceive souls, especially when accompanied by apparently pious phrases. But its object is to discredit or deny the truth as to our Lord's sonship which, through some years of patient enquiry in dependence on the Holy Spirit, and of conflict too, has been made plain to us, and is now "fully believed among us". There is in it thus a challenge as to whether the Spirit of truth has His place amongst the saints, and whether such scriptures as @John 8: 32 an @1 John 2: 27 apply today. Besides this there is latitudinarianism in the publication of this paper, as the persons responsible continue (nominally) in fellowship.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board R.M.S. Samaria.
August 19th, 1933.
Mr. A. Wellershaus.
Beloved Brother, -- I received your letter from Chemnitz for which I thank you. I note all your remarks as to the Notes of meetings recently held in Germany.
Those we went over at Stockton may safely be published, but I am afraid of the others. The extract you sent from those taken at Dusseldorf does not represent what was said. If this extract is a sample of the whole of the Dusseldorf Notes I do not see how they can be used. To translate them into English so that I could go over them in New York, would be such a work as can hardly be undertaken. At any rate, it would be a mistake to publish them unless I can see them in English or have you read them to me. No one in fellowship in America knows German and English sufficiently well to read them to me as you did.
In view of the present activity of the enemy I do not think anything from me should be published save as revised by myself. I am sure you will agree with this.
I shall, please God, return to you the last two readings at Limbach as soon as I can do so, after I receive them, so that the whole set of Limbach meetings may be published without delay.
We pray much for you all, especially yourself in view of the much travelling and translating you have on hand. We shall be thinking of Dr. Elliott's visit to Germany. I am sure the
{404}
Lord will help our dear brother. We value him much in the truth.
Mr. Nee is on board this ship and we have had profitable conversations. I am *much* concerned that our brother may acquire a clear outline of the truth. This is imperative, not only because of his own needs, but also because of the large number of believers in China who are dependent on him for teaching. Elberfeld brethren have published something against Nee, attacking certain views of his on *prophecy*. I have taken this matter up with him and I hope he will get a clear understanding on the subject. As you know, he is young and has not the advantages that we in Europe and America have had.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you dear wife and yourself.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
Convey my love to the saints as you have opportunity.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
August 25th, 1933.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- I should have sent a line from the steamer, but decided to wait until we arrived so as to say something of Mr. Nee as in America.
We reached New York on Lord's Day and so did not have the privilege of the breaking of bread but we attended the gospel meeting. Nee had to remain on board until Monday morning as he had no U.S.A. visa. We had a good voyage, although two days were somewhat rough. My wife was poorly one of the days and she had a bad day from headache since our arrival, but she is quite well now, thank God. The voyage did us all good, especially myself. We found all well here and interest in the truth very good. There was a very large meeting on Tuesday at which Nee spoke. Considering everything, I thought the word good, although some things said had doubtful significance. On Wednesday there were fellowship meetings at Westfield -- an address in the evening by Nee. Many thought it *more* than wonderful, but the *doctrine* distressed me. It was on deliverance, and Nee showed that he has a system of
{405}
teaching of his own, as I may say, on @Romans 6, 7 and 8. As he was free on the steamer he made known many things as to his belief and conditions generally in the meetings in China. His understanding as to prophecy is quite unscriptural -- surprisingly so, as he has a general knowledge of what has been delivered to the saints by those who were taught of God.
Thus the whole position in China is most precarious, as Nee is by far the most influential among the brethren there. My comfort is that the Lord has heard His people during several years as to the movement in that land, and I am assured He will stand by them now. He will make a way for us. In the meantime it is for us to watch and pray more intently.
We are thinking much of our dear brethren in Great Britain, rejoicing in the goodness of God so constantly seen. Our cheer during the recent visit was, perhaps, greater than on any previous occasion. I hope to go to Detroit next week for meetings September 2nd -- 4th there.
We trust Mrs. Ide and you all keep well. We thank you both again for all your kindness to us. With our united love to all,
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
August 25th, 1933.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Many thanks for your letter and telegram. The latter is, of course, most serious. Nee is out of town, spending the week-end with Dr. S------, whom he knew in China, and will not return until Monday, so that I cannot take the matter up with him immediately. His going to a place where there is no breaking of bread and not indicating any exercise as to this, is causing us concern. I spoke strongly to him as to this, and found afterwards that he partly promised to go to S. Manchester to break bread -- so we are awaiting word as to this, as two brothers offered to motor him to S. Manchester on Lord's Day morning.
We got on well on the steamer, Nee was *very* free, making much enquiry, and communicating much as to the work in China which helps us to grasp more clearly the nature and extent of it. He gave me a list of the meetings, also a list of the more useful brothers. He also spoke much of local
{406}
conditions -- needs, etc. We could not get him through the immigration department the day we arrived, as he had no U.S.A. visa.
Beyond what I said above there is no change as to Nee from the position known on your side as we sailed. The views he holds on prophecy are quite wrong -- unscriptural. This does not refer to one part merely, such as the rapture but to the whole field. He says the apocalypse is all literal, even the gold in the heavenly city! I spoke freely with him, and he with me, but I cannot speak of any change in his mind. The same in part refers to Plymouth -- Bethesda. I questioned him, but he made *no* reply.
Of course Nee has been received here with open arms and had a *very* large (for N.Y.) audience to hear him on Tuesday. Considering all things the address was fair -- *generally* thought 'wonderful'. At Westfield he gave an address on deliverance, which by most was also thought wonderful, but in my judgment very defective *doctrinally*. I pointed out the defects as I saw them to Nee and he *listened*, but that is all.
Nee is sailing from Vancouver on September 8th, and hopes to attend the special meetings there. They are in raptures there, as you may understand, at the prospect of having him. I have written to H.G. something of the facts and I hope he will act wisely. One or two brothers will, please God, see Nee on his return as to your cable and it is on my mind to speak seriously to him as to the whole Chinese position as it now stands.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
August 29th, 1933.
Beloved Brother, -- Watchman Nee left New York yesterday and I send a few lines as to our experience together.
Last week I heard from Mr. Percy Lyon that Nee had broken bread with an independent company of Christians in London, which he admits. Then he went to the country last Thursday, to spend a few days with Dr. S------ and his family. These are the people among others that Nee came to this country specially to see. I urged Nee to break bread in some of our meetings on the Lord's Day, but on his return yesterday, he
{407}
told me, as I enquired from him, that he broke bread with the S------ family, and some others.
Some of the brothers in New York, myself included, entered into this sad development with Nee. He said finally that he regretted what he had done, that he should have told the brethren beforehand, but he made no admission of violation of principles. He said the brothers who visited China last year had agreed that the Chinese brethren should be free to receive such Christians as Dr. S------, *as* Christians.
We, the brothers who met Nee yesterday, said we could understand this, but that we were assured that no such situation as his action in London, and New Haven, where he broke bread last Lord's Day, could have been contemplated. He admitted this.
His view on prophecy came into our conversation. We had spoken much of this on the steamer. He thinks *some* of the saints will not be taken to Himself, by the Lord, at the rapture, that they will go through 'tribulation'. He also said on the steamer that the language of the book of Revelation was *literal*, not symbolical, for instance, the "gold" in the heavenly city is literal. The city thus has a corruptible element in it. I pointed this glaring error out to Nee, but he did not seem to take any note of it. What makes his erroneous prophetic views seem more serious is that the person through whom he was converted, a woman, taught him, as he told me yesterday, something on prophecy, according to what is generally accepted by the saints, so that he has given up truth for error.
You can understand my sorrow, because of what has come to light, especially as Nee and ourselves got on very well on the boat. He was free, and made much general inquiry. He was received here with the greatest affection. He addressed one of the largest meetings held here. Considering everything the address was good, but the next night at Westfield, an address on deliverance, disclosed much that was misleading in the way of doctrine. This, however, was not noticed by many. His personality and ability eclipsed all else.
The attitude we take up here, having talked matters over with Nee, is to assume that the whole Chinese position is still in the tentative or learning stage, and that it should be left for the moment entirely in the Lord's hands.
It is so extraordinary, and so many Christians being involved, that if issue were taken in a formal way the enemy would get
{408}
an advantage. The Lord heard our prayers, and will not fail us, as we wait upon Him.
Nee said he would take counsel with his brethren in China, before saying anything definite as to what has been placed before him.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
New York.
September 8th, 1933.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for two letters and enclosures -- all of which I value. I also received your cable as to W. Nee. Most distressing. I had written you after arriving here, and as I was writing Arthur Mayo I gave him what further news there was as to W.N., hoping he (A.M.) would tell you and others.
By this you will know that he broke bread here with ------ and family, and one or two others. He went to spend the week-end (from Thursday to Monday) with them near New Haven. I had not received your cable when he left, but others and myself urged Nee to be sure and break bread on the Lord's Day -- either at New York (we invited all the S------ s to spend the day in Brooklyn) or S. Manchester, two brothers who were staying at S. Manchester offering to go for him. He partly promised he would accede to our wish, but did not -- he broke bread with the others, as I said. I do not think he would have told me did I not ask him, and I should not have asked only I had in the meantime received your cable. Several of us thought we should take matters up definitely with Nee. Possibly some headway was made. We covered the whole ground, not only of these actions, but of his false views as to fellowship, prophecy, etc. He regretted the actions -- not that they were wrong in themselves, but because he did not tell the brethren of them. We asked if he would say definitely that he regretted them, and that he would reconsider the whole prophetic matter; but he said he would say or write nothing until he took counsel with his brethren at Shanghai. Thus the matter stands. We thought it unwise to take definite issue (especially as Nee had made some acknowledgement) as this
{409}
might jeopardise the whole work in China. The Lord has heard the *many* prayers for the work and will not fail to act for His people and make clear what is now so dark and confused. He will own the attitude that the whole matter is still in the tentative or learning stage. This is true of it as a whole, but I cannot say it is true of W. Nee. We sent on all the facts to Vancouver, where Nee was to attend the special meetings¬ week-end.
There was a very good season at Detroit, and the largest number so far. We had the 'household of faith'.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 12th, 1933.
Mr. Alfred Wellershaus.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received your letter and enclosure of the 28th ult. I return the latter having made some needed additions and changes.
I note that you have *all* the Notes of the meetings I attended. It seems from your remarks that you propose to publish those I have not seen without my revision. If so, I hope the greatest care will be used as I am afraid of error getting into print. The enemy will take advantage of this.
You said you would translate *some* of them into English so that I could look over them. I am sure it will be wise to do this. If I see only one set, or parts of one or two sets, I can judge as to whether it will be safe to allow publication of what remains without revision. I am sure you and others will sympathise with my exercises.
Since returning to America I have attended the Detroit special meetings (three days). The Lord helped us. A good number came together. We had at the readings 'the household of faith'.
We think of you both in your service for the Lord. My wife was glad to have your wife's note.
With love in Christ to you both and to the brethren as you see them. I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{410}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 13th, 1933.
Mr. A. Geo. Lewis.
Beloved Brother, -- Pardon my apparent delay in acknowledging your letter. It arrived here while I was in Europe and so it reached me late. Besides, you omitted to include 'Brooklyn' in the address and this also caused delay.
(1) I cannot say anything definite as to the variation in @1 Corinthians 11: 24 from @Luke 22: 19. You will be aware that some MSS insert 'broken' in the former, but this is not generally accepted. "For you" would indicate a continuous *portion*. "Is given" is not very different, but the idea of *gift* is, of course, added.
(2) Reconciliation is said to be of "things in the heavens". I believe this will be fully -- in principle it is true now -- seen in the millennium. Of course, heaven is a 'thing', but what is in view in @Colossians 1 is things in a moral rather than in a material sense. The present physical heavens and earth will remain during the millennium. Peter looks beyond to the final or eternal conditions. These involve new creation. Reconciliation is a moral *change* in persons and things; these, as identified in responsibility, remaining. New creation goes beyond this and is final -- old things having passed away.
(3) 'Giving from the box' is, of course, assembly giving. @2 Corinthians 9 plainly shows this. The bounty of the assembly can obviously extend to 'all saints'. Great care is needed, however, in undertaking in any general way to extend financial help to those not in fellowship by the saints, or we might be regarded as just one of the sects. The *spiritual* value of material giving should always be kept in view. In the passage you mention (@John 13: 29) there is doubtless an intimation that the Lord was accustomed to minister to the needs of the poor (but compare @John 12: 4 - 8), and no doubt any needy ones among the Jews would be included -- they being still regarded as God's people.
(4) The *breaking* of the bread is the act of the brother who gives thanks, but all are committed to it -- "the bread which *we* break". This was the Lord's own part as He instituted His supper -- He did not *eat* of the bread. "This do" refers to what the Lord did. The memorial of Himself is in what He did. Luke omits the reference to eating.
I trust these remarks in answer to your questions will be of service to you.
{411}
It is cheering to hear that 'things are happier in Melbourne'. I sympathise with the dear brethren there in all they have been through. Later information indicates that discipline has been administered and I trust the Lord will make this effectual.
With love in Christ, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September 19th, 1933.
Mr. H. Gill.
Beloved Brother, -- I appreciate much the information you sent as to the special meetings at Vancouver.
First, I wish to explain that your last telegram reached me in Detroit, as I had left for the meetings there before it arrived here -- my wife telephoned it to me on the Saturday evening, and I sent my answer at once.
I am thankful you regard it as confirmatory of the decision you and others had reached before it arrived.
Your experience with Mr. Nee corresponds with ours and generally with what I saw and heard in Great Britain. It seems to me that the attitude brethren here and in Vancouver have taken is generally the only one the circumstances admitted of, and there can be no doubt that our brethren in Great Britain, Australia, and elsewhere will agree. Technically, so to speak, it should have been different, for no brother would ordinarily be allowed to break bread and minister among us who behaved himself as Nee did. But the large number of saints in China who as to fellowship do not know their right hand from their left, who hang on Nee's words, required that he should be handled tenderly -- that is, on the principle of @Romans 14 and @Acts 11 and @Exodus 1: 19. A formal refusal of Nee would probably end in a breach with all now nominally in fellowship with us there.
But the situation is serious in the extreme, for it is the case of a brother in fellowship -- nominally -- with us and hailed with delight because, no doubt, of his personality, ability and nationality -- by the many among us, and yet holding principles which are subversive of the ground we, through grace, occupy, and for which our late leaders suffered so as to recover and maintain them. The attitude therefore taken by yourselves
{412}
and those in New York can only be regarded as of a tentative nature, for Mr. Nee's doing and principles, if endorsed by those in Shanghai and elsewhere in China, will render fellowship with them impossible. How great is the need of being cast on the Lord as to this unprecedented I may say, situation!
I am most thankful that you, Dr. P. and others were enabled to speak so faithfully to our brother. You covered the same ground with him largely that we covered, and it is disappointing to note that his answers or comments are the same as he made here, especially as to 2 John -- showing that he is not accepting the plainest teaching as to fellowship. But the word of God is like a fire, like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces, and so during the long voyage our brother may think over with a conscience what has been presented to him by many witnesses with the greatly-wished-for result. He told us he would not say anything as to his judgment of what was urged on him here until he took counsel with his brethren in China.
We are in touch with the S------ s, indeed they have come to live fairly near us. *She* is very nice and speaks of Mr. Nee's and her husband's loose principles -- she evidently leaning to what is right. We have invited them to have a meal with us tomorrow. Dr. S------ phoned me last Lord's Day week morning, enquiring for the address of the meeting, etc., and I thought he was coming, but instead he went to the Christian alliance meeting and broke bread there! May God help us all in relation to our brethren in China, giving those who have especially to do with them grace and wisdom! And may He help our Chinese brethren, especially their leaders, to see the way and walk in it.
My wife unites in warm love in Christ to Mrs. Gill, yourself, Geof. and all.
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- It is most remarkable that the church, involving fellowship, continues the test for our brethren, and there is no hope of any one being of service in the testimony unless he bows to the truth as to it. I think I told you that when speaking to Philip Mauro I pressed it (fellowship), and he said he knew it existed, but he would not touch it. He *did* attempt to deal with it, however, and made shipwreck -- he went to O.B., etc.
While Mr. Nee refuses Open Brethren -- largely, I believe,
{413}
because of the missionary side of them, which he has seen -- yet he has their leaven and this is the serious matter. @Matthew 16 shows that we may leave or refuse people and retain their leaven. The Lord says, Beware!
Detroit was very cheering. In spite of the general stringency, the numbers were larger than usual and the expenses met -- thank God! At the readings we had 'the household of faith'.
I hope to be at Toronto on October 7th.
In view of the presence of the S------ s with us here and Mr. Nee's participation with them in the breaking of bread, it may be wise for the brethren in New York to communicate with Shanghai, laying the whole matter before them there -- also the London action. The S------ s broke bread in China also. There is a Dr. J------ in Vancouver whom Mr. Nee much wished to see. He (J------ ) also broke bread with them in China. Nee impressed on me that he returned by America so as to see these people, especially the S------ s. He was undecided for some time whether he should go to Florida to see a Miss L------ or attend the meetings in Vancouver. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
September, 1933.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- As I am pressed for time I send this note so that you may see enclosed. In view of your experience in England with Mr. Nee, I think you should know of our exercises here.
You may see Mr. Gill's account of Nee's visit to Vancouver. This is an answer to what he sent me.
The whole matter has grave importance, for the ignoring of Nee's principles in the ardent appreciation of his personality and ability opens the door to the enemy to lead some to think lightly, if not favourably, of principles that would subvert what we now hold so dear -- the precious fellowship of God's Son, of His body and blood and of the Spirit.
Affectionately,
James Taylor.
{414}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 2nd, 1933.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I return the Wallasey address, which you wished to use in French. Perhaps you will send it to me after you have translated it as I wish to use it in a book of addresses on the assembly. I have gone over it only once, but will revise it more carefully after you return it. You, of course, will be responsible for the French.
... Much has been said -- largely by myself -- as to accuracy in ministry and there can be no doubt that the Lord has used it; and I had hoped ------ especially would profit by it, for he always expressed readiness to accept help. It is clear that he *means* to convey nothing wrong, but of course, one is to be justified or condemned by his *words*.
There is nothing further as to China. The brethren here have decided to write the *brethren* in Shanghai. In view of the presence of the S------ s here and what has transpired in connection with them it is thought that it is due to the Lord to move in relation to the assembly -- what He has presumably both there and here. There has been violation of the principles governing it and it seems responsibility as to this being accepted here, and also in London, the facts should be placed before those in Shanghai so that they may also accept responsibility -- which they will if under His hand. This is a full week, the 'monthly' meeting and the Toronto meetings coming in, but I hope the letter will be sent next week. Nee should have arrived in Shanghai last Friday and, of course, he or the brethren at Shanghai may write London or New York.
With love in Christ to you all,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
I am glad to have all letters sent. Thanks also for all news as to 'Conference', etc. Count on our constant prayers.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 13th, 1933.
Mr. W. J. Bishop.
My Dear Brother, -- Pardon delay in replying to your letter -- I have had more on my hands than I could cope with.
I think I can enter into the 'boundary' difficulty in your
{415}
district, especially as I have already had part in a consideration of the matter. It is indeed complicated and requires wisdom from above in those who are affected by it, so that love and peace may prevail. In Joshua the boundaries of the tribes were irregular and this, no doubt, was with divine intent -- love would be tested and increased as exercised by the difficulties involved. But we are children of wisdom and should know when there should be mercy and not sacrifice. On the other hand, we are *priests* -- those who are, so to speak, to know and enforce 'the law'. If sacrifice is required from you it is not for you to demand mercy, but if mercy (as seen in God) makes the sacrifice unnecessary, then the demand for it (the sacrifice) should cease. The fact that your house is actually within the boundary line of Auckland cannot, as far as I see, justify your being required to walk two and a half miles past the nearest meeting-room to get to another.
As regards administration, this hinges on your being of the assembly in the place -- Mount Eden. You are one of the assembly in a general sense, a member of Christ's body, and if (according to what I wrote above) you should be free to break bread at Woodside Road room you are eligible to have part in all assembly matters in Mount Eden. Added to the other facts, your business interests being in Mount Eden is of importance. Besides, the idea of the *neighbour* (other facts being as mentioned) confirms that Mount Eden is the place of your local responsibility. Thus the procedure you mention (as to the case of discipline) which assumed that the service of the four brothers who visited the brother in question was invalid can hardly be justified. On the ground of *general* fellowship (to which I alluded above) and on the ground that the four brothers broke bread in Mount Eden (as I understand) they were (being *personally* suitable) eligible for the service. To exclude a *visiting* brother (unless for some personal disqualification) from part in local assembly matters is not scriptural as far as I understand, on the other hand, a wise visiting brother would not interfere in local affairs save as his brethren made way for him. The procedure you mention which required the sisters (all being gathered for administrative action) to leave because you assumed technical discrepancy so that the brothers should depute two of their number to see the brother under discipline, seems to me unwarranted. The point the apostle makes in @1 Corinthians 5 in this respect is
{416}
that the person to be disciplined *is* what he is alleged to be -- a wicked person. "Being such", he says, without saying how this was determined. Scripturally, facts are established by two or three *witnesses* not necessarily local witnesses. I say this to show how unnecessary the procedure you mention was. Indeed it indicates that the brother who required it had a poor sense of the dignity of the assembly. The expectation should be that the Lord would be there and this makes the disbanding of the assembly obviously more serious.
As regards the two meetings in Mount Eden holding joint care meetings there is nothing wrong in this. As in the same place, they should do so. As of the one assembly in the city, they should act together.
I trust what I have written may be of service to you.
With love in Christ to you and the brethren, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 20th, 1933.
Mr. Stephen Carruthers.
Beloved Brother,. -- Your letter of the 8th inst. Arrived today. I am most interested in all you write about our dear brothers and sisters in Italy. Some months ago I had a good letter from Mr. Zangger. Mr. P. Lyon gave him my name and address and he wrote at length. He did not, however, raise the question you mention.
As to this I would say that as the breaking of bread in a locality involves the truth of the assembly there, we should look for someone corresponding with the "angel" (@Revelation 2: 1). From what you write of Zangger, confirmed fully by the spirit and tone of his letter to me, I judge he is one of sufficient intelligence and integrity to be regarded as trustworthy as accepting responsibility before the Lord. If all there are assured in faith and free to break bread at Venice, it seems to me they should do so, and I am assured the Lord would be with them. Indeed they would thus afford peculiar joy to Him as owning Him and His assembly in that dark, Jezebel-ridden land. Of course, they would acquaint the brethren in Milan and elsewhere in Italy of their purpose before breaking bread so as to insure *general* fellowship.
The case of S------ is not so clear, but if the son and nephew
{417}
of T------ were at all exercised (seeing they are believers) to fall in with him and his wife and daughter in the acceptance of the fellowship no doubt the Lord would help them and make them stand. The question is, Has T------ himself faith to take the lead? The fact that these dear ones at S------ may be free to go to Venice to break bread is a further good reason why they should take up their privilege there.
The case at Como would be necessarily governed by the state of the sisters there. If they are at all such as A------, who had a good report without, I think there might be the breaking of bread on the occasion of a brother, or brothers, visiting them. The principle of the 'angel' or the acceptance of local responsibility is there.
I believe the Lord is deeply interested in these dear ones, surrounded, as they are, by so much gross darkness, and would support them in a special way, as His addresses to the churches indicate. Where there is intelligence and integrity the sense of responsibility to the Lord steadies and helps believers. There is evidence of this on this side of the Atlantic, where there are many small and isolated meetings.
I am very thankful you retain an active interest in Italy and I am sure the Lord will bless you in this. The weakness and need on the Continent are great, and I am sure the Great Shepherd of the sheep regards with special favour those who care for His loved ones there.
Percy Lyon wrote me *en route* to Egypt. I trust the result will justify the long journey.
There is much to encourage on this side, especially in this district. The meetings here are increasing almost continually.
My wife joins in love in Christ to you and your family,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 12th, 1933.
Beloved Brother, -- I am very thankful that brethren in the meetings more or less in the neighbourhood of Newcastle have moved according to the conversation we had when we met.
I saw two accounts of the meeting and I gather from them that the Lord's good hand was over the brethren and that the trend of thought among them was in the right direction.
{418}
Brethren from nearby meetings being brought directly into the matter and taking counsel together in the Lord's name, gives Him greater scope to act on the consciences of His people so that "righteousness and justice" may be done.
Wisdom among us would localise a difficulty of this kind as much as possible, but one of such magnitude as that at Newcastle cannot be wisely left in the hands of one meeting, especially if there are natural or other personal links apt to cause bias. It is *in principle of general* import and hence an advantage is gained in brothers of wisdom and experience from all neighbouring meetings being free to take counsel together as before the Lord so that He might guide to a righteous solution of the sorrow.
To this end it is obvious that the facts of the case must in a general way have full recognition, Israel's judges must make thorough enquiry (@Deuteronomy 19: 18) and they cannot do this save as salient facts have their full place. The 'report' of the three brothers furnishes these facts, and disregard of this report caused the open rupture. Mr. W------ by his confession confirmed the report. Wesley Street to "follow righteousness" should *identify themselves with Mr. W------ in his confession* as they had (tacitly to say the least) identified themselves with his charges. If they do this without reserve they will do what is right, and will imply that they caused division in failing to accept the report -- it having the full status of the "witness" required in @Deuteronomy 19, and elsewhere, in Scripture. If the facts governing the Newcastle sorrow are allowed their full weight it will be morally impossible to ask Eastwood to take common ground with Wesley Street. The position of the latter is utterly out of keeping with @2 Timothy 2: 22.
I shall be looking to the Lord for you all in view of any further meeting. I am sure He will not fail His dear people.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
December 18th, 1933.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for your invitation.
I shall, please God, spend a night or two in Detroit district *en route* to Hamilton. Mr. Powell had written me, and I hope to go to him first.
{419}
I am very glad indeed to know that further help is opened up to the dear brethren who have been out of employment. Some here, too, are profiting in the same way. Thus our God makes a way for us.
There is much cheer here.
Our united love to you both.
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
December 19th, 1933.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- It is remarkable that I was about to write you when your letter arrived. I thank you for it, being pleased to hear from you and to have the interesting information you kindly sent. Of all the cities in which God has wrought in these last days London, next to New York, has the chief place with me, so I am always peculiarly interested in tidings of it.
So far no answer has come to our letter written to Shanghai. Recently the following came from W. Nee, which shows that, at least, the letter reached the brethren and that they were considering it: --
<blockquote> 'Dear Mr. Taylor, <br>Brother Luke is (not) a Shanghai brother. Your letter to him care of me has been forwarded to him in Hinghwa. <br>Your enclosed letter to the brethren here has been handed to them. As they are dealing with me, so I do not think it right to ask anything about it. <br>As for myself, I still do not know how (what) to say. I am waiting for light. With Christian regards, <br>Yours in the Lord, <br>W. Nee'.</blockquote>
Words in brackets are not in original, but I believe, give the meaning.
This letter indicates no change in Nee's mind as to the serious matters in question since he left New York, but 'dealing with me' holds out hope that the brethren in Shanghai are taking our letter seriously. I shall let the brethren in London know as soon as an answer is received, and no doubt we shall hear of any reply to the London letter.
{420}
As regards @2 Timothy 2, I have not hitherto heard of "vessels to dishonour" being *limited* to unconverted persons. *Any* person in the Christian profession holding bad doctrine or principles would be a vessel to dishonour. The excommunicated man at Corinth was a believer, but he is called a "wicked person". Such a person today, whatever the wickedness, would have to be separated from. Hymenaeus had been treated similarly by Paul (@1 Timothy 1: 20), being evidently regarded by the apostle as a christian, for, like the man at Corinth, he had been delivered to Satan for "discipline". 2 Timothy says he had "gone astray" as to the truth, which indicates that the discipline had not been effective, but we cannot say he was an apostate nor unconverted. How far may a believer not go if he come under the influence (through his own will) of Satan! While 2 Timothy touches on the apostasy, those to be separated from may include persons who earlier gave evidence of genuine faith in the Lord Jesus. Jude and 2 Peter go further and deal more definitely with apostates.
We shall be thinking of you as serving the saints in the three places mentioned during the holidays, especially Glasgow as a position of great importance, but where precarious conditions have existed for a long time.
I have found more encouragement from the Lord during recent months than in any like period in this country and Canada -- especially at 'general' meetings. This week I hope to visit Chicago for three days¬ special meetings -- the first since the 'trouble' there a few years back. Then I purpose seeing the brethren in Ontario during meetings at Hamilton at New Year time.
Mr. Murchie's visit to this district was blessed of God. He has remarkable ability in the gospel. During recent months there has been a nice work of God in progress. During the past two, *ten* have been received into fellowship in the city and others are coming on. I need not say that occasion for concern also exists!
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner, yourself, Marjorie and all the household, also to all the brethren at Streatham.
Affectionately in Him.
James Taylor.
{421}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 8th, 1934.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Many thanks for your letters and enclosures. We had followed you in your services on the Continent and we are assured the Lord blessed His people through you.
We thought of all the dear brethren in Great Britain as gathered in many places, and we trust the blessing of God was upon all the meetings.
Seven from here went to Chicago, where a good few of the saints met during the Christmas holidays. The Lord greatly helped us. At the readings we had @Numbers 5 - 8.
Then we went to Detroit for a few days where there was a happy season. Then to Hamilton, and meetings continued in the district from Thursday to Monday. On the latter day a large number met at Hamilton -- three meetings. There is cleavage at Galt, and I was glad of the opportunity of a meeting there. I believe a considerable part of the difficulty was overcome under God's good hand.
We found all well and much cheer here on our return. About 600 had met in Brooklyn on Christmas Day, and they got on well, I hear. J. Smith addressed the saints in the evening and was supported. Progress seems to be made in regard of ministry. Brothers are coming forward, taking a lead in meetings and the Lord seems to encourage it.
There is no answer from Shanghai, but Luke wrote a *very* nice letter on his own account. I had sent our letter in his care, but found he had left Shanghai. Mr. Luke, however, expresses no regret for Mr. Nee's conduct. I think I mentioned earlier that Nee also acknowledged the N.Y. letter, but said he was awaiting light.
I see nothing of definite encouragement yet as to the whole situation. Luke said he and W.N. were about to visit the gatherings, which, of course, indicates that, while he speaks of getting help from the N.Y. letter, he has no difficulty as to Watchman. Even if Shanghai satisfies the consciences of brethren, there are 90 meetings outside that city whose composition and principles are questionable. Having received their instruction mainly through Nee they must be formed accordingly. Dr. and Mrs. S------, who broke bread regularly at ------, afford some evidence of the quality of the meetings in China generally. They are, according to our information, still with
{422}
the Presbyterian Mission board and have linked themselves with the loosest O.B.¬s meeting in this city. Mr. Nee advised them, as they told us, to get into touch with Mr. S------ of the Honor Oak Meeting as the man from whom he received most help.
I regret the French and German Notes are held up for want of funds. Financial conditions in Germany should be somewhat improved and hence the brethren should be able to take on such a small matter. Deep poverty and free-hearted liberality form a remarkable combination -- one that heaven is pleased with.
Thanks for transport information. It is likely, please God, we shall sail by the Aurania, March 15th. I shall let you know later.
Our united love to you all,
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 26th, 1934.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- For weeks it has been on my mind to write, and now your letter has just come. I have been laid up with influenza for a fortnight or more, but thank God, I am steadily improving. I think I got cold when in the West and Canada, for the thermometer was at times '15° below'.
We are very glad to hear from you and of Mrs. Ide and all, and most thankful for the generally cheering news. I heard lately from Mr. Elliott of the Depot and your letter confirms his as to the progress made. There can be no doubt that God is helping you all. The Depot has a great place in *my prayers*. The increase of the circulation of wholesome ministry is most gratifying. Efforts are made here in that direction with considerable success. The three brothers who will now oversee the Tract Depot -- dear Mr Fawcett having gone to be with the Lord -- will, I am sure, do what they can to make it more useful. I have no doubt they can arrange to have all their business go through Stow Hill.
I note that you wish the Birmingham Notes. I received these only this week, but I shall endeavour to revise them fairly early. In the meantime, besides the New York Notes, I am working on material for the book on the assembly, which H.F.N. has suggested. It requires much work. Revising is tedious work, reduction and accuracy being needed, and of
{423}
course, there is *much besides* to be attended to. Correspondence is very heavy. I have the Notes on the Covenant, but considerable changes have to be made. One's thoughts are clearer on some points. I shall, please God, take them with me and see what I can do on the steamer. I think the Birmingham Notes, being fresh, should be prepared after those on the assembly.
We hope to sail on the Aurania on March 15th landing a Plymouth. There will be no need of you going to Plymouth as we purpose spending a few days with Mr. Coates, going from Devon to Belfast.
We are grieved by the news of Mr. Collins¬ death. We really know our dear brother but little, but his hymn-tunes have caused him to be widely known among the saints and much valued.
The Lord helped us in the West during the holiday season. We visited Chicago, Detroit, Hamilton Ontario, and Galt. There is a great change in Chicago for the better, although we fear old roots remain with some and they may bear fruit again. But we count on God, whose strong hand is always against evil. A large number came together at Hamilton on New Year's Day. A very large number came together here, Brooklyn, on Christmas Day and we hear the Lord helped them.
The brethren are thankful to have copy of the Stow Hill instrument, which I understand is *yours* -- it will be adopted almost verbally for the New York Depot.
I am very sorry indeed that Sydney has cancelled New York Notes. This surely cannot be because the Notes are regarded as unprofitable. Incidents of this kind cropping up from time to time in Australia cause great uneasiness. Of course, there has been criticism of some publications in Australia, but the errors in them made this imperative. I am constantly receiving expressions of thankfulness for the New York Notes. It seems to me they have a place of their own. Our united love to you all.
Affectionately,
James Taylor.
<hr>
New York.
January 31st, 1934.
Dr. Van Someren.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 29th ult. has just come. I am unable to answer it in detail but send a line of acknowledgement at once. In view of my usual visit to Great
{424}
Britain many letters come from that side of the Atlantic and hence my hands are more than full. If your letter was full of what we are enjoined to be occupied with (@Philippians 4: 8) I could perhaps sacrifice to treat it fully, but it is occupied with what is negative, indeed with what the enemy is doing or seems to you to be doing, and this cannot be profitable.
Of course, we must not close our eyes to the enemy's work which would be giving him an advantage, but what cheers and strengthens the soul is God's work, and I am sure that if you look around and abroad you will observe much of it. I am sure, indeed, that you do, and that you abound in the work of the Lord yourself, but you failed to balance your letter with it so that it would be as cold waters to a thirsty soul, that is, good news from a far country.
As far as I can judge, I can recall no period since I have been in fellowship which afforded more cause for encouragement than exists at the present time. In saying this, I am far from boasting, the Lord knows, but it is due to Him that we own His goodness to His people. The enemy has been attacking from the outside and the inside, as we speak, for some years back with the obvious view to scatter, and what alone could prevent this has been mercifully available, that is, the Lord's hand. There has been this merciful preservation indeed for over 25 years. If we compare with earlier days -- to say nothing of what occurred even during apostolic times -- fifteen years after the movement of 100 years ago began, a division took place which carried away the great bulk of those who had professedly gone forth without the camp. Twenty years later a serious uprising took place against J. N. Darby indicating a sad underlying condition. Then thirteen years after -- still in J.N.D.¬s time -- a series of four divisions took place inside ten years which carried away more perhaps than remained with the truth. Eighteen years afterwards 'Glanton' took place. These are most sorrowful reminiscences and I have no satisfaction in them (although from another point of view each division afforded victory for the truth) but they show by contrast how good God has been to His people during the last 25 years. Besides, definite ground has been gained and the saints have generally stood by what God has been effecting and giving.
As regards large conferences, etc., I am not an advocate of such, but the opposite, but we cannot undertake to control
{425}
the saints in their respective localities; no one can undertake to superintend the building of the whole wall, the business of each is rather to build before his own house, as it were. If brethren in Bristol, Birmingham, or Edinburgh invite their brethren to a conference and brethren from all parts come and insist on coming, making the total beyond what was desired, what moral right has any of us to forbid this? The Lord blesses these conferences. Whatever brethren who have not attended them may say, or even some who do, I can say with all assurance before Him that the Lord has blessed every conference I have attended. I have not been otherwise more conscious of His support than I realised at these conferences -- without exception. And I may remark as a matter for your special notice that up to the time I visited Australia, I had not attended larger meetings than I attended there -- the brothers¬ readings at the general conference mentioned above were not much over half the size of the Melbourne meetings I attended. I rejoiced in those large meetings of beloved brethren in Australia and do still as they continue. At the same time, I much prefer meetings of 300 - 400.
As regards censorship in the Stow Hill Depot, I should deprecate anything like a set number of brothers requiring everything to pass their mould; but this does not exist. There is a wholesome watch kept on matter to be published, and brothers here and there thought to be more or less capable are asked to look over what seems questionable. I am assured that if you knew all the facts you would be restful as to this -- indeed thankful that such care is taken.
As I said, I am far from making light of the sorrowful things you mention. They are to be taken to heart before the Lord; indeed, as far as I know, they *are* taken to heart, and the Lord is giving repentance to some. But we must be fair and balanced in speaking of them in a general way, for our knowledge may be imperfect and we cannot assume to be free of them, with the flesh in us answering to the dreadful world outside. We are in peculiarly difficult times. But I have written more by far than I set out to do.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
{426}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January, 1934.
Mr. A. J. P------.
Dear Mr. P------, -- Your note of the 20th ult. came a few days ago. On account of your earlier history I do you the courtesy of acknowledging the receipt of it; ordinarily a barrier of silence should be maintained by those who fear God between themselves and those who accuse the brethren and who cause division among them (@Romans 16: 17). Your published papers are not only accusatory of the brethren but *falsely* so.
Hence, unless on the ground of a contrite withdrawal of these papers, I must decline to enter into any correspondence with you. On consideration you will, I hope, see that this attitude is not arbitrary, but godly, as scripturally imperative and consistent. I return copy of Canon Raven's letter.
Faithfully in the Lord,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 4th, 1934.
Mr. Charles Hammond.
Beloved Brother, -- Pardon my delay in acknowledging your very interesting letter. I have been much away from New York since it arrived. It was good of you to write so fully and I thank you for the service rendered.
I am sorry to know of any weakening as to the boundary principle (which the Lord has made so clear during recent years) in West Hampstead. If, as children of wisdom, we think it necessary to disregard in *detail* a general scriptural principle, it is due to God that we should own the principle in itself. But I earnestly trust the Spirit of Christ and love of the truth will prevail among the dear brethren in that section. God watches over His ordinances and gives those who respect them a sense of His approval, while those who disregard them fail of the sap and general blessing that go with His favour (@Isaiah 56: 1 - 8; @1 Corinthians 11: 1, 2).
As regards @1 Corinthians 11: 18 and 14: 23, what you quote conveys my mind. "Together in assembly" and "the whole assembly come together in one place" are not the same thing. The former is properly for the Lord's supper and would apply even in sub-divisions of the assembly. @Romans 16: 4, 5 and @1 Corinthians 16: 19 and @Philemon 2 seem to refer to such
{427}
divisions and the word "assembly" is used in each case. "If the whole assembly" (@1 Corinthians 14: 23) is rather to show that *all may* be thus together than that they *should* be. It is a question of ministry and not strictly the assembly in function. Still there is public testimony in a collective way, for God is owned as "amongst you". This, however, is said to be by prophecy, not by divine order nor the testimony of Christ's death nor His Supper.
I have found much cheer lately in visiting the saints in the Middle West of this country and in Ontario. I am assured the Lord has helped the dear brethren in Great Britain as together at special meetings during the recent holidays.
With love in Christ, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 27th, 1934.
Mr. Faithful Luke.
Beloved Brother, -- It was indeed a pleasure to receive your letter; others and myself have enjoyed reading it, noting therein the brotherly spirit and affection which are in accord with our Lord's injunction: "Love one another". There is also an evidence in it of *love in the truth*, which is of the last importance in our day, when the truth is either being given up or perverted on all sides. The apostle John says of the elect lady and her children and of Gains "Whom I love in the truth".
I much appreciate your desire to meet me and I assure you it would be a pleasure to me and my wife to meet you, and if you are free to come to New York we shall be glad to entertain you. As regards pamphlets, etc., of mine, a good few, I believe, were sent to Shanghai last year, which you may have opportunity of seeing; but I shall gladly send you others if you so desire.
That you had left Shanghai was not known to me when I wrote you, but I also sent a copy of the letter to the brethren to Mr. Nee, and he handed it to them. It was no doubt ordered of the Lord that you should also have a copy, especially as you obtained help from it.
Enclosed is a copy of a further letter the brethren here believe should be addressed to our Shanghai brethren. It seems of
{428}
the Lord that they should have these additional facts as to Mr. Nee's actions here and in London before them. I trust this will be your mind also and that you will be enabled of the Lord to arrive at a judgment according to His mind as to this very important matter.
Your remarks as to the correspondence between the position of the dear brethren in China now and that of brethren in Great Britain and some other countries 100 years ago call forth my sympathy. The many with you in China are just emerging from heathen darkness and cannot be regarded as seeing all things clearly (@Mark 8: 25). They deserve therefore the tenderest consideration. But there is this important difference between the brethren in China now and those in Great Britain and other countries 100 years ago; you -- especially Mr. Nee, yourself, and others who speak English -- have opportunity of profiting by the experience of those in whom and through whom God wrought during the last century.
This is an immense advantage, for the history shows how scriptural principles and human principles have respectively worked out. The latter took root in Plymouth, where clericalism through the example and influence of Mr. B. W. Newton, became established. Mr. J. N. Darby and others withdrew from the meeting there because of this and other evils there; and later deadly evil doctrine against Christ was shown to be held by Mr. Newton.
The brethren in Bethesda Chapel, Bristol, knowing all these sorrowful things, deliberately took the ground of receiving persons coming to Bristol from the meeting in which Mr. Newton was, providing they professed not to hold his evil doctrines -- ignoring the solemn statement of Scripture that one receiving into his house or greeting one who brings not the doctrine of Christ is a *partaker of his wicked works* (@2 John 2). Breaking bread with a man expresses *fellowship with him* and so those who broke bread with Mr. Newton, although they might not actually hold his doctrine, were partakers of his wicked works and so were unfit for Christian fellowship. We are enjoined to "come out from the midst of them, and be separated, ... and touch not what is unclean" @2 Corinthians 6: 17. We are to hate the *garment spotted by the flesh*, while seeking to save some with fear (@Jude 23). "Garment" would be *surrounding* circumstances, such as human religious organisations, unscriptural principles, false doctrine, etc., etc. Bethesda brethren
{429}
ignored these solemn divine requirements in receiving from Mr. Newton's meeting, and the leaven involved in this has worked among 'Open Brethren' ever since and has spread far and wide.
On the other hand, those who stood loyal to Christ and the principles governing the house of God, especially as to fellowship, refusing Bethesda's principles and conduct, have been steadily blessed of God in a gracious ministry of the Spirit given through and to them -- a steady stream through all the years which have elapsed, and it still goes on. The truth as to Christ and the assembly, eternal life, the gospel of the glory of God, the service of God in the assembly, fellowship, and more recently, of the absolute and relative features of the Persons of the Holy Trinity -- indeed the whole system of truth has been coming before the saints with a clearness and definiteness unknown since apostolic days. The evidence of this is, of course, more apparent through those whom the Holy Spirit used, but any one who has not had this privilege may readily verify it by examining the written ministry of the period mentioned. What I am writing is no question of boasting in men -- God forbid -- but of owning and showing what God has done in honouring His own truth and those who, having His commandments, keep them. I am not, of course, ignoring that sorrowful things have happened through human unfaithfulness, but I speak of what God has done in relation to the maintenance of His own principles.
This ministry with the divine formations more or less in keeping with it, in hundreds of gatherings of saints throughout the world is your heritage, my beloved brother, and that of all the dear brethren in China, as it is ours in Europe and America, and you are obligated to the Lord to embrace it, profit by it, and stand firmly by it, refusing what is not of God until He comes for us all.
Latitude allowed to persons breaking bread to retain their links with human religious organisations, and others of a worldly nature, may give you larger numbers, as is witnessed among 'Open Brethren', but it involves the spirit of the world and material unsuited for assembly formation -- a state of things that the Lord cannot identify Himself with and in which the Holy Spirit will not have liberty to operate. 2 Timothy is *especially* the scripture for our day as regulating us in reference to Christendom as it is, and the "seal" there
{430}
is, "the Lord knows those that are his; and, Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity", (@2 Timothy 2: 19). Iniquity is evil, unrighteousness, in various forms; and then there are vessels "to dishonour" (verses 20 - 22), and these (persons) have also to be separated from. To allow people to break bread until they have thus cleared themselves is to link ourselves on with the evil -- for this is the significance of the word fellowship -- with which they are linked. The types -- important instruction from God -- such as @Leviticus 11, show that if one *touches* an unclean thing he renders himself unclean.
What you mention as done at Foochow in allowing persons to break bread -- some for eight years -- who retained their links with the 'churches' is certainly not in accord with @2 Timothy 2. Nor was it in keeping with the order of the truth in 1 Corinthians. There, fellowship (communion is the same word) (chapter 10) comes before the Lord's supper (chapter 11). The former is *exclusive* of what is inconsistent with the death of Christ; the latter is *inclusive* of those that are consistent with it. The principle of Scripture as to these matters is, "Cease to do evil, learn to do well", @Isaiah 1: 17. The principle governing you at Foochow was to get people to do well with the hope that they would cease to do evil. Thus you had some in fellowship with you there for eight years who had not ceased to do evil!
Please pardon so long a letter, but the spirit and tone of your letter encourages me to write freely and I trust that what I have written will be of service.
With love in Christ to you and the brethren. I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
January 30th, 1934.
Mr. Stanley McCallum.
My Dear Stanley, -- I am deeply grieved by what you write and cry to God for the poor erring one and for you all as having to deal with such a matter -- in itself so defiling. Priests alone can do so according to God.
The responsibility of judging in such a case belongs entirely to those in the locality in which the person who has sinned resides; they alone are in the position to know fully the
{431}
circumstances which led up to the offence, and this includes the general character and history of the one involved. Persons residing elsewhere may help as to principles and this is all I can venture to do.
One important principle is that the assembly, or rather the saints, have authority to remit as they have to retain sins, @John 20: 23. Thus, your enquiry will be, is the sin thoroughly bottomed in true contrition as before God? Is there the sense that God has thus forgiven? To reach a safe conclusion as to this it will be necessary to determine whether the beginning of the sin was just what you mention, or was there anything of the kind earlier? Was the nervous breakdown because of this *one* offence? Was there anything like such a breakdown before; if so, was this last one coming on when the sin occurred? Was the confession wholly voluntary? or was the motive in confession partially or wholly because of the likelihood of the matter becoming known anyway?
According to @Leviticus 13, the saints, as priests, are qualified to reach a true conclusion, and if it is certain that the leprosy has ceased to act, being not the outcome of an old unjudged root, and that the offender is free from, or superior to, the state that led to it, being conscious of forgiveness by God, according to @1 John 1 and 2, the saints may righteously have recourse to their prerogative of forgiveness, and hence there will be no need of public action. The saints are already sitting in judgment in the matter and the offender is voluntarily at their bar, as it were, and so what they do, as seeking to act for God, to maintain, on the one hand, the holiness of His house, and, on the other, to maintain the reign of grace -- as in @Luke 24: 34, the appearing to Simon -- under these circumstances heaven will ratify what they do.
As I said, it is for the local saints to decide and the Lord will not fail you all as you brokenly and humbly seek His face in this sorrowful matter and seek to act for Him. You will have to consider as to whether there is any public effect, which would cause the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme.
Be assured of my sympathy with you all in your sorrow and my prayers that the Lord may be with you in your exercises and give you a judgment which He can approve.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{432}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 1st, 1934.
Beloved Brother, -- Mr. Biggs sent me your letter to him of the 16th ult. As he says he sent it with your permission I take the liberty of making a few comments to you direct.
First, I may say that I am no advocate of big meetings, but the opposite; 300 - 400 suit me best. But of course what suits me or anyone else determines nothing; what Scripture warrants must govern us.
Thus, if dear brethren at Barnet, Bristol (Worcester no one could complain of) Birmingham or Edinburgh invite saints from all parts to a conference, and they come and insist on coming so that the total is far beyond what was intended, who has the moral right to forbid brethren in these localities to receive them? Primarily the matter is theirs respectively; indeed all administrative matters must work out locally. You or I may suggest or advise local brethren, but if no divine principles are openly violated we shall be wise in leaving local matters in local hands and if one feels before the Lord that something more is needed He will not fail us as we unburden our hearts to Him.
You have mentioned your burden to Dr. Hewer, which was right, as he is a London brother, and no doubt he has passed your thought on at Kennington; there, it seems to me, you must leave it, or you will not be regarded as a "son of peace" in this respect.
The London brothers may point out to you that the Lord ministered the word to *all* that came to Him -- sometimes they blocked even the door -- although He addressed His own as "Little flock;" that while He appeared after He rose from the dead to Peter and James severally, He also "appeared to above 500 brethren at once" -- an important point, as referring to what is specially spiritual, which you would limit to twenty or so apparently; and you say, 'No note taking:' This does not seem fair. Notes of Edinburgh meetings circulate to the extent of 8,000 - 10,000 -- does this not indicate that they contain some food for the household, which the Lord values? What right has anyone to say nay to it? Also that Paul contemplates *all* the saints at Corinth coming together in one place for ministry: These latter two facts being specially important as appearing m an epistle that treats of outward order; then
{433}
we read of Paul and Barnabas *teaching* "a large crowd" at Antioch, this teaching being not merely 'addresses' evidently, but in the assembly, and a *multitude* is spoken of as listening to Paul and Barnabas at Jerusalem. Then, coming to our own, or remnant, times, it is well known that large meetings for ministry have been held from time to time during the last 100 years. J.N.D., J.B.S. and F.E.R. attended these -- indeed a brother told me of a meeting even for the breaking of bread, J.N.D. present, where five loaves and five or more full glasses of wine were needed; you have seen meetings of a thousand to fifteen hundred in and around London, and I have many times attended such meetings elsewhere in the Kingdom during the past 25 years, also in Australia. The London brethren may remind you of these facts -- what are you going to reply? I am sure -- knowing you as I do -- that you will not assume to be wiser than Scripture nor even wiser than the least of your brethren.
As regards your suggestion that recent conferences have 'diminished in quality', I must respectfully entirely disagree. Of course I may be somewhat disqualified to judge as having so much to do with them, but in searching my heart before the Lord, I do not think I am prejudiced, and I can say in His fear that I have not found such support from Him in ministry elsewhere as I have found in the conferences held in Great Britain in 1929 and since -- not one excepted. I have heard of comparisons and criticisms, but they seemed to me to ignore the grace and goodness of the Lord in giving something *distinctive* on each occasion. The criticisms I have heard of were wanting in the recognition of this and of corresponding thankfulness, and this the Lord would feel.
If the London brethren decide to have meetings at Park Street such as were held in 1922 I shall be thankful, but if they decide otherwise I shall make no complaint, although I fear I shall be somewhat hampered in such a hall as in view -- I have not seen it. But I know something of the Lord's gracious consideration of His people and that He will minister to them even in a conspicuous hall. He says, Gather the people together -- no restriction imposed -- and I will give them water. I have the assurance that He will fulfil His promise even in Westminster Hall! And I believe that you also, my dear brother, will have this assurance. The Assembly Hall in Edinburgh is *comparatively* more noted -- for the King's
{434}
representative is there every year -- and it has been used by us for *many* years, the Lord blessing His people in it.
As said already, there is nothing unusual nor very inconvenient in 700 - 800 brothers meeting together over the word; *generally* there has been no complaint, but the opposite, as far as I know. Considering the large number of saints in and around London -- a great proportion of whom wishing to I attend -- it does not seem to me that there should be *any* complaint if the brethren decide on this number. But I shall be thankful for every bit of pressure brought soberly against outward show.
With unabated love in Christ to you and your family in which my wife joins, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 8th, 1934.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Many thanks for letters and enclosures. I return Owen S------¬s, as you request. I am struck with the provision the Lord is making for His people in brothers such as S------. In *this* country and Canada, Dean and Samuels seem to be finding more time for service and I am cast on God for them, especially D. in view of earlier experience. In the New York and Ontario districts many are evidencing ability. May the Lord impress us all with the example of the "little child" by Him!
I sent -- as I was writing him -- Mr. Higgins a copy of a further letter we have written Shanghai and requested him to forward it to you. The course taken by Dr. S------ and his wife is no doubt allowed of the Lord as making the position clearer. I now enclose a copy of a letter I was free to write F. Luke in answer to a letter from him.------ and others on the Pacific Coast have printed notes of W.N.¬s gospel address at Vancouver. This is distressing for general reasons and also because of some very unscriptural statements. I believe our brothers will regret what they have done. I do not think H.G. had any part in it. I am conscious the Lord is moving for self-judgment and clarification in this whole matter.
There are mutterings of opposition to large conferences being held, that proposed in London specially aimed at. Dr. V.S.
{435}
wrote me *ten* typed pages bewailing this with *many* other sorrows as he professes to see them. I think it right to send you a copy of my reply -- for your *careful* use. No doubt you will be aware that similar feelings to V.S.¬s exist in England. Brethren in London are, I am sure, observing as before the Lord, what is said while using the wisdom He gives them in what they have undertaken.
The brethren in Kingston, including Half-way Tree, Jamaica, propose, please God, to resume the breaking of bread next Lord's Day. We are much looking to the Lord to stand by our much tried brethren; W------ told Mr. Murchie he would not interfere again. Two of his sons got blessing through Mr. M. and this may have touched him. Evidently the Lord used Mr. M. much in Jamaica. He is now in Barbados.
I had a bad turn of influenza and bronchitis, but I am better, thank God. I think it took root in Chicago and Canada.
I trust you all keep well through mercy,
Our united love in Christ,
James Taylor.
We think of spending the week-end at Teignmouth -- I have written C.A.C. -- then go on to Ireland.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 10th, 1934.
Miss W. M. Frost.
My Dear Miss Frost, -- Please pardon my delay in replying to your letter. When it arrived I was in the West attending special meetings and did not return until early in January. The weather had been very cold, especially in Canada and evidently a cold took root in me; at any rate I was laid up last month for a fortnight, with influenza and bronchitis. Thus my correspondence has been much behind.
The subject you wrote about is often considered, but, I fear, a satisfactory conclusion is hardly ever reached. This may be because spiritual understanding is specially needed for it and we must admit that this is somewhat rare. The Lord may have seen fit to leave the matter a little vague so that *He* should be more sought for understanding. We are to *think on* what He says and He gives understanding in all things. As
{436}
waiting on Him, if we do not get what we seek we may at least get what we *need* -- of which He is the best Judge.
One thing quite clear in @1 Corinthians 11 is that a woman should not pray or prophesy with her head uncovered. If this is definitely accepted and conformed to, the rest of the instruction on the subject will be seen to be more or less detail. This covering in prayer should be real.
The use of a bow by many sisters at all times while about the house is based, I believe, on @1 Corinthians 11: 10, the word "authority". It seems in this verse to be a symbol of the authority under which -- in her husband or in man -- the woman is. Thus some sisters use a bow permanently -- that is during the day. But it cannot be a covering in the sense of the earlier verses of the chapter when a sister is engaged in formal prayer with others, say at a prayer meeting.
For sisters who do not wear a bow as a symbol of subjection, many are employed in offices, factories, etc., it seems to me the important thing is to be covered at prayer, even when praying alone, but especially in formal prayer with others, including so-called family prayers.
I trust above remarks may be of help to you. My wife and I hope to arrive in Plymouth on March 24th, spending, please God, the week-end at Teignmouth.
With our united love in the Lord,
I am, affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 13th, 1934.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- Kindly pardon my delay in replying to your letter. I was glad to receive it, but I have been unusually pressed for time this winter, and so my correspondence suffered. During November and December, I spent considerable time in the West and Canada and since returning I have been laid up with influenza and bronchitis. I am better, thank God.
The very very sad news contained in your letter as to the ------s has already come. We felt this disaster most keenly and earnestly trust God will restore our poor brothers. There
{437}
has been *much* of this unrighteousness in business matters, which fact is very searching and humbling. Those of us who are in business should especially take these sorrows to heart. Then there is much to occasion concern otherwise. A.M.H. mentions cases in New Zealand from time to time. His recent 'Letter on Discipline' is largely occasioned, he says, by the way these cases are dealt with there. But I do not at all agree with this letter; to my mind it is very misleading and I am telling our brother of my concern.
As to China, there is nothing, I suppose, that I can tell you that is not known in New Zealand in a general way. The New York brethren have written again to Shanghai in reply to their *brief* acknowledgement of our first letter. I enclose a copy which will explain why we wrote again. I also enclose a copy of a letter to Mr. Luke, who wrote me in a very brotherly way. I am not sending these to any one else in New Zealand; so perhaps you will show them as you consider wise. No doubt the saints generally should know of what is transpiring as to this very important matter. W.J.H. will no doubt be in New Zealand when they reach you, and I should especially be thankful if you will let him see them. I have sent a copy of the Shanghai letter to Mr. E. Phillips. I am also writing Mr. Nee, appealing to him to reconsider the whole position. As far as I know, his mind remains unaltered.
I am thankful the meetings in New Zealand have had so many visitors, which would indicate that the Lord is specially caring for you all.
In this country there is help from God generally and considerable ability for service is developing. This refers especially to this district and Ontario. J. Dean has liberty again to get about and his service is well spoken of. L. E. Samuels is acceptable, too, and takes a leading part in special meetings.
My wife and I hope to sail for England on March 15th, hoping to attend the Easter meetings at Belfast. We shall be thinking of the meetings usually held at Wellington and elsewhere in New Zealand at that time, also at Melbourne and elsewhere in the Commonwealth.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea and you and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{438}
February 14th, 1934.
Mr. A. M. Hayward.
Beloved Brother, -- I omitted to allude to the report of what I said as to no sweet savour for God in a public announcement of judgment reached as to one convicted of sin; I hardly remember saying this, but no doubt I did and would have referred to @Numbers 5: 15; for @1 Corinthians 5 should not be brought into chapter 11: 18; a special meeting should be called for this.
Since writing I thought it well to read your letter on discipline. It seems to me somewhat misleading. Certainly the following is: 'I believe mere separating from wicked persons is unrighteousness, for it is not maintaining in integrity the commandment laid down for us'. As it stands, that statement is a contradiction of @2 Timothy 2 and @Numbers 16: 26, 27. You may say vessels to dishonour are not wicked persons; but they may hold and teach the worst kind of error and hence they (or at least some of them) are wicked. Certainly Korah and his band were wicked. Moses enjoins the assembly to depart from the tents of "these wicked men".
On a later page (pages are not numbered) you say: 'So that in the execution of the judgment arrived at we can only decide for ourselves that we separate from such, as departing from one identified with iniquity'. This and the other statement are opposed to each other. To your mind it may be the reference to an 'execution of a judgment arrived at' cancels the inconsistency but 'separating from wicked persons' (first statement) must be 'the execution of a judgment arrived at'.
Before and after the first statement you elaborate the view that one must 'carry out' every commandment of Scripture -- that if we cannot carry out the commandment to put away a wicked person how can we carry out the other commandments of 1 Corinthians including the Lord's supper? Thus clearly in the first statement I quoted, you condemn separating from wicked persons as unrighteousness, being substituted for putting away, the latter being the commandment. Whereas later, as I pointed out, you say separation from wicked persons is the right ground to take.
It seems to me that generally, the second part of the letter cancels the first part, leaving your readers (if they can forget the early section) with what is in the main what brethren generally understand as the truth governing the matter considered.
{439}
But I do not think this is how the letter will be regarded by all who read it.
The letter fails to make due allowance for the great difference between original and remnant conditions. This is not only in 'modifications of language and of the scope of operations' but in direct divine disallowance to the remnant of normal assembly status -- @Revelation 2: 24 to end and chapter 3. Philadelphia has a little power and is generally owned because of an approved state (which could only be in comparatively a few) but the general position, beginning with the remnant in Thyatira, remains unchanged. The instructed can discern that the church is in the Lord's mind, but He is not *holding* the seven stars. @Matthew 18: 19, 20, is not on the same plane as verses 17, 18.
I gather that you are seeking to correct slackness in New Zealand. It would be distressing to find that any of the gatherings there in dealing with sinful persons fail to get together, and bring the facts to bear on those persons and on the consciences of all, so that the guilt is established before refusal to walk with the guilty is expressed. As far as I know, this is done generally.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 7th, 1934.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Many thanks for letters and enclosures. I think we had better let the booking on Cynthia stand for the time, at least.
I find the Aurania calls at Halifax and may not reach Plymouth until late Saturday; perhaps not until Lord's Day. She is to leave Halifax on Lord's Day at 11 p.m. The last time we sailed on her we were held up at Halifax with fog! I am therefore requesting Mr. Coates not to make any special arrangements for the week-end. It seems we had better move to Belfast from Devonshire. The week before Easter is awkward for extra meetings, as arrangements are made for Friday and Monday. Your reference to Islington for the 27th instant is not clear as I understand brothers¬ meetings are on the first and third Tuesday of the month. I am glad you hope to be at Belfast.
{440}
Yes. Mr. W------ wrote me, also Mr. B------. The former answered my remarks in a lowly way, but the latter justifyingly. They seem to have in mind a meeting something purely conferential -- selected ones taking counsel as to particular matters with us doctrines, etc., which would be 'What do you think?' etc., etc. But the meetings which the Lord blesses and which Scripture warrants involve the temple of God, where, the Spirit being free, there is ministry from Him. Why should this be restricted to a few? -- W------ mentioned twenty! Of course, a few may come together -- indeed this has often taken place -- and confer as to any subject, as we did during the revision of the hymn book. But the truth comes out more clearly and authoritatively where brethren are together in dependence on the Spirit, recognising what He has provided for the edifying of the body.
I am glad to have A.M.H.¬s letter to J. W. Taylor as to his letter on discipline. He wrote to me in a similar way but with more restraint. I know of no difficulty in N.Y. as to this matter. I enclose a copy of some remarks sent to Mr. H. as to his letter on discipline. I regret its publication. The paper of mine on righteousness to which H. alludes maintains fully the place @1 Corinthians 5 should hold amongst the saints -- that is, in view of the greatly altered conditions. What was said at Park Street (when the brethren met with J.S.G.) was according to what is stated in the paper on righteousness. When J. S. G. enquired whether @2 Timothy 2 or @1 Corinthians 5 was the ground of discipline, I remember answering, *both*, and I believe the Lord used it with other statements supporting it, to satisfy the consciences of brethren.
I am very interested in what you say as to publications on the Continent, and especially thankful that the saints at Berlin were contributing something to the Moray Firth brethren.
With our united love in Christ to you all,
Affectionately,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board R.M.S. Aurania.
March 21st, 1934.
My Dear Brother, -- It is only since I came on board this boat that I find your letter of December 26th is still unanswered. I am very sorry.
{441}
Shortly after it arrived I took ill and my correspondence became much behind. In the early part of the year many invitations come from Great Britain and I am compelled to leave replies of most until I am at sea. Your letter, I regret to say, was placed with these and it was overlooked that it contained a special enquiry.
But I hardly know what to say as to the case you mention. Did I know the man in question and his history I should be the more able to furnish help.
It is important to note that Matthew, being the assembly gospel, has "except" (@Matthew 19: 9) -- making a way out for one who may be *morally* clear in the circumstances of divorce. But is the person you mention of this class? Was the cause of his action that mentioned by the Lord? I do not mean that if the answers are in the negative the man's case is hopeless.
The government of God in the assembly is marked by grace, and hence, if the brethren are satisfied that the man is contrite, having judged as before God and his brethren his sinful conduct, I believe he may be restored to his privileges -- although certain governmental limitations will attach to him. His present marital relations must be regarded as binding before God, also those of his former wife -- neither can be righteously abrogated.
Thus the case is now dependent on the man's state, which, of course, must be determined by the brethren in I------. But in a matter involving such conduct, it is evident that the man's contrition should be without a cloud before he is restored to the fellowship of the saints.
What I am writing may now be too late, but I send it hoping it may be of service, under the Lord, in a general way.
You will see that my wife and I are on the Atlantic and we hope to land at London on Monday.
With our united love in Christ to you and your house and to the brethren, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
March 23rd, 1934.
Mr. W. G. Hardwick.
Beloved Brother, -- I was very glad to receive your letter. The remarks and general news 'items' it contains are interesting to me. The dear brethren in Berkeley and elsewhere
{442}
in California are much in my prayers and hence I am most thankful to hear of their progress.
Evidently the Lord is helping you all both in normal growth in the truth and in ability to edify one another.
Your report of J.D. is cheering. He is particularly in my prayers, that the Lord may keep and bless him. There is need for ministry and the Lord would use those who are available. He has an active and venturesome mind and his best friends will be those who will judge and not fail to express *to him* their judgment as to any questionable things. Reports of the service he rendered in Los Angeles are confirmation of what you wrote.
The suggestion of a meeting in Oakland is in keeping with a wish I have long cherished. Of course, nothing should be forced, but a meeting there would add to the testimony, I am sure, and afford more for God than is yielded by the one meeting in Berkeley. I am very thankful for the addition in San Francisco.
As regards a visit by me to the 'coast', I suppose it is due, but I cannot say that I can go there -- the Lord permitting in any case -- during the coming fall or winter. I should like to do so. I am especially obligated to Los Angeles as the dear brethren there have pressed me to visit them. The Lord is evidently blessing them also, for which I give Him thanks constantly.
What you remark as to @1 Timothy 6: 15, 16 is, I am sure, the truth. The great thoughts of these verses arise in the apostle's mind from verse 14, "The appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ".
No word had arrived from Shanghai before I sailed, although the New York letter had been in the hands of the brethren there for about four months. But I shall be glad to find that our second letter had been received before they wrote. It seems to me the Lord has graciously given opportunity through Mr. Nee's actions to set the truth before our brethren, and whether they bear or forbear, the testimony will be on their consciences, and He will use it to some -- if not now, later. I think brethren generally are obtaining help. My wife unites in love in Chris t to Mrs. Hardwick and yourself and all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
Yes, I knew of your brother's visit to Argentina and look to God much for him.
{443}
Markinch, Scotland.
May 4th, 1934.
Mr. George Spiller.
Beloved Brother, -- You will, I am sure, pardon my delay in answering your letter. You may be sure that it has not been because of want of interest in it; the delay is entirely because of constant pressure from meetings and other urgent duties.
It was good of you to write and give me so much information of the dear saints at Portsmouth. You rightly reckoned that I would be interested. The news of the young people coming forward is most cheering and I thank God for it. Portsmouth is always a fruitful field and I am thankful you could speak of Mr. Ide's work there yielding for God. Because of the naval character of the place, it is not to be wondered at that sorrows exist. I earnestly hope that the grace of God acting in W------¬s family will touch his heart and lead to his recovery.
We have been in Scotland since April 16th and have found most cheering support from the Lord. The north, where we have spent most of the time, is a very fruitful field. Souls are constantly coming forward, confessing the Lord, and the meetings correspondingly grow. We go to Edinburgh today for the week-end, then Jedburgh, Carlisle, Sunderland and then the London area. Mr. and Mrs. Ide have been most kind to us. We go to be with them in Teddington, please God, on the 14th inst.
I had a very good letter from Mr. Williams, telling of his movements. We hope to be seeing them in the Worthing area. I am sorry I cannot see you all at Portsmouth this year, but we shall, no doubt, meet you and Mrs. Spiller somewhere.
My wife unites in warm love in Christ to you both and to the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Jedburgh.
May 9th, 1934.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- I wish to thank you for information you have sent.
Flatbush is constantly on our minds and we are most thankful God is helping you all. The Broadway gospel meeting is most interesting and I earnestly hope the attendance will continue.
{444}
The Lord will surely honour the brethren in this energy. This morning we looked at @2 Timothy 4 as calling for all the spiritual energy we possess, the need being so urgent.
The Shanghai letter is not surprising. It is Open-brethrenism or worse. Additional facts as to 'Honor Oak' prove that very evil doctrine is held there. No doubt I shall be hearing from someone as to what the brethren think as to an answer. I believe the London brethren will reply, so that the truth will be again pressed on the Shanghai brethren. My belief is that Nee dominates the position there. The more we hear of his ways, the more his duplicity is manifest. But I am assured the Lord will turn all to needed education for us all.
The work in this country is most cheering. I must stop now as we have to start on our journey.
Affectionately,
Father.
<hr>
Stroud.
July 2nd, 1934.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received yours of the 29th ult. with enclosure from ------, which I now return.
Whatever comment I made on J.H.T.¬s book was on a report, for I have not read it. But there seems no warrant for saying or suggesting that the hiding of @John 8: 59 was returning into Deity. However, I rather agree with ------ that the matter is not of great importance.
As regards @Proverbs 30: 18 - 20, I do not recall making any criticism. As a matter of fact, I am not clear as to the meaning of the passage. If I have ventured a judgment, as ------ has heard, I do not remember doing so.
As you will, no doubt, be sending this to ------, I may remark that I am thankful he has called my attention to "I have written" in @1 John 2: 21 - 26. The apostle clearly refers to what he is writing as also in chapter 5: 13. The use of the 'aorist' in chapter 2: 14 is so formal as over against the "present" in verse 13 that the remarks in the address are justifiable. Still I shall make alterations to make allowance for verses 21 and 26.
The paper on 'Covenant Relations' is in New York and hence cannot be revised until I return.
Mr. Partridge wrote me as to staying with them until you call for us *en route* to Chester. I saw him on Saturday and the
{445}
matter is left open, as the time at Evesham will be very short after the bank holiday. As the meetings at Chester are to be on Thursday we shall need to reach Chester on Wednesday evening. We shall let you know in due time whether we shall be at Mr. Shepard's at Evesham, or at Pershore.
There was a very good time here on Saturday, also yesterday.
Love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you all,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
July, 1934.
Mr. E. Roberts.
My Dear Brother, -- Yours of the 11th was duly received. The matter you mention is constantly the occasion of exercise among the Lord's people. No doubt the apparent vagueness of the teaching is to test our spirituality. But to a person entirely subject, the apostle's meaning is obvious. A sister, praying or prophesying should be covered, clearly this would apply when she is in the attitude of prayer, although another may be speaking to God.
Prophesying -- conveying the mind of God as from God -- although evidently in the province of women in the beginning is scarcely known now, but prayer is, of course, common. The instruction of the passage is thus very direct at the present time. A sister therefore should be covered, whether in private, family, or praying amongst the saints. It is a question of the order of God in creation, and its place in the epistle, as immediately preceding the instruction governing the order of the assembly, is significant.
I think "power" in verse 10 refers to covering in verse 6. The former would refer to the covering as a sign of authority. On the whole it seems to me that the simple thing for a sister is, to have a covering on her head always -- that is, during the day, etc. -- she is then ready for prayer as the opportunity offers.
A bow which some sisters wear, seems satisfactory; it is at least a recognition of the authority of the Word.
With love in the Lord Jesus,
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
{446}
Rotherham.
July 23rd, 1934.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- ... Last week there were two days of meetings at Harrogate. The Lord graciously helped. At the readings we had royalty as in David and leadership as in David. P.L. gave an excellent address on Phinehas. I spoke on 'the man of opened eye' -- Balaam, @Numbers 24. The ministry bore on certain current difficulties in Newcastle and Filey, and I am assured the Lord will use it ... .
We are booked to sail on the Britannic, August 10th. Mr. and Mrs. Ide will be with us, please God. Mr. Ide will be free to take meetings -- gospel or addresses to the saints. He does not trust in eloquence, but the Lord blesses his ministry ... . Interest generally among the brethren is most cheering.
Love to Ruth, yourself and children and all.
Affectionately,
Father.
<hr>
On Board M.V. Britannic.
August 15th, 1934.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- I was glad to receive your letter of April 2nd. All the news was most interesting to me. The dear brethren in New Zealand are always in my prayers and I rejoice in every indication that God is blessing them.
A visit among you would be joyfully undertaken by my wife and me were our way at all clear. The dear brethren in Australia are also urging me to visit them and, of course, this is an additional incentive; but our way to undertake such an extended journey and all that it entails is for the moment not open. The urgent need in America, including the West Indies, and in Great Britain, with family and business obligations forbid it -- at least during the coming year. I am anxiously waiting on the Lord as to this (to us) important matter and I am sure He will indicate in due course what He would have us do. I have not been to the West Indies at all, save once to Barbados; then I have not seen a good few meetings even in the United States, and the same applies to many meetings in Great Britain and Ireland. But I am *obligated* to all, and you may be assured that I accept this obligation and wait constantly on the Lord as to it, especially what I owe to New Zealand
{447}
and Australia. I mention all this so that you may understand my exercises and thus know that I am not neglectful of my responsibilities.
During my recent visit I visited many meetings in England, Ireland and Scotland. The interest is generally most cheering. Large numbers come together week after week, and the Lord graciously furnishes refreshment such as seems to be required in each district. Our experience has been most cheering. There are indeed some cleavages, especially at Newcastle, but the Lord is adjusting these, especially that at Newcastle, so that we may confidently expect all (nearly 100) to be recovered to the testimony. Fellowship had to be refused to Filey because the principal brother took sides with Miss S------, who wrote a dreadful letter against the truth and the brethren. There are only a few at Filey. The Lord has helped those who have had to do with this sorrowful matter and has given a victory for the truth.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea and you, also the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board M.V. Britannic.
August 15th, 1934.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I was very glad to receive your letter at Galway. It drew forth increased prayer for the dear brethren at York, for I could see the peculiar difficulty there; but God will enable the brethren to leap over that wall. He has helped much so far in meeting the evil combination and I believe He will, through the means available, complete the work. I am thankful you went there. I note you were going on to Scarborough and I trust you had further help from the Lord there. It is an advantage that some visiting brethren are at S. for they will be a cheer and support to dear Rusling and the others.
We are thinking of you also as having gone to Newcastle. All the information I had from that region was encouraging. Great grace would be needed however for many problems had to be solved and the enemy will do his utmost to arouse old feelings as these are being met.
{448}
You will have cheer in Scotland, I am sure. I am looking to the Lord for Glasgow. On the whole an improved situation exists. The 'hiving' has, I believe, reduced the tension. A. Steven has a sober judgment of everything and God will use him. Glasgow is a most important part of the divine field and calls forth my deepest interest and sympathy. The Burnbank-Leven link remains and gives the enemy an advantage; indeed it works out in a cleavage in Fife. Mr. Elder suffers much on account of this.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
September 24th, 1934.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 21st inst. with cheque for $75.00 is just to hand. I am sure you will thank the dear brethren for me for their gift, which I value. That you had a surplus after the heavy expenses of the meetings is cheering and would indicate God's approval of your undertaking.
But there was evidence of this already, for His gracious presence and support throughout the meetings denoted how pleasing it was to Him that a few of His people should thus draw together.
I have received from Miss Langley notes of the first two readings and I am revising them for a book which Mr. Nunnerley has suggested should be published, including papers on the Service of God. It will take considerable time to obtain and prepare material for a volume as large as that of 'The Holy Spirit'.
What you write as to Mr. Ide confirms what I have heard from others. He had help too in Toronto. What you understand is correct -- Mr. Ide is going to Winnipeg, and I hope to be in Toronto.
We had a very good season on Saturday at Chatham. The reading was on the water of separation in John's gospel and the address on the ancient mountains and the everlasting hills.
My wife and I remained there over the Lord's Day.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum and you also to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{449}
Brooklyn, N.Y.
October 22nd, 1934.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter has just come. I am thankful you have written. Not understanding the circumstances and bearing of the 'Reading' you refer to, you are at a certain disadvantage. It was at Sheringham, which is one of the well-known watering places of England, where there is a meeting and many brethren visit the place to get the benefit of the sea. A large number of such visitors were present at the reading and what was in mind was to fortify them against the leaven of the place. We are to admonish one another "in all wisdom" and if I were to tell the brethren present that they should not visit Sheringham, or any sea-side resort, I should defeat my purpose and indeed discredit the truth. The sea and the beach are God's creatures, and so "good", affording benefit to men and hence to be received with thanksgiving; (that they are abused by ungodly people does not set this fact aside); the intent of the reading was to help saints to do this. 'Doing things that others do' is simply bathing, sitting or walking by the sea for the sake of health, eating, etc. -- things right in themselves. These, as done in a way suitable to christians, as over against and in the presence of, the ways and spirit of the ungodly, are a testimony to God.
'Sisters and brothers in the meeting disporting together three-quarters naked' is another matter -- it is abominable and should be rebuked. Apparently you were enabled to rebuke what you saw. I hope you will maintain that attitude. The remarks you quote from the magazine rebuke it. They make allowance for christians making use of beaches, but condemn such conduct as you mention for it is not different from what 'others are doing'. Brothers and sisters three-quarters naked (even at the beach) is a condition I abhor -- especially in sisters. If they cover themselves when out of the water, godly seemliness would be preserved, but in this country some do not and hence are deserving of rebuke; and if rebuke is unheeded severer measures should be taken.
Some (perhaps most in this country) beaches are, when fully frequented, unclean and saints should not be found at them, but others, although having *some* objectionable features, can be used with care, i.e. the principles suggested in the notes you refer to. It is not fair to compare such with 'picture shows night clubs', etc. In seeking to help our brothers and
{450}
sisters we must avoid *extremes* or we shall discredit our 'good'.
As I said, I am thankful you wrote and trust our correspondence will be mutually profitable. With love in Christ to you and all the brethren with whom you are walking at Cincinnati,
I am, affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 21st, 1934.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- It was thoughtful of you to write me so fully as to London and other matters. I am indeed interested, as you assumed. The dear brethren have my full sympathy in their exercises and sorrows, especially as to bereavements. Mr. A. Lucas will indeed cause a blank. May the Lord fill it and comfort his dear wife.
I am thankful to know of your visit to Harrogate and what you could write of J.H.T. In a letter from P.L. just received I see he (J.H.T.) is gaining strength. This legal matter will tax him, but I gather events seem favourable. The circumstance is humbling, but it is strictly T.¬s affair and I do not see how he can avoid facing it -- because of the trust laid upon him. P.L. and others are just assisting our brother. My prayers go up for him and all concerned -- that the Lord may give them favour in the sight of this man.
The occurrences at Teignmouth are sorrowful, but the Lord's good hand is manifest. The state of the meeting there has long been precarious and the enemy is taking advantage of this -- really to discredit Mr. Coates and the truth generally. The pretence by H------ and L------ that they have no complaint save against the meeting will deceive no one. @Galatians 5: 12 applies. Sorrowful divisions in earlier days generally carried away such disturbing elements, now the Lord graciously deals with them in detail with much less loss; but we are to humble ourselves that we are unable to save them, or at any rate, that such conditions exist.
We find *much* encouragement in these parts. The Lord sustains the brethren in their meetings generally and particularly in special meetings. There has been a remarkably good interest in the readings on the sufferings of Christ; also in special gospel meetings, such as held in London, only on a much smaller scale. The Lord has blessed Mr. Ide in moving
{451}
about among the gatherings, he having gone beyond the Middle West in Canada and the U.S.A. He is here now and will, please God, attend the usual Thanksgiving meeting at Plainfield on the 29th inst. I hope to leave for Indianapolis and Council Bluffs on Saturday, especially to attend meetings at the latter place from the 29th inst. to December 2nd.
McB------ has found opportunity for attacking the truth again through a *very* faulty address by J. Dean which came into his hands. Fortunately McB------ made a blunder in quoting and I trust the Lord will use this to nullify his effort. The blunder has been pointed out to him. I am urging Dean to withdraw the paper. Some statements in it are distressingly defective. He is so highly regarded in the far West that it is very difficult to get him to correct his loose way of handling the most holy things. But I believe the Lord is now helping in this. We hear, however, that he has been invited to Chicago for special meetings at New Year's time.
I have seen the recent letters from China and I am thankful they indicate that London and New York letters will be answered, but I see no sign that the vital issue is being faced and I am apprehensive lest temporising letters such as Luke's should mislead anyone. We are nominally linked with a leavened mass in China and I see no hope save in individuals, as truly exercised as to the truth presented to them, withdrawing from it. My wife and I are very pleased that Kathleen has confessed the Lord as her Saviour and we trust the others will soon follow through His gracious leading. Our united love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and you all.
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
November 22nd, 1934.
Mrs. R. W. Stollery.
My Dear Florence, -- In the midst of your great sorrow and general pressure, it was very good of you to send us a line. My wife and I value your thoughtfulness and we again assure you and Bob of our deep sympathy with you both, and we wish you to count on our continued prayers for you.
I am particularly interested in the channel in which your mind is now running, indicating, as it does, that you recognise the Lord's good hand in the deep waters through which you are
{452}
passing; that He is with you in them, leading you through to firmer ground and a clearer horizon -- a horizon which, as I gather from your note, you intend Him to fill. This will be gain indeed -- such as you will not surrender for the most attractive natural or earthly advantage.
The success of your husband in his profession -- a success which under God is legitimate -- and the prominence which this is calculated to give you, afford the enemy an advantage, and the Lord, who watches for your soul, would rob him of this, thus sheltering you, and this doubtless somewhat accounts for the severity of the calamity that has befallen you. As seeing this fact clearly and embracing it, you will be possessed of added armour by which you will overcome further temptation and conflict.
In the subsequent sorrow which, as we understand, you have had to endure, my wife and I are keenly sympathetic and we trust your health is not thereby seriously impaired. That God may grant you both the full fruit unto holiness of your exercise will be the desire and prayer of us both.
We are most thankful that you could speak so confidently of John's recovery and we are looking to God to grant and hasten this.
With our united love to you and Bob and the children, I am,
Affectionately in Christ,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
January 21st, 1935.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you much for yours of December 5th. The news it conveys is cheering to us, and encourages us in our prayers for our dear brethren in London.
I am particularly thankful to hear that ------ has been restored. I trust he has gained in his imprisonment. Joseph's history is most encouraging in this respect. He had gained through the presence of God with him in his imprisonment and was helpful to others of the king's prisoners. I trust this may be the case with our brother.
When writing to Mr. Lyon lately I overlooked mentioning that a letter had been received from Shanghai promising to answer our letter of May sent to them. No doubt the London brethren have received a similar letter. For my part, whilst
{453}
I am thankful that they intend to write, I see nothing to encourage. Indeed the only hope now is that a remnant may come to light. My immediate exercise is that the Lord may help the brethren to extricate themselves gracefully, and in due humility, from the impossible position we have got into. I have no doubt this will be your exercise also.
We have been thinking of the dear brethren on your side much during the recent weeks. From the reports already received, I gather there has been much help from the Lord.
There has been help in America generally, and especially in this district. A dark cloud had arisen in the Chicago area, but thank God it has been dispersed, and consequently grateful relief is experienced by the brethren.
I note the kind wish of you and Mrs. Gardiner to have us spend a week-end with you. We should much like to do this, and I have no doubt we shall have opportunity. I shall hope to be seeing you in the meantime, and we can speak of this matter. We hope to be in London about the middle of April, but will be leaving almost immediately for Belfast.
With our united love in Christ to you all.
Yours affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 21st, 1935.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- I was very glad to get your letter, and should have answered it earlier, only I was uncertain as to whether I should be with you in September. I had hoped that Mr. Myles would be in this country at that time and would attend either Detroit or Vancouver.
The brethren in Vancouver invited me sometime back for their meetings, and I agreed tentatively to accept, the Lord permitting, but hoped that Mr. Myles could be with them. Now I find that Mr. Myles is leaving for New Zealand in May travelling via America, and hopes to sail from Vancouver in July. This will enable him to attend the Rochester meetings and also the meetings at Berkeley on July 4th.
You will see therefore, that as I have promised to be at Vancouver, I shall not be with you in September. I am looking to the Lord about all these matters, and it may be
{454}
that He will order that someone else can be at Vancouver, or that someone whom the brethren might desire may be available for Detroit. As the date is a good way ahead, we can wait on the Lord as to it, and He will make all clear. In the meantime I am committed to Vancouver.
I am thankful that the dear brethren in your parts are all employed, and I trust this will continue, and that there is general encouragement in all three gatherings. I am much interested in your visits to Cleveland and Windsor. As we are set to serve the Lord in this way, He opens doors to us and affords means of entering through them with profit.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum, the baby and yourself, and to all the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
February 26th, 1935.
Mr. Robert MacIntyre.
My Dear Brother, -- I have your letter, and in reply would say that I have no recollection of saying at the meetings in London that the judgment of the assembly of a wicked person should be announced otherwise than to the assembly *as such*.
What was stressed in the reading you refer to, is that the wicked person was dealt with according to God, and that any exercised persons could become acquainted with this fact by inquiry. The saints were enjoined to remove the wicked person from among *themselves*. His position in relation to the assembly would thus be defined, and this would be noticed by any interested persons who attended the meetings of the saints. The notes show that the subject was fairly well covered, and I have no recollection of saying anything contrary to what was in the notes.
My belief for a long time has been that disciplinary matters should be dealt with in a *special* assembly meeting, and not at a meeting for the breaking of bread and for assembly privileges generally. I believe that @1 Corinthians 5 contemplates this, and when the saints act in this way the Lord is present according to the power needed to act against evil. I hope what I have written will be of service to you.
{455}
With love in the Lord Jesus to you and the brethren, I am,
Yours affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
P.S. -- If discipline is executed in an assembly meeting for the purpose, as suggested above, there would be no need for further announcement of it -- all would (or should) be present. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 11th, 1935.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received your letter of August 29th, 1934, and was glad to get it. I was also glad to get all the items of news you kindly sent. New Zealand is always much on our hearts, and we can pray all the more intelligently as we have knowledge of current happenings.
In regard to remarks in the London notes as to publicity of cases of discipline, I think what is said in the notes is scriptural. In a small community, of course, where something flagrant occurs and is known to the public, it is wise to make clear that the brethren are with God about it, and have dealt with it in accordance with His mind. One can understand how this would be applicable in New Zealand. Sorrowful cases of sin, alas, occur generally in those nominally walking with us, but there seems to have been an epidemic of this in New Zealand. It is likely that the Lord has allowed certain flagrant cases to bring the general state home to the brethren. As we "cry out", He pays attention to us and helps us. Compare @Mark 6: 50.
As regards Mr. Joseph Dean, it seems that he is now definitely engaged in the Lord's work and has been moving about in the West somewhat freely during the past winter. An address of his delivered in Berkeley last spring was typed and circulated, and copies went to Great Britain. An attack was made upon it by J. McB------. The address itself was very defective, and Dean finally agreed to withdraw it, humbling himself because of it. This has commended him somewhat, but many are still concerned as to his tendency to exaggeration and inaccuracy. I hope, however, the Lord will help our brother, and that he may be generally acceptable and useful.
You will be aware by this time that Arnold Heath married
{456}
our sister Miss Midgley of Staten Island. They are now on their way to Auckland with the full fellowship of brethren here. I believe our sister will be in every way acceptable to our brethren in the Auckland district.
The work of God in America is generally satisfactory, and, indeed, encouraging. I have not hitherto seen such interest in the saints around New York as has been noticeable this winter. My wife and I hope to sail for England on April 8th, returning about August 20th, after which I hope, if the Lord permit, to attend the meetings at Vancouver in early September.
With our united love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea and yourself,
I am,
Yours affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.
March 11th, 1935.
Mr. Walter G. Hardwick.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for sending me the correspondence relative to Mr. Dean's address. I am sure the Lord is pleased with this correspondence. He values our taking to heart what might in any way affect the testimony adversely. I much appreciate the spirit both in the letter from the brethren at Berkeley to Mr. Dean, and Mr. Dean's reply. The Lord will no doubt bless our brother for humbling himself in this way and withdrawing the paper in question. He will also bless the brethren at Berkeley, I believe, for writing to our brother so faithfully.
I am interested in your purposed meetings in July, and I am assured the Lord will be with you all. There is no truth in the report that Mr. Ide is coming to this country immediately, but there is truth in the report as to Mr. Myles. By this time, you will no doubt be aware that he purposes travelling to New Zealand during the early summer via America. In his last letter to me dated February 27th, he mentions his purpose to visit Montreal, Toronto, Detroit, Chicago, Des Moines, Los Angeles, Berkeley and Vancouver, sailing from Vancouver July 14th. In a previous letter he said he hoped to attend the meetings at Berkeley on July 4th.
In this last letter, however, he mentions as follows:
{457}
'My wife is so weak, that unless strengthened during the three months before us, she would not be able to start out. All this suggests that waiting on God is right, until His will is clear to me'.
This would indicate that there is some uncertainty as to our brother's carrying out his purpose, and so it behoves us to wait on God as to him. Possibly you have written inviting him to the meetings in July; if not, I should advise you to do so. The brethren at Rochester have written him urging him to attend their meetings.
The work of God is quite cheering in these parts. I do not think I have hitherto seen such interest in the meetings. My wife and I hope to leave for Great Britain on April 8th. She unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Hardwick and yourself, and to all the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
164, Haverstock Hill,
London, N.W. 3
June 21st, 1935.
Mr. K------.
Beloved Brother, -- I wish to thank you for calling me on the telephone. I understood you fairly well, especially as to the purpose to suggest a meeting of saints in the other neighbouring gatherings -- perhaps on Saturday of next week. Our prayers shall go up for this meeting. The matter is really of universal bearing but wisdom will leave it in nearby hands, trusting they will be governed by right principles and that love that never fails, otherwise brethren further afield will need to act, as also responsible.
In such circumstances we must act with heaven. @Acts 10 shows that it takes the lead in them, and that we must not be out of accord with it.
General facts (especially those of the 'Report' ) show that those of Wesley Street are clear of the evil that has been shown to exist in Newcastle, that indeed they have stood against it. This marks them off as on quite a different footing from those from whom they have separated.
Whether our brethren in Wesley Street are in their spirits and general outlook equal to their outward position is what the brethren in the neighbouring meetings have to decide. In determining this, they will need to humbly consider themselves
{458}
and not look for more in their brethren than marks them in their respective local settings. If there be disregard of this and a judgment reached contrary to the Lord's mind He will not fail to resent it.
Some reports are in circulation which indicate that our brethren in Wesley Street are not as to their state fit for fellowship, but they are not supported by accredited facts; having made careful enquiry I can find no foundation for them. My long interview with them, in company with Mr. Malpas and you, brought out nothing uncommendable. Of course, impressions of brethren more or less conversant with Newcastle demand respect and consideration, but they cannot be regarded as conclusive as to any point, except as accompanied by accredited facts. Then generalities as to the history of Newcastle are but of little importance. To judge according to God we must have authentic current conditions.
Our brethren who recently withdrew from Wesley Street must have a great place in our minds. All godly effort should be made to recover them, but in these efforts we must not make our brethren at Wesley Street suffer. We cannot ignore their rights as shown above.
Our brethren who have separated have had the opportunity to walk with their brethren and have failed to do so. I have examined nearly all their letters giving reasons for their withdrawal and I believe it will be owned by all who soberly weigh them that their writers do not furnish valid ground for withdrawing from their brethren. If this be so their course is (in principle at least) schismatic.
Then it is admitted by those who know the facts attaching to them that even if all the brethren now separated wish to return to Wesley Street certain of them would not be regarded as clear of the evil that was the cause of the present sorrow. In considering the conditions at Wesley Street this fact will be in view, and the Lord may make it clear that in recognising our brethren there as morally clear and hence possessing the same rights as ourselves, the position may be more favourable for the recovery of those now separated, that is, they can be served respectively according to the holiness and discipline of God's house.
With love in Christ, I am,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
{459}
Salisbury.
July 24th, 1935.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- Mother and I are very glad to have yours of the 11th inst., also a previous one. We thought of you much as on the ocean and later as having resumed your duties in New York. As moving about we have heard much of your movements and services in Great Britain -- commendation everywhere! At Gloucester last week-end we had an excellent season.
We are thankful dear little Arthur is undamaged and that Ruth and all are well through the mercy of God. Through appearances we are sometimes allowed to experience sorrow so as to gain by the discipline and then we find the occasion of sorrow had no real existence.
We are greatly relieved that ------ withdrew his letter. I note that you would like to see him take the seven plunges in Jordan, but we must be thankful that he *went* to Jordan; but I think he did more. *All* the circumstances have to be considered.
We arrived here last evening for two meetings today; then we go to the London area again for meetings at Wimbledon and Wallington, and then to Worcester, Birmingham and finally Southampton for meetings at Eastleigh on the 9th -- the day before sailing -- the Lord permitting. I find sustained interest in the truth everywhere.
Note -- kindly tell Mr. Fogg, Manchester, that Mr. Scutt will not be at their special meetings; he has to hurry to Victoria to catch a boat. I wrote to Jim of his going to these meetings.
Extend our sympathy to Mr. and Mrs. Shuldheis, also to the Zbindens if you have opportunity. We grieve for them. Convey our love to all the brethren, especially those at Flatbush, as you have opportunity. Plenty to Ruth, Dorothy, Ruth, jnr., and the twins and to all the families. Most thankful to hear of dear Jean -- may God perfect her and make her a testimony in the hospital, to her parents and other relatives.
Affectionately,
Father.
<hr>
Streatham, England.
July 30th, 1935.
My Dear ------, -- Mother and I, P.L. and others here were glad indeed that you had grace to withdraw your letter to J.S.
I have heard, however, that New York brothers were not
{460}
satisfied with your letter of withdrawal and had written to Westfield again. I have not seen their letter. The Lord will give you grace to meet any further demands on you in a way that would please Him. To make *much* of one's own errors and as little as righteously *possible* of those of others is a safe motto. If one is personally an object of attack to be as a deaf man that hears not and one in whose mouth there is no reproof is the lead the Lord gives us.
Your more recent letters cause me concern for they indicate that your mind is restless. There is a danger of being occupied with the difficulty to your hurt. Without being aware you may become obsessed, with consequent harm to the mind.
As to the 'principles' involved, I do not think you need to assume that those that are of God will be set aside. I am still unable to understand fully whether those who acted in New York did so just as brothers on their own responsibility or otherwise. If they acted thus as brothers in an advisory way to prevent what seemed to them wrong no serious objection should be made. No damage seems to have been caused by their action, on the contrary the delay at Miami seems wise and will not work evil.
You will be wise in accepting fully any judgment of the Westfield brethren. All that New York could or can rightly do is to furnish facts to Westfield -- you have to say to them directly and not to New York.
We are very thankful to hear of James speaking for the Lord and trust he finds encouragement as he goes on. We pray for him and all your children specially.
The interest here is steady. Before leaving on August 10th, we attend meetings at Wallington, Worcester, Birmingham and Eastleigh, the Lord permitting.
Last night at an 'assembly' meeting in London a judgment as to China was pronounced -- that London can no longer have fellowship with brethren at Shanghai -- this is in reply to the *recent* letter from that city. No doubt a copy of the Shanghai letter was sent to New York.
Affectionately,
Father.
