{1}
APPEARINGS OF THE GLORY IN THE WILDERNESS
@Numbers 11:16,24,25; @Numbers 14:10; @Numbers 12:5; @Numbers 16:19,42
This is pre-eminently the wilderness book. Indeed, its primary title was, In the Wilderness; and so in the opening of it we have Jehovah speaking to Moses "in the wilderness of Sinai". @Numbers 1:1. Our position in it is thus assumed; and God reminds us at the very outset that He is thinking of us as there. He thinks of us in every position where we may be legitimately, as required by His will in this world. So in this book ( @Numbers 33) we have the journeyings of the people and their encampments recorded, as if God would impress upon us that He follows all our movements with intense interest.
Now the wilderness, though a familiar word amongst us, is perhaps not so well understood as we may imagine, nor is it definitely accepted, as divinely presented to us. The idea of it appears in Exodus, God sending His message to Pharaoh to let His people go that they might serve Him in the wilderness. It may seem a matter of small moment that the words "in the wilderness" are added @Exodus 5:1. It might seem to be enough to say to Pharaoh that God wished His people to serve Him, which indeed was the purport of His first great message, "Let my son go, that he may serve me" @Exodus 4:23; but afterwards stress is laid on the *place* of service, God was to be served in the wilderness.
In Christendom today the nominal service of God is not carried on in the recognition of the world being a wilderness; it is carried on where there are abundant worldly resources. The world is taxed to provide the ways and means, whether it be the buildings, the salaries of the servants, the choirs, the furniture or what not, whereas God notified Pharaoh at the outset that the world cannot provide the means of
{2}
divine service. He intimates plainly that it was to be carried on where there were no *visible* resources. In other words, that the world and its resources are wholly ignored, and all the provisions come from above. Hence you find that before the means and order of service are proposed, Moses, Aaron, Nadab, Abihu and seventy of the elders of Israel are invited to go up to Jehovah; @Exodus 24. The principle is that things have to come from thence. "And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness. And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink", @Exodus 24:10, 11.
They are there in God's realm, we may say, as "nobles" and they are there without fear. So that when in the next chapter He proposed to them to build Him a tabernacle, what is required is understood; at least, a general impression has been conveyed, though the details awaited instructions received by Moses during the forty days on the mount. Moses is detained, called up higher (verse 12), and there a pattern is unfolded to him, "a figurative representation of things in the heavens" @Hebrews 9:23. God is in no way dependent on this world for the means of His service. We are shut up to God and to heaven, so that divine thoughts may come into evidence. Who that knows God in any way does not prefer to have God's design for His place of worship, rather than those of the greatest ecclesiastical architect?
A young believer begins to see that he has to do with God; and with God where there is no light and no material save as God Himself brings it in. I do not say the people did not have material, because they did; but spiritually it was from God, and the wilderness brought it out. Four hundred years before it was announced to Abraham that they should go
{3}
out of Egypt with great substance. No believer is of any value in the assembly morally unless he has got some substance.
The exercises of coming from Egypt imply that I acquire substance; I do not come into the wilderness a pauper. I am there with a measure of substance, but God will order and direct as to the use of it. It is to fit into a divine scheme. Think of having something which God can use, according to a pattern which He has ever had in His mind! I should not like to be out of that; I should like to have something that God can use. "See, saith he, that thou make all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the mount", @Hebrews 8:5.
That is the position in the wilderness with regard to the service of God, and I am concerned with it as set out in Numbers. Exodus gives us the tabernacle set up; Leviticus God dwelling in it, calling us to Him in His own abode -- a most touching thought, and everything is provided for in the priesthood. Numbers contemplates what has been set forth in these two books, so that we can face the world as contrary to us. Having the light of Exodus and of Leviticus, we are here in the wilderness not as individuals, but in relation to the tabernacle.
"The wind is contrary" @Matthew 14:24 to that; as you will remember, in @Matthew 14 the Lord, having sent the multitudes away, and having compelled His disciples to go into a ship, was alone on the mountain praying, but the wind was contrary. That is the position. Let no one assume that the wind will change in this respect, it will always be a contrary wind. But Numbers is to prepare us for it, and to show the provision which has been made.
Now I wanted to deal first of all with individual service. Moses is the great type of this; he is said to be a servant, and faithful in all God's house. There are those who are like specialists, but scripture
{4}
hardly countenances anything like that; the idea of service is to extend to *all* God's house. Each has his own gift, his own measure; but every truly commissioned servant will have the whole house in his mind. Even if he is not able to help actively he can pray, or she can pray. One may be bed-ridden or crippled, but he can embrace all the saints in his prayers and affections.
Chapter 10 contemplates the tabernacle set up and in movement and as movement begins the power of the "wind" is felt. And, alas! we find here in Moses, as often appearing in ourselves, a spirit of complaint. Not rebellion; I suppose the nearest point he reached to rebellion was when he called the people rebels. We are not far off rebellion when we say that the people of God are rebels. But in this chapter Moses is not saying that, he is telling Jehovah of the burden, the excess that is laid upon him, and that he had not "conceived all this people". @Numbers 11:12. That is to say, the complaint was against *God*, because He had as Moses thought, put upon him more than He should have done. Moses on that occasion saw the Israelites, every man in his tent door, weeping. They were the tears of murmurers, they were not tears of humiliation. So it is, beloved, that we are tested in the service of God in these circumstances.
I want to show you that, although a man in this position, honoured of God, may for the moment fail, yet how graciously God stands by him These appearings embody the divine provision for these failures; that is to say, God came in in a visible way to meet the opposition. For us, of course, it is for faith, but nevertheless real, so that the servant should not lose ground. It is as sure as possible, if I begin to complain that there is too much upon me, and that I am not cared for, or considered enough, I shall lose ground with those whom I serve.
Now the first appearing here is to maintain Moses
{5}
at the full height of his service. God says, as it were, I will act according to your suggestion, but in doing it I will preserve your dignity, I will preserve you in honour. I speak thus, dear brethren, so that in service we may know what resources there are; how tenderly, how compassionately, the Master stands by His servant, even although he had brought the circumstances upon himself. So He says: *You* gather these seventy men. For God will never pass by His servant, save He is obliged to by permanent unbelief, or will. So He directs Moses to select the men who were to help him in his service, trusting him to know that they were reliable, really leaders of the people. What beautiful confidence Jehovah placed in His servant, although failing at this moment!
Moreover, He says, Gather them to the tent door and I will come down and speak with *you*. And "I will take of the spirit which is upon you, and I will put it upon them". @Numbers 11:17. How Moses would feel that! It was as if God were saying, I have thought this matter out, and I have not put any weight upon you that you could not bear; so in adding others I am going to take from you and give to them. But I will speak to *you* in doing it, I will maintain your honour. And incidentally it would be an advantage to the people; for God turns even the failures of His servants to advantage. There are seventy-one personalities now in the service instead of one. The power is not increased; but the personality is increased, and that is something. Jethro had suggested that Moses should delegate his authority, which he did, but now he has got divine consent, and the power is actually transferred; so that we have seventy persons in addition to Moses with the same spirit or power that Moses had.
Two of them prophesied even in the camp; @Numbers 11: 26 - 28. Joshua says, "My lord Moses, forbid them", @Numbers 11:28 as if he would restrict ministry to one man
{6}
like many a young brother who would stand up for some selected leader, as we see at Corinth. Moses says to Joshua, "Enviest thou for my sake? Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets". @Numbers 11:29. What a beautiful spirit! one that should mark every servant of Christ. No one who serves in the spirit of Christ can detract from you, or from me. "Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them". @Numbers 11:29. What a camp Israel would have been if all had been like that! It was greatly enhanced by the fact that there were seventy more with the spirit that was upon Moses.
The next thing is, in @Numbers 12, to see how God stands by His servants; and woe be to him who envies or traduces them. Miriam and Aaron were jealous of Moses. "Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he not spoken also by us?" @Numbers 12:2. Well, that was true, but why assert it? Moses was not saying anything different. Moses had just said, Would God that *all* the Lord's people were prophets. Think of the wickedness that would rival a man like that, that would impute to him such a wicked motive as arrogating to himself the whole service of God! He had no such thought. The service of God is never a one-man affair; it is a question of personality and increase of personality under Christ, but all in the power of God, all in the anointing.
We see in this chapter the seriousness of envying one whom God uses, one indeed whom God had honoured in such a signal manner as to come down and speak to him on several occasions at the tent door, and recently in the presence of those seventy men on the mountain. The Holy Spirit immediately says, "Now the man Moses was very meek". @Numbers 12:3. It is not the *servant* Moses -- we want to see the *man*. The man must underlie the servant; indeed, one is very loth ever to use the word "servant" in any official way. We want to see the man behind the service.
{7}
What kind of man is he? What is he in his house, in his business, if he has one, or in his workshop? but particularly what is he in his house? Moses had married an Ethiopian woman. Why should he not do so? He was not accountable to Miriam for that. And so the Holy Spirit brings in at once His estimate of "the *man* Moses". @Numbers 12:3.
One is reminded of the greater than Moses, "the man Christ Jesus". @1 Timothy 2:5. Luke gives us the Man. We have to study Luke in order to understand Mark; in Luke it is the Man, but in Mark the Servant. Now here you see God takes this matter in hand and it is important to notice that He spoke "suddenly". @Numbers 12:4. We see here how God distinguishes between servant and servant "If there be a prophet among you, *I* the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house. With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?" @Numbers 12: 6 - 8.
Now this is important instruction for us. It is very confirmatory to those who serve, but it is a solemn warning against rivalry or jealousy, and to opposition founded on jealousy against any servant of the Lord. It is so important a matter that the Lord comes down Himself. He shows that while there is great personality in the service, there are also distinctions of service and one is honoured more than others.
In chapter 14 we have another appearing. This is in relation to the gospel in its heavenly character, as alluded to in Hebrews. It is the gospel of the land of Canaan, the gospel that witnesses to heaven and the heavenly calling. The spies had brought back an
{8}
excellent report, and, they had brought the grapes from Eshcol.
This is a most serious matter, indeed Hebrews shows that it was the great turning-point, and that apostasy is in view, and dealt with from this point onwards. That is to say, it leads to the habit that has been observed from that very day until now, of taking on a lower line when God is emphasising the higher line. This is a great feature of opposition -- that when God emphasises certain features in a ministry it is opposed by certain of the people. Not that one accuses any, only that the warning should come home to every one of us, lest we take a lower line, or oppose what God is emphasising.
There was hardness of heart in unbelief. This was to be a test; twelve men were sent up to bring back a report of the land; and there it was, the grapes of Eshcol told their own tale, and the twelve all witnessed to the wealth of the land. Then the enemy began to work, and only two out of the twelve stood their ground in connection with what God had emphasised. So Caleb stands up and witnesses to the good land, and to the power of God to bring His people in, because He had delight in them. How wonderful is this, the sense of God having delight in us, and because of that delight giving us the very best He has got, and exercising His power to bring us into it against all opposition!
You see what is at work -- opposition to that which God emphasises as the very best thing for us; indeed the people are about to stone these two faithful men, when the glory appears. "And the glory of the Lord appeared in the tabernacle of the congregation before all the children of Israel", @Numbers 14:10. We see now what is to be contended with; not two weak men like Caleb and Joshua, but God shining out in all His glory. No one need fear but that He will stand
{9}
by the truth! Think of the glory coming down at such a time and appearing to all the congregation! We need not fear, dear brethren, to stand firmly by what God emphasises. The glory will appear in some form; God will come in unmistakably and show where He is, so that the thing stands.
Following on this in @Numbers 16 we have the great rebellion. It is not now Miriam and Aaron in personal jealousy, but a general uprising against Moses and Aaron by the leading men of Israel. There were two hundred and fifty men, princes of the congregation -- a most powerful combination -- Korah leading. And so the glory appears; that is to say, God will stand by the whole position. It is not now simply a question of one servant or of two servants, but the whole position of Christianity, typically, is assailed in this chapter. "And Korah gathered all the congregation against them unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation; and the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the congregation", @Numbers 16: 19. They are gathered together around the door of the tabernacle. It is an attack on the whole position, as I said; they have come up boldly to the door of the tabernacle.
This marks Christendom at the present time; there is an attack on the whole position -- Christ in heaven and the Holy Spirit down here. The "door of the tabernacle of the congregation" @Numbers 16:19 is where the attack is being made. Can it be met? It *is* being met -- it *has been* met -- by the glory. Can God be overcome? Never! It may mean martyrdom, it may mean separation, reduction, reproach, but the truth stands; it must stand. While Christ is in heaven, and the Holy Spirit is here, Christianity can never cease to exist. It stands, and we may stand courageously by it, for the glory stands by us: "And it came to pass, when the congregation was gathered against Moses and against Aaron, that they looked
{10}
toward the tabernacle of the congregation; and, behold, the cloud covered it", @Numbers 16:42.
The cloud *is covering the whole testimony*. Can we doubt that this applies at the present time? There is not a doubt that God has preserved the truth, the whole position of Christianity, implying that Christ is in heaven, with all power committed unto Him in heaven and on earth; and that the Holy Spirit is here and that the priesthood exists in virtue of the Holy Spirit being here; and that the church exists, and the glory covers it -- indeed that all is preserved.
This leads me in closing to emphasise that we have the *whole* idea presented for us. If Satan cannot rob us of the whole, he will endeavour to rob us of a part, but the glory covered the *whole* tabernacle here. As I was saying elsewhere, the recovery of the Lords supper in our time (it had been in captivity, so to speak) introduces and maintains before us the whole thought.
The Lord in instituting it says, "This is my body". @Luke 22:19. We commit ourselves to that; and "we, being many, are one body". @Romans 12:5. You have the whole thought ever in view, and the glory covers it. How often we have proved that! How precious to be together with the light of Christ as Head, His body here, and the glory coming in and covering all! It is no local matter; the breaking of bread, although done locally, is universal in its bearing. Who can take it from us as we recognise the position and stand by it? We must maintain what is local, but the thing is that in what is local we should maintain strenuously what is universal -- one whole testimony of God.
And so "the Spirit and the bride say, Come". @Revelation 22:17. As soon as the Lord announces Himself, all is there in active response. So He says to Philadelphia, "I will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world". @Revelation 3:10. The Lord Jesus has never anything less than the whole thought before
{11}
Him. David in slaying the lion and the bear preserved the lamb. In @Amos 3:12 you have the word, "two legs, or a piece of an ear" taken out of the mouth of the lion. That is something, but David had the *whole* thought before him. However weak a saint is, I must look at him in relation to the whole, he belongs to the church and to nothing less.
So in the face of the greatest rebellion that ever took place against God and Christ, and I refer now to the antitype, that is, to the history of Christendom, we have the appearing of the glory as it covers the tabernacle, the figurative representation of things in the heavens, where God meets with His people. That indeed is preserved, the glory covering it. May we not courageously stand by the whole truth, maintaining the whole thought and nothing less, in the face of all opposition. May God grant this!
{12}
THE KING AND THE KINGDOM
*(Summary of Reading)*
@1 Samuel 22: 1,2; @1 Samuel 30: 17 - 31; @Romans 14: 17,18
In regard to the kingdom we find the scriptures making much of the Man by whom it is administered. They make much of Christ, and the Old Testament affords us testimonies to Christ as King, and in all His relations; hence it helps in the understanding of the kingdom, if we consider the Man by whom it is administered. The idea necessarily proceeds from God, but He is pleased to exercise His power and authority in a Man. Scripture makes evident the value of the types, and of what marked them. David is pre-eminent in this way. The scriptures enlarge on what he was personally, and on what Moses was; the Spirit enlarges on their character, these being the two specially employed by God in administration.
It might be stated concisely that the kingdom is the exercise of power in grace, and for this there must be a suited man. In the person of David a rallying point is afforded for those that needed help. David becomes a captain over them, and, in result, nothing is lost in spite of Saul's breakdown. David recovers all. These two features are prominent, protection for those in need, and formation (for the people become like David), and then the recovery of everything for God. We need help, but as that is afforded us, we learn there is a formative power behind it, and that brings in the moral greatness of the man. David was not officially king yet, it was a question of what was moral. In @Psalm 45: 4 we read, "And in thy majesty ride prosperously because of truth and meekness arid righteousness". That gives the thought of the Man; He is very great and very meek. That state has to be brought about in us; one has to be ruled before one can rule. Rule in the main is influence, and this involves moral greatness. The
{13}
idea of a king is that he is *able* to rule, he has proved his ability in this way, and *we* are being formed to rule.
In Moses you have divine authority more directly set forth. It is a question of God's authority directly communicated. So we get the thought of Moses¬ rod, the symbol of God's authority. Whilst divine influence was there it came out generally in ordering and arranging the people, so that they went out in rank, or military fashion; @Exodus 13:18. The kingdom is exercised in Exodus very much in a military way until after chapter 15, where Moses is king in the affections of the people. In @Deuteronomy 33, he is said to be king in Jeshurun, referring, no doubt, to @Exodus 18. Generally speaking, however, what is military is in view. The people go out in harness, five in a rank, then Moses acts in regard to the Red Sea, typically against death; the rod is lifted up and death disposed of. Thus the Lord is celebrated in @Exodus 15:3 in a military way, as a "man of war".
David is also marked by this, but much more is said of his personality, what he was as raised up amongst men. "He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God", @2 Samuel 23:3. David is the typical king. In the Old Testament there is more said about him than perhaps about any other, beginning with his boyhood. His anointing in the midst of his brethren is one of the finest pictures in the Old Testament. That is the man to rule. Saul was anointed in a sort of private way by Samuel, and was given a heart afterwards to suit his position. God helped Saul so as to show that if there was anything in flesh qualified to help man God would give it all the opportunity possible. Saul is marked from the very outset as having failed to find the asses. One might pass over that as being a mere incident, but the fact is drawn attention to, in order to show that he was disqualified from the start. He set out to find the asses and failed, and so he returned fearing
{14}
his father may become concerned about him; a poor circumstance for a king. David, on the other hand, is occupied with the sheep, and none is lost; the lion and the bear come, but David protects his flock. He qualifies in this way before he is anointed. Then he comes in before Samuel, and everything about him indicates he is the right man. He has the marks: "ruddy and of a beautiful countenance" @1 Samuel 16:12; there is the indication of the energy of youth; and the Spirit says, "Arise, anoint him for this is he" @1 Samuel 16:12, as if to show that the Spirit knew him if Samuel did not. So the man is stamped with success from the beginning, and is anointed in the midst of his brethren. His parents did not know he was selected, yet the Spirit knew him well. Divine interposition is seen as marking his anointing; "this is he".
The Lord developed the qualities of a king in the midst of His brethren. God knew Him, and marked Him off in the midst of the remnant of Israel. Everything about Him was pleasing to God. He stood out in the mind of God as the One for His delight. So when anointed with the Spirit, He can announce, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight". @Matthew 3:17. The anointing was God committing Himself to Him. He had no pleasure obviously in Saul's anointing. It was provisional to show what flesh is, but David is a man after God's own heart.
David is first anointed by God in the midst of his brethren, but later he is crowned in Hebron. The people come to it. Like Solomon crowned by his mother in the day of his espousals. We have to come to this, that we desire no other. There is the recognition of the true leader before the public establishment of the kingdom. "When Saul was king over us", they say, "thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel". @2 Samuel 5:2. They recognised him then. So we recognise that the power of God is with Christ; though government outwardly is in other hands, the
{15}
*real* power is with Christ. We can rely on that whatever may be going on in the political world; you can take account of what the Lord is doing. He recovers everything; and we know it by the way He recovers us. There is the testimony to it in oneself.
If we apply this dispensationally, the remnant of Israel as well as other needy ones require the power of Christ as viewed in this light, just as David's brethren and his father's house needed to be protected and influenced and stamped by his character. So the Lord, though rejected, is security for every one of us. "With me thou shalt be in safeguard", David said to Abiathar; @1 Samuel 22: 23. It is a question of the king now, and we learn from the sequence that a stamp was left on all those associated with David during the time of his rejection. His influence brought about an extraordinary set of people.
In @Matthew 11: 29 the Lord says, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn *from* me". He is not simply a teacher there. He is a *model*; you see how things are presented in Himself. He was in rejection, and in the next chapter He quotes David's action, how he went into the house of God and did eat the shewbread, when fleeing from Saul. In the same chapter we get, "If I by the Spirit of God cast out demons, then indeed the kingdom of God is come upon you", @Matthew 12: 28. It was there, but He invites all those who laboured and were heavy laden to come to *Him*. The emphasis is on the Person, it was a question of the *kind* of person. "Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest to your souls; for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light". @Matthew 11: 29,30. It is an immense thing, amid the break-up of everything politically, to have the idea of the kingdom and security spiritually, for surely it is much greater to be secured spiritually than physically. Not that God does not preserve us physically, but at the same time we are preserved here
{16}
in peace and tranquility, so that we become a shelter for others. He has "made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father", @Revelation 1: 6. There are two ideas, a kingdom and priests, and how can we be made a kingdom save as formed by the King?
David's marvellous warriors were all the product of his influence, so we have the same thing now in Christians, for David's men typify such, every one of them is as the son of a king. They had not much to commend them naturally, they were discontented and in debt, but their association with David made them what they were eventually. Abishai risked his life to obtain water for him; David became such an attraction and object. "I speak of the things which I have made touching the king", @Psalm 45:1. We get a suggestion there as to how those under the influence of Christ regard Him. It gives the thought of a composition. Every lover of Christ composes something as regards Christ. It is not His position in regard of the assembly that is in view, but His place as King: "So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty". @Psalm 45:11. He becomes an object for every one in the kingdom, and I believe this is a great feature, so that one is not carried away by radicalism. It provides an antidote to that. We hold and preserve the truth of God in our souls as retaining the dignity belonging to us, as connected with the King. Royalty attaches to us, and moral dignity goes with this, though we should be marked by meekness outwardly. "Behold, thy King cometh unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass", @Matthew 21: 5. We are made to feel today that foundations are being destroyed, kingdoms are toppling, so it is important that we should have right thoughts as to the King. God's King loves righteousness and hates lawlessness.
Mephibosheth is an example of one who appreciates the king; he is an Ephesian believer typically. He had no thought for his land or anything earthly, all
{17}
he was concerned about was that the king should come again in peace to his own house. So we look for the Lord to come into His rights. The kingdom becomes a large theme. Paul, during the whole of his two years at Rome, received all that came to his hired house and spoke to them of the kingdom of God. In @Romans 14 it is the kingdom that occupies us, not now the king exactly. It is the system, the thing itself and this brings into evidence formative work, as the kingdom is composed of persons. Chapter 13 gives us the kingdom of men, what God has set up provisionally in the world, but chapter 14 is what is spiritual, it is the kingdom of God, "righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit" @Romans 14:17. The last verse of chapter 13 exhorts us to "put on the Lord Jesus Christ", @Romans 13:14, it is not "put ye on Christ" nor "the new man" as elsewhere, but "the Lord Jesus Christ", it is His full title, involving His authority. It is remarkable that we should put *that* on. It is put on as clothing, it is the garb in which we appear. We "put on" Christ as related to the kingdom. It is profession, but carried out consistently and practically.
The present good of the kingdom is first for protection. You are protected spiritually. If a young believer confesses with his or her mouth Jesus as Lord, it means salvation. Such come under the protection of Christ, and are saved. So baptism is in the name of the Lord in @Acts 10. As you come under the wing of the Lord you are protected spiritually by the Lord. You come under His influence and learn from Him, and being formed by Him you get the benefit of having your will subdued, and realising the good of the Spirit. If the protection of the Lord is gained, your will is not to be active, you cannot count on His protection if you pursue your own will. The Lord must subjugate me if I am to be in the good of what He has for me. He sees to it by means of discipline and other things that my will *does* go.
{18}
"Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ" @Romans 13:14, is a question of profession. It is the garb in which you appear in public; you make no provision for the flesh, and then you come into the good of the Spirit. A Christian parent is not concerned as to how his children will get on *in the world*, so he baptises them, and brings them up in the truth of that. He puts on the Lord Jesus Christ in his house, and so in every sphere.
The kingdom is the bulwark of everything. Just as the city being the metropolis of the empire is protected, and just as all the light and direction which issue from the centre would soon disappear were it not for the army and navy to hold enemies off, so without the kingdom where would the assembly be? Perhaps we get the best example of this in @Acts 9. Saul sets out as an emissary of Satan to destroy the assembly, and entering into houses, dragged out men and women, committing them to prison. In the midst of this activity the Lord appears and brings him down, and then subdues everything that opposes itself against what He is doing, so that, in result the assembly is multiplied and edified.
The parables in @Matthew 13 and onwards view the kingdom as the product of Christ's sowing. We get what the kingdom has become historically on the one hand and what it is essentially on the other; this is chapter 13. In chapter 18 and onwards it is viewed in relation to the assembly, so the features which mark it would work out in the brother you forgive, and in the light of the assembly you would look at the kingdom in an entirely new way, as in relation to the capital. One of the great features in this connection is to know how to forgive a brother. We are to be full of forgiveness, not niggardly.
In regard to suffering, the word to Smyrna is, "Ye shall have tribulation *ten days*" @Revelation 2: 10. The Lord limits the period of it. If He allows it, it is
{19}
His doing. It is a great thing to be directly in touch with Christ as Lord. One can stand as on a rock amid the surging tide of lawlessness. "Here I take my stand; I can do no other" is the profession of a man in the kingdom. It marked Luther's brightest day. You have the helmet of salvation, and are able to lift up your head. You are protected spiritually in order that you may die outwardly, that you may become a martyr. The Lord supports the one He subdues, He will not support the flesh. Honours conferred on any one denote the prerogative of the sovereign, and those who receive them are necessarily part of the system. One might say in connection with @Romans 13:14, that we put on the King, we appear in that garb everywhere; that is the idea in "Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ". I am not any less than the dignity conferred on me, and am supported according to that.
We referred to Mephibosheth sitting at table. In a certain sense it is an official position, but it also speaks of joy and satisfaction. So with us; but, on the other hand, we are to administer. In @Matthew 18: 3 it says, "Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven". One enters as a little child, guileless and without worldly sophistication, and grows up under the influence of the kingdom, so he knows how to act towards a brother, he has learned this from Christ. "Go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone", @Matthew 18:15. That is the line on which he acts. If he does not recover his brother, he takes another, there is an *increase of the brotherly spirit* brought to bear on the erring one. One of the finest features in the kingdom is the overcoming evil with good, hence you are on the line of recovery all the while. So you increase the brotherly spirit and thus make it hard for the brother to pursue a course of sin. "How oft shall my brother sin against me, and I
{20}
forgive him?" Peter asks, "till seven times?" "Until seventy times seven", is the Lord's reply @Matthew 18:21,22. It is wonderful, but that is the kingdom. If we refer for a moment to Luke's account of the transfiguration, which is different from the other evangelists¬ it says, "there be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God". @Luke 9: 27. What they see is a Man *praying*, it is not a warrior; "and as he prayed", it says, "the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his raiment was white and glistering". @Luke 9:29. And with Him are found two men, "talking with him"; that is the kingdom, then the Father's glory, the Shekinah, appears, so you have a vision of the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Peter says, "We were eye-witnesses of his majesty". @2 Peter 1:16. They learned in Him what the kingdom was.
The position of the saints is like a rock in the midst of the waves. Take it away, and all is gone. It is invulnerable. There is power with those who put on the Lord Jesus Christ. Hence it says, "Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, immoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord", @1 Corinthians 15: 58. It is a question of *the Lord*. It is very wonderful, and one would like to experience this power more in one's soul, for it really and truly exists. We are not dealing with theories. Christ is in heaven and the Holy Spirit on earth, and man's will cannot triumph as long as the Holy Spirit is here. "He that doeth these things shall never be moved", @Psalm 15: 5. "His place of defence shall be the munitions of rocks", @Isaiah 33: 16.
{21}
FRESHNESS
@Revelation 21: 1 - 14; @Revelation 22:1,2
In reading these scriptures I wish to show how God would preserve freshness amongst us as His people. These scriptures afford the thought in bringing forward the heavenly city. It is seen at the beginning of the millennium from verse 9 to the end of chapter 21 and in chapter 22 and then one thousand years later, in chapter 21, verses 2 and 3, and still retaining its freshness. John says, "I saw the holy city new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of the heaven". @Revelation 21:2. It suggests to us that it was what he had been labouring for. His ministry was inaugurating, and preserving freshness. He says, "I saw".
Now I want to show this thought in the word, so that we might see how, that what it was at the beginning should mark the end, and if there is one thing that marks the end, it is freshness, as we see in this scripture. God began with that. You remember how that before man was formed in @Genesis 2, it is said "a mist went up from the earth and watered the whole face of the ground". @Genesis 2:6. And then we have the record that God made man out of the dust of the earth; evidently watered earth, moist earth. Then in the same chapter we have what is more formal, man being formed and set up in the garden where things are to be maintained in freshness. It says a river went out of Eden to water the garden. We must remember that Genesis was written by Moses when the necessity for the truth contained in it was very apparent. We cannot be sure as to the exact date at which Moses wrote the book, but we can be sure of this, that he was a man who knew something about the meaning of water. He wrote about the age of the people, as you remember, in his well-known psalm (@Psalm 90); he wrote about the allotted age
{22}
of man. He knew how age tended to staleness, although he was in himself a bright exception, and is a model for us. He retained his freshness and his vigour although he had exceeded by far the allotted span of which he speaks.
Moses wrote Deuteronomy when he was one hundred and nineteen years old. There is not the slightest indication of any decay in that. He indeed at the very close blesses the people, and he blesses them in holy vigour as Moses the man of God, outlining the tribes, not according to the principles of decline, but according to the energy of the Spirit. Beginning with them he says, "Let Reuben live, and not die" @Deuteronomy 33:6 -- he had life before him. And so, according to @Genesis 2, he is not occupying us with mere physical things, but with spiritual things, spiritual suggestions. We have a watered earth not yet from heaven, for the mist arose from the earth to water the ground. Then again, a river went out of Eden to water the garden so that there might be freshness. For God intended to come into the garden, and did come into it, and in coming into it would look for that freshness.
Later we have the principle of springs, which Moses also records for us and we have further, in Exodus, the smitten rock, which cannot fail to touch the heart of every Christian on earth. In the New Testament we are told that the Rock followed Israel; they drank of that spiritual Rock which followed them, and that Rock was the Christ. It was to provide that there should be no weary ones in the whole camp of Israel; they should be watered. In @Exodus 17 God told Moses to go there to the Rock, and "I will stand before thee there upon the rock". @Exodus 17:6. God said, "Smite the rock and there shall come water out of it" @Exodus 17:6. God was there as the Lawgiver when the Rock was smitten, and the water flowed. The Lord Jesus is presented in that in a typical way as dying that we might have water. Again, in @Numbers 20, the rock
{23}
was to yield refreshment for the people. God said to Moses, You go and *speak* to it, and take the rod; not your rod, but *the* rod, from before the Lord. There is only one rod now, the smiting is over; Jesus lives for evermore, and there is water for the asking. He says, "Take the rod", @Numbers 20:8, the symbol of priestly power. What marks that rod? What marks Christ today, and every spiritual person? That it budded and blossomed and yielded fruit; the evidence of freshness and power. That is the rod that Moses was told to hold in his hand when he spoke to the rock. In other words, it is what we have as believers received from God; He gives a fountain of water springing up into everlasting life, in virtue of which every one who goes to Christ may have water.
It says in @Psalm 104:16, "the trees of the Lord are full of sap" -- that refers to believers. What is the sap? What is it, but what we have from Christ, in virtue of which there is fruit-bearing even in old age. They go to God in the energy of that sap, a sap which ever bears its fruit -- first the bud, then the blossom, and then the fruit; all in a night, but all in perfect order. I referred to Moses because he wrote the book of Genesis, and we have in all his writings the thought of retaining freshness. But I want to go to Joshua and the book of Judges. Joshua records for us that Achsah, the daughter of Caleb, asked for springs of water. There is nothing said about rocks or wells, but springs. We find the book of Joshua so full of suggestions as to the establishing of the truths of Christianity in the power of resurrection and ascension. Joshua takes us into the land, and there should be springs. Achsah expressed the spirit of the assembly in the way of desire that things should continue as they were at the beginning, so one thing she wanted was springs of water. I can understand those who knew the Lord Jesus when He was here, desiring the continuance of that freshness. Take
{24}
John; how he loved the Lord. You remember how he says in his last chapter, "It is the Lord". @John 21:7. How he would consider the necessity (out of love for Christ), of the continuance of that. Nothing less would satisfy him; he would tell you of His beauty, and what He said, and how He said it. John's gospel is a talk by one whom He loved. John says humbly of himself, "the disciple whom Jesus loved". @John 21:20. Jesus loved in John what was of Himself, the reproduction of Christ in that way, and John loved Him and would desire to continue in the freshness of Christ personally, and so he brings in water. He records what the other evangelists do not record, the wondrous conversation between Christ and the woman of Samaria. It is the narrative of one who would have continued here the freshness and vigour of Christ.
Now Achsah in the book of Judges represents that spirit typically, she says to Caleb, I want springs of water. She sprang off the ass; there was energetic movement on her part which Caleb appreciated -- she sprang off. She has a sort of prophetic instinct that decline was setting in, and so it was. The angel of the Lord leaves Gilgal and goes to Bochim; that indicates decline, and soon it came with rapid pace, but here Achsah is indicating, as it were, the spirit of the assembly, expressing a wish to have the springs. In that same book we have another thought in Samson -- the same principle, that of freshness. When the Philistines shouted against him he broke the cords with which his brethren had bound him. Alas think of that, brethren may bind one who retains the energy of the Spirit. But "the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him". @Judges 15:14. What is the use of binding a brother who is moved by the Spirit of the Lord, "the power that worketh in us"? @Ephesians 3:20. And so, being released from his bonds, Samson found a fresh jawbone; it was by him. Certainly it should be said of each one of us that we are not far from death.
{25}
Samson found the fresh, or moist, bone, and he takes it and smites one thousand men at once. And we have recorded in the book of the wars of the Lord, "With the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps, have I slain a thousand men" @Judges 15:16 -- it was in freshness. I specially recommend to you the features found in Judges, because we are in days of decline, and God would have us come back to what was at the beginning. Judges affords a link with the books of Joshua and Moses in freshness and vigour.
Now we may dwell on what each one of us must know in our souls if we are truly believers. God says of Israel, "When Israel was a child ..". @Hosea 11:1. Now we have all been that if we are truly Christians. Some of us may not be more than that, others may have gone into manhood, but in each case the knowledge of childhood must be precious, and God remembers that time. Who that is a father does not recall the early evidences of life and response to affection in his children? So with God, He refers to the time when the movement of life first appeared, and, if the grey hairs have come since, God remembers the period when there were no grey hairs. He says, "When Israel was a child, then I loved him". @Hosea 11:1. There is a sorrowful indication in this that any of us who are elders may take note of. Does He love us now? Are we as lovable now? John was lovable. It is an indication that each elder one may take to himself. Am I just as lovable now as I used to be? How delightful are the first evidences of life and affection. God refers to the time when Israel was a child, "then I loved him". @Hosea 11:1. Why did He love him then? Because he was lovable, he had partaken of the passover, put the blood outside, and moved out of Egypt at God's direction. He was lovable, he was obedient. And it says, "I remember for thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals; when thou wentest after me" @Jeremiah 2:2 -- not simply now by commandment,
{26}
but by attraction. You soon come to follow the Lord by attraction; He has become attractive to you. So Jeremiah records, "When thou wentest after me in the wilderness". @Jeremiah 2:2. Israel was "the first-fruits of his increase". @Jeremiah 2:3. That refers to every one of us, and I ask myself, Am I lovely now as I was then? "What is thy beloved more than another beloved?" @Song of Songs 5:9. He is "white and ruddy". @Song of Songs 5:10. There is evidence of life. It is said of David when he came into the house, that he was ruddy and of a beautiful countenance, and the Spirit says, 'That is the one'. You see how God takes delight in the energy of life in Christians. Elihu remarks when speaking to Job, that when a man judges himself God is gracious to him, and "his flesh shall be fresher than in childhood, he shall return to the days of his youth", @Job 33: 25. So God refers to our beginnings.
You may ask, How may this freshness be maintained? I anticipated that question in the reference to the springs, but I would turn to the Psalms by way of help. Let us look at the first psalm. It says, "Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful. But his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law doth he meditate day and night. And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper". @Psalm 1:1 - 3. There is a word for young and old. The way of freshness has to be the way of righteousness, it has to be the way of rigid separation -- "he walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly". @Psalm 1:1. He is apart from all that marks the world, and "his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law doth he meditate day and night". @Psalm 1:2. According to @Deuteronomy 18, the priest's portion was the shoulder, the two cheeks, and the maw, indicating the importance of mastication and assimilation.
{27}
Unless we read and assimilate the word of God we shall not be sustained in freshness. The psalm indicates one of the features whereby we can continue in separation from the world. And then diligence in acquiring the Scriptures, it is one who delights in the law of the Lord. Some of us read the Scriptures as a mere duty; such will not retain freshness, but one who delights in them will do so. Some discredit the Old Testament but look at this, it abounds with wondrous things if we will only seek them.
The Lord in Luke was expounding the Scriptures. Beginning at Moses and the prophets, and in His own infinitely exquisite and perfect way, He was expounding in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself. I can understand these two saying, 'Where shall we go to have them expounded like this?' We must get along without expounders, though we are thankful for them. But when these two returned to Jerusalem they found the Lord Himself there, and He opened their understanding that they might understand the Scriptures. So He says, "Thus it is written" @Luke 24:46 -- it is for you to look up what is written. He had said that before to the devil by way of defence. He regarded the Scriptures as His armoury, He selected the weapons that He needed at the moment, and utterly discomforted His opponent "Get thee behind me, Satan". @Matthew 16:23. But now He is instructing, "Thus it is written" @Luke 24:46 -- it is for us to look up what is written, or we shall be unintelligent and wanting in the freshness of which I have spoken; so that we might know the apostle's desire "that God, the Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him". @Ephesians 1:17. And so with that we may go through the Scriptures and behold wondrous things in which our souls are nourished and built up, so that we are fresh and vigorous.
There is just one other point in the Psalms. In @Psalm 92:12, it says, "The righteous shall flourish like
{28}
the palm tree". You have the word 'righteous' here, it is a word we do well to take note of. Unrighteousness is becoming so prevalent; everywhere bulwarks are giving way. The question is, Am I righteous? It behoves us to be righteous in our business affairs and in all other things of man. Without that we are vulnerable -- if we have not the breast-plate of righteousness; but if we are covered there, we are free to go in for the means of sustenance and growth. But it goes on to say, "Those that be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the courts of our God. They shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat and flourishing". @Psalm 92:13,14. So now we come, not only to reading the word of God, but what we are in relation to the saints, where our roots are. Some of our roots are in our businesses and in our families, whereas he that flourishes in the courts of God has his roots in the house of God.
Let us enquire as to whether our roots are there, whether we prefer our natural relationships to our spiritual relationships. I have to learn to give the house of God the first place. In other words, I love the Lord Jesus and the saints, and my affections are ordered in relation to them. The evidence of life in the public way is the result of my roots; the flourishing depends on the roots, not on the gift you have. Gift in itself will soon lose its power and efficiency unless it is used in love. The apostle says, speaking of gift, "Yet show I unto you a way of surpassing excellence". @1 Corinthians 12:31. That is where your roots are, you grow up there, and the Lord will give you in his sovereignty what you need, and so you flourish, and there is power in it, and vigour in it. And it further says, "They shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat and flourishing". @Psalm 92:14. That is the lovely appearance you afford to the eye; the saints speak about it, the love that marks you in your relations
{29}
to the saints; not above them, but as Paul says, "less than the least of all saints". @Ephesians 3:8.
I have read all that in relation to the two scriptures, not to speak of the holy city, but to borrow that one thought, the freshness and vigour that John saw at the beginning of the millennium appearing at the end of the millennium. John's ministry brings in the thought of freshness and the Holy Spirit abiding with us for ever.
{30}
THE WILDERNESS
@Song of Songs 8: 5
I wanted to speak about the wilderness, for it has its place. In making that remark I am thinking of @Revelation 12. The woman who brings forth the man child is said to flee into the wilderness, where she is nourished for one thousand two hundred and sixty days. She is said to have in it a place prepared by God. Then it is said that there is war in heaven, but *she* is taken care of. The interests of the testimony are not specially bound up with her, but she is taken care of in the wilderness, in the place prepared for her of God. In that place she is nourished by certain ones whose identity is not disclosed.
Now it may be that, as in the wilderness, some may not know that it is the place divinely designed for our preservation spiritually and for our nourishment, and where we may acquire the knowledge of God as we could not acquire it otherwise. The thief on the cross had no such opportunity -- to be in paradise with Christ is not to discover what Christ can be to you in a scene of contrariety. The woman's son was taken up to the right hand of God, for the dragon had his eye upon him, as he had on Christ, but *she* was in the wilderness. Satan is not yet attacking her, for God will not lead the young believer into the conflict at once. Instead of that she is nourished every day for one thousand two hundred and sixty days, even though it brings its own test of the provision God makes. But the war goes on, there is no cessation of that, whether it be in heaven or on earth.
But though that is indeed true, let us be assured of this, that you and I are divinely cared for in the wilderness, just as it says here, they nourished this woman for one thousand two hundred and sixty days.
{31}
We are preserved in some sense pending the Lord's return, hence the protracted period of one thousand two hundred and sixty days, but we are cared for every day. Whether it be through Peter or James or John, each in his own way brings in the bread of life come down from heaven, and the nourishment is administered: the love of God is the divine provision for every one of our days. But then the war goes on. We hear but little of the conflict waged against the apostles after Paul is introduced in Acts, but the war went on, and you may depend upon it though you may not be a soldier in active service you will share the spoils. No good soldier of Jesus Christ is selfish, and the spoils of war are divided equally with those who tarry behind, taking care of the stuff.
The war went on here in @Revelation 12. Michael and his angels fought with the devil and his angels, and Michael was victorious. Thus in the next instance (verses 13,14) the woman is given the wings of the great eagle. You are nourished first, but when the time arrives for the conflict you are given wings. He had borne them upon wings and brought them to Himself, but these were not the wings of God, but she is given wings of an eagle "that she might fly into the desert". @Revelation 12:14. When the time of attack comes we shall be furnished for it. The woman is protected from the face of the serpent, not for one thousand two hundred and sixty days, it is not a daily matter now; God would reduce it to limits, so it is "for a time and times, and half a time" @Revelation 12:14 -- that is to say, God brings the thing down to narrow limits when you have to do with the serpent; but when you have to do with God's preservation it is a question of days. The war is in progress and it will go on, but God will reduce it to a limited compass. The one thousand two hundred and sixty days is love's reckoning, but the time, times and half a time is the reckoning of the soldier. It is but a brief moment
{32}
and the war will be over, but while it is going on you will be furnished with wings.
I come now to this passage in the Song of Solomon because it contemplates the believer as coming up out of the wilderness. The idea of the wilderness is limited, but the ways of God are not limited. Love belongs to eternity; it finds its home there. So we come up out of the wilderness to enjoy love in its own place. Alas! the believer is sometimes found in Egypt. You will recall how the Israelites come up out of Egypt, but they wanted to return to Egypt.
Now the Lord's supper is for those who know where He is, and that He is not here. There are those who would not want to go back to Egypt, for they are born in the wilderness. There are some who have been born in Christian households; they do not go to theatres nor do they desire the world. They do not wish to leave the environment in which they have been brought up. Moses could say, "Come with us, and we will do thee good". @Numbers 10:29. You will recall that when the work of the tabernacle was in progress there was much more provided than was needed, there is wealth there. So it can be said, "Come with us, and we will do thee good". @Numbers 10:29. We are journeying to the place of which the Lord has said, "I will give it you". Some Christians born of Christian parents have no thought of going on, hence Hobab says to Moses, "I will depart to my kindred". @Numbers 10:30. There are many such, they are children of the wilderness. But the end according to God of that journey is they were to go up out of it, leaning on One whom they had learned to love. The way into it is by baptism. Paul says, "Ye ... have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into which ye were instructed". @Romans 6:17. The teaching brought in the mind of God, and they who believe obey.
After the children of Israel sang the song of victory, Moses led them into the wilderness of Shur; they
{33}
went three days, that was the testing time. It is a question of submission. It is in the discovery of *His* love that you come to love. It is a wonderful time in the history of a soul when it can say of Christ that He is her beloved. "Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved?" @Song of Songs 8:5. I will tell you who she is, she was brought up under the apple tree.
Moses led them three days and they found no water, and when they found water it was bitter. The will must be subdued, there must be unqualified submission to the authority of the Lord. There are failures at the outset, the failure of believers to submit to the authority of the Lord. You may see it coming out in the households. The Lord will bring out of that. There must be the acceptance of death. You must be tested. The Lord tasted it in his own way. The sin that brought in the judgment that fell on Christ is not going to be allowed in a believer. Happy is the soul who began in the abhorrence of it.
So he led them to Marah, and there the water was bitter. We shall have to accept definitely the judgment of God on the flesh, bitter of course it is, but how delightful when you can say, "Where thou diest I will die". @Ruth 1:17. Moses cried to the Lord, and the Lord showed them wood. It is a wonderful moment when the wood comes in; the judgment of God and discipline are very near together. He showed it to Moses, it was the light of the love that has been there. He has been there -- "who loved me" -- think of that; do you ever say that? Who loved me! I know of nothing so affecting. Paul says, "He loved me", the Lord Jesus loved me when He died for me; think of the Lord loving me when He died! I can understand your saying, "He loves me", but "He *loved me*", says the apostle, "and gave himself for me". @Galatians 2:20. One can understand that the link formed there with Christ will never be broken. That precious fact
{34}
will ever remain with us, that the Lord loved me when He died, and hence the change in me, in the light of the love of Christ, that has begun in the wilderness; multiply the forty years by three hundred and sixty-five days, every day brings in that experience of the love of Christ. What has He been to me today! Wilderness time is a most valuable time. What about it beloved -- how are you spending it? If you were to take a calendar, every day brings its own tale of the love of Christ.
If I read the book of Exodus, I see Him die. He died for me. If I take the Book of Leviticus, what is Christ to me there? If I take the book of Numbers, what is Christ to me there? God has given instructions as to how they were to march, but when they marched, the ark of the covenant went before. Hear Moses¬ word when the ark went forward "Rise up, Jehovah, and let thine enemies be scattered". @Numbers 10:35. Who is the ark? It is Christ going before us -- it is love -- it is Christ going before to find a resting-place for the saints. Will He ever fail us? Never!
Again I hear, "Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel". @Numbers 10:36. Having scattered all enemies the ark comes back. From the beginning to the end it is the love of Christ -- every day.
And so this Song of Solomon contemplates it; it says, "Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness?" @Song of Songs 8:5. How are we to come up out of it? As coming into His obedience, coming up out of it as loving Him to be occupied with the love of Christ -- they leaned on Him in coming out. While we are in flesh and blood condition, we always need support, and that is the arm of Christ. We are drawing near to the end, and the world is but a wilderness to those who love Him. It is a period in which the Christian is tested and in which the Lord is attracting hearts to Himself. Thus in the Song of Solomon we see His triumph in securing the love of the saints.
{35}
The aim of ministry is to present Christ in such a way that He becomes the Object of the saints here. He says, "I raised thee up under the apple tree". @Song of Songs 8:5. The apple tree refers to the service that the Lord rendered in the covenant; so whilst the cup is said to be the cup of the new covenant, it is the new covenant in Christ's blood, it is the pledge of the love of God. Then the place the Lord Jesus is in has also to be borne in mind. It is in "the cup of the new covenant in *my* blood" that He makes the love of God effective. Everything is given to Him to minister, but one thing given to Christ that affords Him the greatest delight is to make the love of God effective in the hearts of the saints. In @2 Corinthians 3:6 the apostle says, "The letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life", then he adds, "the Lord is that Spirit". @2 Corinthians 3:17. It is the Lord carrying out that service in the saints, making effective in them the love of God. It is the Lord's doing, He never wearies. He never gives up a task. He has undertaken to make the love of God effective in the saints, and He will do it. The Lord asserts His authority in the soul, but it is to bring into effect there the love of God. "The Lord is that Spirit and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty", @2 Corinthians 3:17; there is always room for that service. He claims room in your heart where the Spirit of the Lord is. The apostle says, "We all with open face beholding the glory of the Lord". @2 Corinthians 3:18. Not as John saw Him with garments down to the feet. He says you cannot see any of those beauties, but we all with unveiled face. It is a love matter, you must come into it, and whatever happens, love has that in view; the Lord will bring into your soul the love of God. You may evade it, battle with it, but the Lord is stronger. I, He says, *I* brought thee up under the apple tree. It is always under His own blessed influence, "where thy mother brought thee forth ... that bare thee". @Song of Songs 8:5. The love of God that comes into
{36}
the soul will lead to attachment to Christ, and in result she comes up out of the wilderness leaning on her Beloved. It speaks of the saints as leaning on the Lord as the loved One.
It says, "cometh *up from* the wilderness". @Song of Songs 8:5. The Lord has become so endeared to the heart in the wilderness, that you come up out of it leaning upon Him. Moses, as typical of Christ, says, I have been with you all these years, and I wish you to come into the land suitably. It is a wonderful land; you must be there in suitable dignity. So that the believer should be moved by the drawings of love. They were led by the *hand* out of the land of Egypt, but they are led by the *heart* of God into Canaan.
{37}
GOD'S INHERITANCE IN THE SAINTS
@1 Thessalonians 1: 2,3; @1 Thessalonians 3: 12,13; @Ephesians 1: 4,5
I have before me to speak about the saints as *before God*. We have to take account of ourselves as before God. We read in the Old Testament that "the Lord's portion is his people", and that "Jacob is the lot of his inheritance", @Deuteronomy 32:9, and I desire to show how that thought is developed in the New Testament epistles, taking up this first one to the Thessalonians, who may be taken to represent the saints in the state of *normal* childhood, for they were but a few weeks old spiritually when this letter was written; and in that way they afford perhaps the most interesting company of believers that you can find in the Scriptures.
You will remember how that when the apostle in his labours visited Thessalonica he spent three sabbath days in preaching in the synagogue, and how that it is said that certain believed the word, and consorted with Paul and Silas, and of the worshipping Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few. The company, therefore, was made up of believing Jews and Greeks, among whom were some of the chief women. The apostle had to move on in his service, but he moved on with considerable concern as to the work at Thessalonica, lest he had laboured in vain, but the result of the visit of Timotheus brought to light that instead of his labour being in vain it had been a great success; not only had they believed savingly, but they had come to take account of each other in love. They had indeed taken form as an assembly, so that in writing to them he addresses them in that way. He addresses them as an assembly of Thessalonians, not a set of converts, but an assembly. They are addressed uniquely; there is no other company in the Scriptures addressed in this fashion, and it is because, as I understand it, that God would
{38}
through the letter of the apostle disclose to them what a place they had in His affections. They had become in fact, as the letter says, "beloved of God". @1 Thessalonians 1:4.
Now one would not suggest that every saint is not beloved of God, because *we are*. Love in God rises above our ways, even as in Corinthians when their ways were fleshly; God loved the Corinthians, but He had to write to them in a corrective way. In the Thessalonians there was that which was *lovable*, and the exercise with one is as to whether one is lovable. Love in God takes account of one, and sets itself upon one, even though unlovely in many respects, but this epistle indicates a state of loveliness in youthful Christians. That is, God in this letter lets us into His thoughts as to what He looks for in young believers, and one is free to address oneself to young believers.
You will remember that John in writing his first letter addresses himself to believers under three heads. The first set are called fathers, then he addresses young men, and then finally he addresses little children. The whole letter could be read by either set. I have no doubt the fathers could enjoy what was said to the little ones, and said to the young men, and thus the fathers would get more out of the letter than the little ones; but the little ones were not forgotten, and they are addressed as a class; and God has a great deal in the freshness and vigour that mark the young believer normally: He looks for it. If you have lost it through years, and grey hairs have come, He has not forgotten it; He says, "I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness" @Jeremiah 2:2.
Now the Thessalonians correspond in that way with the beginnings of Israel's history. We see in them the kindness of youth, and the love of espousals, and so I desire to dwell for a moment upon them before I pass on to Ephesians. The apostle says, We have
{39}
great remembrance of you, "we give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers". @1 Thessalonians 1:2.
It is a great thing to get a good start, and so you find it says in John that the Lord went away beyond the Jordan to the place where John baptised at first, and many believed on Him *there*; @John 10: 40 - 42. That was a good place to believe on Him, where John baptised *at the first*.
It is an immense thing to get a right apprehension of God in Christ, for that is what this epistle indicates. It is God, but God in Christ. The light of the knowledge of God in Christ shone into their hearts, and they turned to that God. God came before their souls, and they turned to Him from idols, and then further it says, "to wait for his Son from heaven". @1 Thessalonians 1:10. It was *God's* Son. You see how the babes are set up in the light of the knowledge of God in Christ, and the Christ who has made God known is His Son, not *the* Son, but *His* Son. You are thus in the light of holy relationships, the Father and the Son. As I said, many believed on Him where John baptised at the first. The first principles were dominant there, and so, as John says to the little ones, "If that which ye have heard from the beginning shalt remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father". @1 John 2:24. That is how the little ones are set up, so that these Thessalonians, young believers as they were, had the Father, and they had the Son, and hence the work of faith; that is the next thing.
What are you doing, beloved? You see we are left here, we are baptised into the light of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit - a wonderful heritage of light! But what are we to be in that light? We are to develop into sons of light, and the first great thing is your body. That is how the truth is developed in Romans; the members are to be yielded unto God as instruments of righteousness.
{40}
In Romans the body is to be presented to God a living sacrifice. So we get here the work of faith. What are we doing? Are we working for the brethren to take note of us? I know well enough how it is for young people, and even with older ones, how we do work for wages; that is to say, we look for approval, we look for recognition. Now the work of faith is not that, the work of faith has God before it; so he says, "Remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, *in the sight of God and our Father*". @1 Thessalonians 1:3. How lovely this company was in that way. There was in it the evidence of life in its beginnings. It worked out in the way of taking account of God.
Such is the picture the Spirit of God gives us of a company of Christians a few weeks old. And the apostle goes on in chapter 3 to introduce the subject of holiness, which I would dwell on for a moment. If you have life in activity the great thing is to give it a lead. Life springs up of itself, the principle of it is spontaneity, but it has to get a lead; there has to be formation, the growth has to be according to the pattern; so the apostle is that pattern primarily, and then the Lord Jesus, and then God Himself. And one of the most serious considerations I know of today for the elder brethren is that so many young ones are coming on, what kind of pattern are we setting? Now the apostle calls attention in chapter 2 to what he was amongst them. He cared for them as a nurse her own children. We may be sure, as elder ones, that God holds us accountable for what has come to us. What comes to us has not come from our children but from our fathers, it has come in that way; "the father to the children shall make known thy truth" @Isaiah 38:19; therefore it is a question for those who are elders as to whether we are exponents of what has come down to us.
{41}
These young believers became models because they were patterned on a model. Who was the model? Paul was the model. "Ye became followers of us, and of the Lord". @1 Thessalonians 1:6. As they imitated the one through whom the light came, he passed them on to Christ. That is the principle of a model. This is important, dear brethren; it has to be taken up; God is graciously working, and young ones are getting light, and taking their stand with the saints; what about models for them? You say, Christ is the model; thank God He is, the Same yesterday, today, and for ever, but He is in heaven, and so the apostle says, "I write unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning". @1 John 2:13. To the little ones he says, "If *that* which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you", @1 John 2:24 etc., but to the fathers it is, "*Him* that is from the beginning". @1 John 2:13. We are to be models as acquainted with Him; not simply with *that* which is from the beginning, but with *Him*. It is the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Himself as from the beginning that constitutes us models for others, and so the apostle calls attention to the fact that he regarded the Thessalonians as did a nurse her own children; that is to say, he exercised the skill of the nurse with the affections of the mother.
We may be sure that this is necessary at the present time; the young are coming in (thank God for it!), but the great point is the model, and then he goes on to say that he was like a nursing father. There was in his service in those few weeks among them the instincts of the mother and the skill of the nurse, the maternal side; but there was also the paternal side, so that he says, "as a father his own children" we admonished every one of you @1 Thessalonians 2:11. And then he says, You became imitators of *God*, and lastly of the *assemblies of God*.
Now I mention these facts for the young, because they show the development of life in us, and I would specially call attention to the imitation of assemblies.
{42}
It is because there are so many non-catholics, because we are so sectional and so national. Now the Thessalonians were Greeks, most of them, and as Greeks naturally prejudiced against the Jews; but the evidence of life was so present with them that the normal effect of it was that they overcame their national instincts, and they became imitators "of the churches of God which *in Judaea* are in Christ Jesus". @1 Thessalonians 2:14. They might have gone elsewhere for assemblies to pattern themselves on, but the apostle says, "Ye, brethren, became followers of the churches of God which in Judaea are in Christ Jesus". @1 Thessalonians 2:14. These assemblies were not established by Paul, they were established, doubtless, by the labours of the twelve, and there is not much evidence that the Thessalonians knew Peter and John and James, so there was all the more evidence of the power of life in that they overcame all feeling, national instincts, and so on, to pattern themselves on assemblies so far away as Judaea. There is in it the catholic principle which one feels is so important, because God in these days is calling attention to His house. The house of God naturally extends beyond all national boundaries, it includes all the saints, and the Thessalonians, young though they were, understood how to overcome rational or social prejudices, they patterned themselves on the assemblies of God; *God* was their link.
The element of holiness is introduced, and I would remark on it for the young, because in our beginnings as believers our motives are apt to be very mixed; hence the importance of understanding holiness, so that we have the word in chapter 3, "The Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: to the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in *holiness before God*, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints". @1 Thessalonians 3: 12,13. The element of holiness must be present, and this
{43}
leads me to say a word about the covenant, because as the people took their position before the mount in @Exodus 19, the question of holiness necessarily arose. God was proposing to dwell, and if He is to dwell it must be according to His nature. Righteousness is present, and righteousness judges sin with authority; it faces the sin, and it deals with it. We have to learn that. It says, "The body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteousness". @Romans 8:10. There is no more important lesson you can learn than that you have the Holy Spirit in view of righteousness; in the power of His presence you must judge sin with authority.
But then holiness repels it, *shrinks* from sin, it shrinks from evil, hence God sets up an enclosure in which He is to dwell, but He is to dwell there in holiness, in holy love; so the Lord Jesus is presented to us in the epistle to the Corinthians as bringing in the love of God to our hearts. The apostle says, God "hath ... made us competent as ministers of the new covenant; not of letter, but of spirit. For the letter kills, but the Spirit quickens". @2 Corinthians 3:6. Then he says, "Now the Lord is the Spirit". @2 Corinthians 3:17. Now look, beloved, I would like you to understand that the Lord Jesus has not only made the love effective in dying, He has not only attested it in His death, but He makes it effective in our souls. One of the most precious services the Lord renders to us at the present time is to make the love of God effective in our souls. In dying He says, "Thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel". @Psalm 22:3. He did not forget that God was dealing in righteousness. He was dealing authoritatively in righteousness when Jesus died, but He was dealing in holiness, and the Lord recognised that. He says, "Thou art holy, thou that dwellest in the praises of Israel". @Psalm 22:3. He says that on the cross. How then is He to praise in the midst of the assembly, to praise such a God as that? How except by bringing
{44}
in the holy love of God into our hearts, so that we not only judge sin but we abhor it, we recoil from it. There is already in our souls by the administration of Christ, in the gift of the Spirit, a holy love. The love of God in us is a holy love -- "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given unto us". @Romans 5:5. It is in virtue therefore of the administration of Christ, the love of God being shed abroad in our hearts by the Spirit, that we are constituted suited for the abode of God. And in keeping with that there is the administration of the Father, the Father of our spirits: "Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits, and live?" @Hebrews 12:9. But how live? Live in holiness, so that we are chastened by the Father of spirits that we should live in holiness. Then it adds, "without holiness no man shall see the Lord". @Hebrews 12:14. Difficulties will arise, crises come up among the saints: who knows His way? He who has holiness, and he who has holiness sees the Lord. It is a question of where the Lord is in the crisis, and who sees Him but he who has holiness; so, beloved, the importance of holiness in a practical way is apparent, but it is specially apparent at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so he says, "The Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: to the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints" @1 Thessalonians 3:12,13. What a word that is! To have our hearts established in holiness, *established* in it, at a time when we shall need it -- that is to say, when the Lord comes with all His saints, for He is coming with them *all*. This thought appeared very early in Scripture, for it is said by Jude that Enoch prophesied of the Lord coming with the "holy myriads", @Jude 14, so when He comes with these, beloved, we shall need holiness. It will be a wonderful time, arid this is before our God and
{45}
Father, so the saints come in there *before our God and Father* with hearts established in holiness.
Now I pass on to Ephesians, because we have there the full thought of God for us, and what you will see in Ephesians is that it is a question of what is *before the foundation of the world*. I do not suppose any one of us can take in the idea of eternity, I know we cannot, and God takes account of that. It is something to be realised, not defined, nor compassed, and so we have "before" here, as it says, "according as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world". @Ephesians 1:4. We are thus led into the thought of God in regard of us; He had in view that He should have an inheritance. I do not know of anything so interesting to contemplate as God's inheritance. The apostle recognising the difficulty of saints haying hold of it prays to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory. I would that I could convey to you something about that, the Father of glory. He prays to Him that the saints might have the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him; not revelation, but the *spirit* of it in the knowledge of Him, "that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints". @Ephesians 1:18.
Now this is not children, it is not the beginnings of life; no, it is sonship now. Before the foundation of the world God had *sons* by Him, and so He says, "When Israel was a child, then I loved him". @Hosea 11:1. He loved him in his youth, but He says, "I ... called my *son* out of Egypt". @Hosea 11:1. He had sonship before Him for them. "Let my *son* go", He says @Exodus 4:23, not 'My child'. The child is lovable, but the *son serves*; the son reciprocates intelligently the affections of the Father, hence He calls His son, He would have His son before Him, He would have His son to serve Him, and so He brought them out that He might bring them in. He led them out by the hand, as He says,
{46}
"I it was that taught Ephraim to walk, he took them upon his arms", @Hoses 11:3. That was the beginning, but in going into Canaan it is another matter; it is a question of recognising the Lord Jesus as moving that way. He has been here, He has gone there. How has He gone there? It is for us to discover that spiritually. He went through death.
@Psalm 22 is the "hind of the morning". It is Christ invisibly moving about amongst His people. It is love active, active invisibly, to the natural eye, for the world saw Him no more; it is the movements of Christ known spiritually. Now He says, "I ascend". "Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God". @John 20:17. What a word! That is for sons; it supposes intelligent affection, which the Lord would develop in us, so that we might see the Lord as He has gone up.
You remember how Elisha coveted a double portion of Elijah's spirit. It was a wonderful desire, an intelligent desire, a desire appreciated by Elijah, so he says, "If thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee" @2 Kings 2:10 -- if you see me *go up*. That is the thing; have we seen Christ go up? We often dwell on the coming down, the wonderful descent of love, but what about the going up? "When the queen of Sheba had seen ... his [Solomon's] ascent by which he went up into the house of the Lord, there was no more spirit in her". @1 Kings 10:4,5. It does not say only, He that descended is the same also that ascended; He "descended first into the lower parts of the earth" @Ephesians 4:9 in love; let every one who has gift remember that, the descent precedes the ascent; but He ascended too, far above all the heavens, and it is for us to see the nature of that. So Elijah says, If you see me when I am taken up it shall be granted unto you; and the apostle shows how it is in the appreciation of
{47}
Christ going up that we become acquainted with what is becoming to that scene.
Directly the Israelites crossed the Jordan, as you all know, the manna ceased; it ceased on the morrow after the passover, then they ate the old corn; it abounded in the land, it was the *store* corn, it was carried forward from the previous harvest. Paul was caught up into the third heaven, and heard unspeakable words. It is a wonderful inquiry as to the manner of Christ's going up, what He is there before God, that we might know the pre-world thought of God, that we should be holy and without blame *before Him* in love. Predestinated unto sonship through Jesus Christ to Himself; it is all before Him so that the Lord's portion is His people; "the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints" @Ephesians 1:18; and it is only as we apprehend Christ going up, and what He is there in His own domain, that we understand what we are, that we should be before God holy and without blame in love.
I have often said that the Christian does not go up alone, nor would he desire it. The more we love the more we desire to have the brethren every inch of the way, so we are quickened together with Christ, raised up together, and made to sit down in the heavenlies in Christ. We are there in love, we would not have it otherwise. If we love the Lord's people we want them all there. And we are made to sit down together there; it is final; we are to sit down in Christ, in full dignity, before God.
Well, I hope I have indicated something of what there is for God in His people.
{48}
CORRESPONDENCE TO CHRIST
@Revelation 19: 7,8; @Revelation 21: 1,2, 9 - 11
Adam gave names to living souls, not to inanimate things. What is living takes form under the eye of Christ and for Him. He confers names, and forms into families; the families receive their names from the Father. So every family in heaven and in earth is named of *the Father*. The last Adam names individuals, in each of whom is expressed some form of life; this life is developed in affection, and these affections link on to the affections of others, and so families are formed: it is fitting that the Father should give the name to the family, but all are in correspondence to Christ.
God has brought Christ in, and in Him is life. He was the Image and glory of God, a standard that God brought in to be our Head, to form our heart and our intelligence. We get a view of the result God has before Him; we must consider it in the abstract and aim at that, and the Holy Spirit moves in us so that we are brought into correspondence to Christ.
In @Ezekiel 40 we have a unique revelation, a wonderful vision of the frame of a city; the abstract thought has to be filled in. As we draw near to the vision we see a man with a measuring line who is to take us through the city, and we see a house. Now a family is a primary thought, but a city is a provisional thought; so here it is not a city but a house with remarkable measurements -- there are courts, and chambers, and altars. The prophet was to show the house to the people that they might have the full thought of God. If they are ashamed of all that they have done, they are to be shown the form of the house, its pattern, the goings out and coming in thereof. But if there is no corresponding exercise to
{49}
this wonderful revelation of God's mind they would *get no more light*.
In @Psalm 45 the heart is inditing a good matter -- it is the *heart*, not the mind. God has formed vessels who appreciate Christ; it is the welling up of a heart that appreciates the King. He pours out what is his thought about the King: "Thou art fairer than the children of men: grace is poured into thy lips: therefore God hath blessed thee for ever"; "Upon thy right hand did stand the queen". @Psalm 45:2,9. The queen! The Spirit of God in the Psalmist brings in a new thought: the queen! Who is the queen? No one can understand the mystery of union with Christ without the feminine side. We are to form part of a company that stand at the right hand of Christ; we shall stand in divine righteousness with Him. "Hearken"! The full divine thought is brought to you. If we listen we are brought to the great fact that we are to form part of the vessel which is to be with Christ as the queen. We must begin to hearken if one is to be clothed in gold of Ophir.
In Hosea they did not continue to hearken, but there is One who said, "Thou openeth mine ear morning by morning". @Isaiah 50:4. The very idea of humanity is that one hearkens; you hear and learn what God has to say. You forsake your father's house: "So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty for he is thy *Lord*; and worship thou him". @Psalm 45:11. "The king's daughter is all glorious within". @Psalm 45:13. Whence all this? You begin in hearkening; as you hearken the Lord brings remarkable things to you; the word enters the heart, and it produces what the word conveys.
Revelation gives the thing in its fulness; it is not something to admire and understand, but what we take into our souls. I fix my mind on what is spiritual. In Revelation the thought suggested by the prophet is "the holy city, new Jerusalem". @Revelation 21:1. Two things mark this city: it is holy and it is new. There is not
{50}
a little tarnish found there after its long service during the millennium employed in the administration of earthly affairs. One might have thought there would be a little weariness or fatigue, some wrinkles might appear, some spots here and there. But no; the prophet says, "I John *saw* the holy city, new Jerusalem" @Revelation 21:2; *it remains new*; the springs of God were there. Israel was in the desert, but the Rock followed them -- a permanent spring. It is very touching that the Rock followed *them*. The cloud, the pillar, and the ark all moved *before*, suggestive of divine forethought. What grace that the Rock *followed them*. The Lord teaches us *how to lead, and how to follow*; if we do not learn how to follow we shall never know how to lead. The false wife says, My husband is gone on a journey; he has taken a bag of money. She does not feel the need of him, she is no widow; there are no springs of God there, it is a desert: she paints herself. The prophet sees her in a desert, he drew near to find her making every effort to appear young, but she was growing old in the wilderness; there are wrinkles and spots on *her*, but not on the heavenly city. The washing of water by the word preserves the assembly now.
Thank God for ministry -- the washing by Christ, that there may not be a wrinkle or spot on us; "holy and new" prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. That word is to our *heart*; that we are to be in correspondence to Christ -- not a wife, but a bride. It is the eternal scene that is before us. After verse 9 the scene changes and it is provisional and administrative. The bride is all glorious *within*. She is attired suitably to the King *inside*; the exercise is, how am I to meet it? When we see Him we shall be like Him. How uneasy I should be to find in myself something out of correspondence to Christ; that cannot be from the divine side, but I should be exercised now as to perfect correspondence with Christ. There was
{51}
a man found at the feast without a wedding garment, he was out of keeping with Christ; it is a great thing to be dressed as a saint; what God does He does for ever, but He works through my exercises.
Paul desired to present every man perfect in Christ; the washing of water by the word is the means. The wedding garment is provided by the King, it is perfectly suited to the occasion. Paul felt God's abhorrence of any inconsistency with Christ. But the queen is all suited to the King's eye. She is all glorious *within*; it is the "within" time and not the time for display; her beauty is *for her Husband*, not for display. At the Lord's supper this comes out; I am there *for* Christ, the assembly is for Christ. Then what I am inside is to come out administratively; now it is the wife, not the bride. It is the wife, the Lamb's wife, who is with Him; this is retrospective, she is in relation to the suffering Lamb. He needs her in the conflict and contrariety -- in the time of suffering.
"All thy garments smell of *myrrh*". @Psalm 45:8. The whole system is marked by the spirit of a suffering Christ. If there is to be correspondence to Christ now, the elements of suffering must be accepted; she knew and entered into His suffering. Paul said, "and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake". @Colossians 1:24. Christ must be expressed here amid suffering. Are we prepared for it? The Corinthians were reigning as kings; that is not suffering! "In all their afflictions he was afflicted" @Isaiah 63:9, and now Paul takes up the affliction for His body's sake, the assembly. He confides in her. He confides in her in an hour of suffering and then she is His companion in the hour of glory. There is correspondence to Christ "within" which prepares for the administration outwardly. The true One comes into evidence. She is the wife before the public nuptials. She has made herself ready.
{52}
God has many wonderful *grants* in His word; it was granted to her that she should be arrayed in fine linen clean and bright, the fine linen being the righteousnesses of the saints. Every bit of righteousness in the young believer or the old bedridden saint is knit together, not one iota missed, not a cup of cold water forgotten, all gathered up and interwoven into the garment for her being arrayed, In Colossians we have the idea and how God brings us to it. "As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him: rooted and built up" @Colossians 2:7; you will not want or need anyone else but Christ. "In him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead" @Colossians 2:9. Do you need anything after that? Nothing can be added, we need nothing more: "In him *dwelleth* ... . bodily". All divine fulness is there, and we are "complete in him". @Colossians 2:10. I need nothing outside of Christ.
In @John 20 Mary Magdalene is sent with a. wonderful message from the Lord to the disciples. She finds them sitting in an upper room intently talking about the Lord. *She has just seen Him*. If a Greek philosopher or Jewish rabbi came in with a great work of tradition or philosophy and offered this book to her and said, Mary, this will aid you in understanding the Lord; we do not deny what you hold, but this will add to what you have, she would answer, I have just been speaking to the Lord and He said, "I ascend unto my Father", @John 20:17, and He sent me with this message. Do you think Mary would accept the aid offered? John says, If all the Lord's doings were written, the world could not contain the books. We have more books than we can read, The world's books may be cleverly written and highly illustrated, but I do not need them. I have *Christ*. He is the Head of all principality and power, and the Christian should he in moral correspondence to Christ in view of entering in.
{53}
FIRST PRINCIPLES
@John 10: 40 - 42
I have read this passage for two reasons -- first because it introduces the baptism of John, and secondly, because it introduces the thought of Christ abiding: I wish to connect these two things. If the Lord abides, it is in connection with first principles. So it is said here that He went beyond Jordan, where John baptised "at the first", and abode there.
Now John baptised elsewhere later. We find a disputation at the second baptising between one of his disciples and a Jew about purification. But we find no such occurrence at the first baptism of John; that introduces to us what may be called first principles. It opens up, indeed, a wide set of circumstances, because it gives the occasion on which the Lord Jesus Christ is owned publicly by the Father. As God looked down and saw the remnant moving from Jerusalem, from all parts of Judea, from the different countrysides to the Jordan, it afforded Him pleasure, as indeed any such movement does at any time or in any place, where men are moved in regard of God. We learn in Luke there is joy in the presence of the angels over one sinner that repents, so that we may be assured, as these repentant Israelites moved from different sections of the country, there was interest in heaven.
But One comes (we are told), among the others, emerging from the obscurity of private life -- not indeed that He was ever obscure from the divine eye, from the Father's eye, but obscure in regard of men. Even John the baptist, His relative after the flesh, had to say, "I knew him not". @John 1:31. So He comes and proposes to be baptised. Think of the Lord of glory -- He, as it is said, by whom all things were made, and who upholds all things by the word of His
{54}
power -- humbly moving to the Jordan in relation to His people, the people of Jehovah, as they moved.
John says, "I have need to be baptised of thee, and comest thou to me?" @Matthew 3:14. One admires the saying. But the Lord says, "Suffer it to be so now; for thus it becometh *us*" @Matthew 3:15 -- not it becometh '*Me*', but "it becometh *us*". He associates Himself with the accomplishment of righteousness -- "It becometh us", He says, "to fulfil *all* righteousness" Think of what that was to God! There was One who had it in His heart that not one iota of righteousness should be left out. He says, "*All* righteousness". Thus John submits and Jesus was baptised.
And coming out of the water He sees the heavens opened, and the Holy Spirit descending in bodily form. Marvellous event! The Holy Spirit in bodily form as of a dove -- and it abode *upon Him*. And the Father's voice says, "Thou art my beloved Son, in whom *I have found* my delight". @Matthew 3:17. That was what took place when John baptised at the *first*. Think of all that lay behind the sending of the Holy Spirit on that occasion, reaching back as it did and covering all men from that moment to Adam. Upon none could the heavens open; to none could those words be uttered, "*This is* my beloved Son"! What lay behind that? The freshness and vigour of a life that from its infancy, from its very first movements, was devoted to God. He was cast upon God from the very outset in dependence. And He grew up; as it is said, "For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant". @Isaiah 53:2. He grew up before God, before Jehovah, as a tender plant. Think of the freshness that met the eye of God in that tender sapling.
The Psalmist speaks of the trees of the Lord being full of sap. Never was it more true than in that holy Babe, and in the boyhood and manhood of Christ. He drew nothing from the soil around; He was as a root out of a dry ground, but there was that
{55}
constant greenness, as one might say, for the eye of God. So the Spirit coming down, and the voice, told of what lay behind for God.
Then the dependence that marked him as a man. Arrived at the age of thirty, about to enter the service of God, according to Luke, He prayed.
Now, all this came out where John baptised at the first. Hence the Holy Spirit would recall us to what is at the beginning: as John says, "That which was from the beginning". @1 John 1:1. That is what the Holy Spirit would engage us with today. If He is to bring about a state of things answering to the mind of God at the end, He will engage us with what was at the beginning. John says to the little children, "If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son and in the Father". @1 John 2:24. The Lord would bring us back to that, He would keep before us that which was from the beginning. Thus the result is apparent: the Lord resorts thither. "He went away again beyond Jordan, into the place where John baptised at the first, and there he *abode*". @John 1:28.
Having said so much about the beginning, I want to say a word about the abiding. John does not present the Lord as a visitor to this world. He says, "The Word became flesh, and *dwelt* among us" @John 1:14; it is not *visited*. You will find throughout this gospel references to the Lord's abiding. But having told us who the Word is ("In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; the same was in the beginning with God; all things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made: in him was life and the life was the light of men" @John 1:1 - 4), he adds, "The Word became flesh". @John 1:14. Think of what is wrapped up in that! He became that in which He could be near to us, that in which He could dwell with us. So he says, "And dwelt among us; and we contemplated
{56}
his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father, *full* of grace and truth". @John 1:14. It was such an one as that.
We can well understand therefore as Paul presented the truth, in affection to the Thessalonians, how they turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God -- the God whom the Son made known -- and to wait for His Son from heaven. It was the same whom the apostles contemplated. An only One with the Father. He was with the Father to be contemplated. I cannot define what that meant, but I can understand the apostles being detained as they companied with the Lord and saw the relation that existed between that Man and God as His Father. Such is the privilege. He went in and out amongst them; He ate and drank with them; He spoke with them; He was weary with His journey; and yet here it states, "We contemplated his glory, the glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth". @John 1:14. That was their privilege.
And thus He was presented; and God in Him was presented in the gospel. Indeed the gospel is not rightly presented unless it is thus first, what God is in Christ, and then what Christ is with God. That is what I apprehend to be the gospel. We must have the latter. We shall never understand the greatness of what we have come into unless we apprehend what Christ is with God. "We contemplated his glory, the glory as of an only-begotten with a father". @John 1:14. "*With*". It is what He is "*with*". Think of beholding that what He was with God. And then to know that One moving in and out with them, dwelling among them. That is what John presents: not a visit; that is not John's point of view, but it is always, "We know that the Son of God is come". Not come and gone, but *come*.
And so He comes to dwell. Hence in chapter 2 we have, "Where abidest thou?" @John 2:38. The Lord did not
{57}
there say, I have no place to lay My head; elsewhere He did. When one sought to follow Him He said, "The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head". @Matthew 8:20. But that statement is not found in John. John is dealing with the Lord Jesus coming into this world as the Son, and He has got an abiding place; and hence it is, "Come and see". @John 2:39. It is a spiritual place. Would that we could know more of that request -- "Come and see".
In John it is always available for us, for John supposes a work of God in the soul. In Luke it is Christ come into manhood to seek men -- He came where the man was, fallen among thieves, in a half dead state; but that is not the abiding place. Neither is an inn an abiding place. With John it is "Come and see". He has an abiding place outside the ordinary reckonings of man. One has to learn where it is. John is entirely on spiritual lines. Not that the others are unspiritual, of course, but John supposes there is a work of God in the soul, and on the ground of that He can invite you to come. So the Lord says, "Come and see" -- a wonderful invitation that may be heard today! The Lord would invite its to come and see where He abides.
John tells us that "they abode with him that day, for it was about the tenth hour". @John 2:39. From that point you get movement on their part. Andrew seeks Simon; Philip seeks Nathanael. So that you have purpose as the abiding is understood. There is movement according to Christ. But the first thing is "Come and see". I would appeal to every one, especially the young -- if you are to know the abiding place, the word is, "Come and see".
The Lord, it is said, went over beyond the Jordan where John baptised at the first; and He abode there. "And many resorted unto him, and said, John did no miracle but all things that John spake
{58}
of this man were true". @John 10:41. That is, the gospel is in connection with the abiding place in this evangelist. "And many resorted unto him". It is not that He seeks them out, but they resort to Him. And then, what comes out is that whatever John said about Him is known to he true. So I would say to every young one here, if you want to be sure about the things that you have heard (and we have had much ministry), the certainty or confirmation is in the abiding place. They say, John did no miracles, but what he said about this man was true. It is an immense thing to be sure of a thing. How are you to be sure? Not by remaining outside at a distance.
One has great sympathy with many of the Lord's people who know nothing about the abiding place. They are clinging to Scripture -- and one is thankful that the scripture has authority -- where would any of us be without that? Scripture truly has authority and should command us, but then there are many of God's dear people who are *not* confirmed. As the apostle said to the Corinthians, "He that stablisheth us with you in Christ, and hath anointed us, is God". @2 Corinthians 1:21. We want establishment, and one has great sympathy and consideration for dear brethren who know nothing about the abiding place. They are wanting in confirmation. Here they say that John did no miracle, but what he said about this Man was true. It is an immense thing to have that in your soul: to be confirmed in everything that you have heard in the way of ministry according to Scripture. It says here, "many believed on him *there*". @John 10:42. It is a point of great importance *where* you believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.
From the point of view of Luke, the Lord comes in and meets the soul, the individual soul; if one goes astray He leaves the ninety and nine and goes after the lost one and places it on both shoulders and takes it home rejoicing -- that is Luke: he found the lost
{59}
one on the mountains. And from that point of view it is no question of where you may be, nor indeed is it in any sense from a geographical point of view, but it is a very great matter as to the moral surroundings where you believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. Many true believers in Christ are at a great disadvantage because they believe on Him in surroundings that have been corrupted with bad teaching. Many of them are dwarfed, as I may say, maimed and underdeveloped, because they have not believed on Him "*there*". You say, Where? In relation to first principles. It says, they believed on Him *there*.
I would say to young people whose parents have walked in the light that you have a great advantage. You have come to believe on the Lord in surroundings that do not admit of evil, of moral evil or spiritual evil. You have a great advantage and you should cultivate it. It is open to you to be like those who believed on Him in this place: they believed on Him where John baptised at the first: and there He abode. It is an immense thing to come to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ where He abides, and where first principles are maintained.
And one would say to the elder ones, how important it is if our young are to be brought up aright and develop into young men and fathers that the elders should maintain first principles. John says, "I write unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning". @1 John 2:13. I would like to be a father. John has a word for the young people specially; he addresses them by themselves. And then young men also are addressed by themselves: and then the fathers. There is a word for each. And so John's word for the elder ones is, "Ye have known him that is from the beginning". @1 John 2:13.
Many elder ones, who have been long on the way, recall reminiscences of the service of certain servants
{60}
which are interesting, but rich as are such reminiscences they do not constitute a father. One cannot but remember that Gehazi, the servant of Elisha, could recall many of Elisha's exploits but to whom is he recounting them? to a wicked king. What link could he have with such a man as that? He had immense opportunity. He could not only have recounted the exploits of Elisha, he knew his faith and devotion. He had evidently come into favour with those in high places through his relations with Elisha, but they did not add to him, nor did it indicate that he was in accord with what was at the beginning. What was at the beginning? Elisha says to one of the kings, I would not look at you were it not for Jehoshaphat. Jehoshaphat feared God.
So with Naaman when he came to Elisha: Elisha did not even come out to see him. These were the features from the beginning that Gehazi had forgotten about. We may grow old and be able to recall the exploits of others, yet be devoid of the qualifications or features of the fathers. What are these? The knowledge of *Him that is from the beginning*. No servant is now from the beginning. Jesus is from the beginning. The knowledge of Him that is from the beginning is what marks a father. As I have already said, what marks the Lord at the outset was that which marks Him still. The Lord remains ever what He was -- "the same yesterday, and today, and for ever" @Hebrews 13:8. The knowledge of Him today is the knowledge of Him as He was at the beginning. It is thus the fathers know Him.
May the knowledge of Him that is from the beginning preserve us in vigour, in vitality, and in freshness, that we may have maturity of judgment, that we may have experience. Those who know the Lord in that way have what young men cannot have -- they have experience. So that is the experience of those who know the Lord according to what He
{61}
was when He was baptised. The soul ever reverts to it as loving Him. He is the Father's Son; it is the same One that the Thessalonians waited for. There is thus carried in the soul that first freshness and energy, and, I was going to say, in our service there is found brevity or pointedness that is edifying.
I think that, as John the baptist is the model servant, Mary of Bethany is the model worshipper. She represents one that knew the Lord. She had a pound of ointment, the intelligent apprehension of Christ rightly measured, and suited to the occasion. That is remarkable intelligence -- spiritual intelligence. The Lord explains it. He says of Mary, 'She hath kept this against the day of my burying. Let her alone'. You may be sure that in the Lord's service, or in the Lord's worship, the worship of God, that which is the outcome of love shall be taken into account and approved according to its value by Him. He was going to die. Those feet that had been anointed in Simon's house were again anointed, but this time because they were going into death. Mary knew that. They were carrying that blessed Man into death. She anointed Him for His burial. It was an action of intelligence, and it was so regarded by the Lord Jesus.
That is all I would say, the Lord abides where first principles are maintained, and He is to be believed on there.
{62}61
LOVE'S CIRCLE
@Numbers 10: 1 - 3; @Mark 3: 31 - 35; @1 John 3: 14 - 24
I had in my mind to speak about the circle of the saints, regarding them as love's circle. The passage in Mark suggests this thought because it speaks of the disciples sitting *around* the Lord, and of His looking round in a circuit upon them. The passage therefore affords the suggestion of a circle and I wish to show how that circle is formed and maintained.
The silver trumpets of @Numbers 10, as we can readily understand, were intended for sounding out the testimony. The Lord having died for us has a right over us. He has the right of redemption. He has another right over us, as He has over all men, as Creator, He has thus creatorial rights. The trumpets were made of silver, suggestive of redemption. Christ having died for us has a right to call us to Himself. He calls us in His rights of love, and no one can rightly refuse to answer. Then the trumpets were made of *one piece*. This suggests that in calling us the Lord intends that oneness should mark us. The Lord had redeemed the people, and nothing can be more touching to the heart than the thought of redemption.
The passover lamb was taken from the flock by the Israelite in Egypt on the tenth day of the first month. It was taken away from its natural surroundings and brought into surroundings of another kind -- brought into the house. It remained in the house, as you will remember, four days. It refers to the Lord Jesus coming out of His own surroundings, coming to earth, being among men for a full period of testing, a period of observation, so that it was apparent that He was without sin. The testimony was there, that He was "holy, harmless, undefiled separate from sinners" @Hebrews 7:26 -- such was Jesus -- and He was
{63}
put to death. The lamb was put to death and the blood sprinkled on the two door posts and on the lintels of the houses of the Israelites; it was for God's eye, for the Israelite inside the house knew by the word of God that that blood sheltered him; and corresponding with that they moved out until they were on the other side of the sea and wholly beyond the reach of harm from the Egyptians. They were safe under the wing of Jehovah and under the leadership of Moses, who would typify the Lord Jesus.
Thus they were a redeemed people, a people who unitedly, under the leadership of Moses, sang the song of deliverance, the song of redemption on the wilderness side of the sea. "The Lord hath triumphed gloriously". @Exodus 15:1. They spent three months in these circumstances in the wilderness, nourished and nursed in the desert by God Himself. The water flowed from the smitten rock for them, and the cloud went before them and guided them, and for about thirteen months they encamped before the "mount of Jehovah". Here God entered into a covenant with them. In proposing to do this He said, "Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians and how I bare you on eagles¬ wings, and brought you unto myself". @Exodus 19:4. As brought to Himself they were for thirteen months before the "mount of Jehovah" where He opened out His heart and mind (at least in type) to them. He would take them into relationship with Himself according to His own terms, for they were terms of love. For thirteen months, as far as one can reckon, the unfolding of the love and mind of God from the holy mount went on, and at the end He says, "Make two silver trumpets", @Numbers 10:2, as if to embody all that had preceded in these instruments of testimony.
As the blast went forth from these trumpets, what lay behind it, to a heart that loved God, was all the love He had shown in redemption, in deliverance, and in the opening of His heart to them. All *that* would
{64}
enter into the blast of these trumpets, and so today the Lord asserts His right over us; oh, what a right! the right that He has as Redeemer, and not only so, but as the One who has disclosed the love of God to us in the death of his Son, He has made it known; He has attested it at the cross; He has brought it into our hearts by the ministry of the Spirit.
God said, "when they shall blow with them, the whole assembly shall gather to thee at the entrance of the tent of *meeting*". I wonder if every one here has responded? The trumpet blast has been going forth, and its intention is to gather *all* the assembly; every redeemed person on the earth is in view in this blast. It is not for a limited few of the assembly. If we sit down to the breaking of bread and some are absent, we miss them; if we love the Lord and if we love them, we feel their absence. The trumpets¬ blast has been heard in our hearts, and we have responded, but we may well say in the language of the Lord in @Luke 17:17, "Where are the nine?" Where are the many of those who owe their all to Christ and who have heard the blast but have not responded? The Lord would have all the assembly. It says, "all the assembly shall gather to thee", @Numbers 10:3, that is, to Christ. Moses represents the Lord in His authority. We must recognise that it is the Lord's supper, and that the Lord necessarily governs the assembly. Indeed, the whole first letter to the Corinthians emphasises that. If I respond, I must recognise the principles that govern the house of God. It is as if the Lord would say to us, Now what about your love? Have you come because you love Me? Yes; well, now I will give you a test. "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me". @John 14:21. We can put that test to the whole assembly. That is the test that is being put forward today, and it is a question whether we are answering to it.
I come now to @Mark 3. Mark in approaching this
{65}
subject brings the natural relationships in. I touch on that because these natural relationships, alas! often operate adversely in regard to the assembly. The silver trumpets refer to you personally: salvation may come into a man's house, as the Lord says, "This day is salvation come to this house". @Luke 19:9. All the house may be saved as a household, but the household is not called into the assembly. The silver trumpets refer to you individually. It is a call; it is a voice; it is the voice of the Lord speaking to *you*. Each one had to isolate himself from all his relationships according to nature. He respects them in their place, but now the Lord wants *you*. "The Lord hath need of thee". Have you answered that call? Search yourself in regard to Christ; recognise that His rights are first. He has prior claim now, even before that of your father or mother. You can never understand the assembly unless you accept that natural relationships have to become secondary to the spiritual. The Lord would jealously guard the assembly from all "household stuff".
You remember how in Nehemiah's day the priest, Eliashib, was related by marriage to Tobiah the Ammonite, an enemy of God, who, as it says, had "no place in the congregation of the Lord for ever". @Deuteronomy 23:3. They had not shown the brotherly spirit and so were shut out. Eliashib was overseer of a chamber of the house of God, and he brought in Tobiah and set him up there. That happened when Nehemiah was away. When Nehemiah returned he cast out all the household stuff and Tobiah with it. All the natural element must be dealt with unmercifully. Mark brings forward this feature of the truth here. We read, "Behold, thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee". @Mark 3:32. There are many like that, who would influence one inside, but the Lord sets us the example, and so the truth of the circle here comes to light. He would take care of that and one would urge that each
{66}
would see to himself that he is taking care that the circle is formed and kept free from all household stuff. It is preserved accordingly a spiritual house, which is added to by the thought of a holy priesthood. It is a spiritual house over which the Son of God presides, and He would have it maintained as a circle of love, a circle marked by spiritual relationship.
Mark says His disciples "sat about him". @Mark 3:34. There is a certain restfulness in their position, and they were occupied with what the Lord was saying. The mother and the brethren would have disturbed all that. We would often break up a spiritual state of things for our own personal ends but the Lord rebuked this. He says, "Who is my mother, or my brethren?" @Mark 3:33. What a question that was; how testing for her who bore Him, as we read in another setting, "Woman, what have I to do with thee?" @John 2:4. How we need that sternness to refuse the natural claims when they interfere with the spiritual order of things, and spoil and rob us of our rich heritage; that is, this circle of love -- that in which divine love has its place. So the Lord, it says, looked round the circuit of them which sat about Him. He is now marking out, by His own action and words, the love circle. He has marked it out for us so that we might know it, and this passage, as it were, marks out for us for all time the circle of love. The Lord Himself marked it out and it is distinguished by certain features. The Lord proceeds to indicate them.
The Lord looked on them as they sat round Him, and said, "Behold my mother and my brethren! For whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother". @Mark 3:34,35. He would, in saying this, show that every affection we have finds an object in this people. Our brotherly affection, our sisterly affection, and our affections for a mother find their answer in that circle. Some of us know this to be true; others do not, and it is to them I
{67}
would speak. There is no affection begotten in you by the Spirit of God that does not find an answer and a sphere of expression in that circle. It is a divinely ordered and appointed circle. If I want a brother I find him there; or a sister, I find her there; or a mother, I find her there. I find her as I can find her nowhere else, in a spiritual way. So that we find a home in that circle. Morally there can be nothing like it on earth -- the circle of those who do the will of God. As the Lord says, "whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother". @Mark 3:35.
Think of what it is for God to have here on earth a circle of people who do His will, it is heaven on earth! "Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven", @Matthew 6:10. That was surely so in Christ. The glory, one would say, shone in the Lord coming down. "The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament showeth his handiwork" @Psalm 19:1. These refer, in a way, to Christ being wholly subservient to the will of God. The earth was lawless, but the Lord Jesus coming here as Man brought the glory here, so that the glory was seen as He moved about according to the will of God. Wonderful spectacle for heaven! that precious pathway of Jesus from the manger to the cross, a Man doing the will of God and now He has brought about a circle of those who have learned from Him, who do the will of God. What a great thing it is to see a man's soul entirely submissive to the will of God, and that there is a circle marked off by the Lord, in which affections may be fully satisfied.
So in the passage in @1 John 3:14, the apostle calls attention to a means whereby we may know that we have passed from death unto life. It says, "We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren". John makes much of that. The Lord had indicated 'the brethren' in looking round, had marked them off. John develops that, and enlarges
{68}
on love. I may confess to you in speaking of love, dear brethren, that I feel extremely incapable. There is nothing I know less of. I look at this epistle, I have read it many times, but the more I look at it the more wonderful it is, and one has to admit that one can hardly speak of love. In 1 Corinthians the apostle has to speak of it in the abstract -- a very humiliating thing. They were a people among whom he had laboured for eighteen months, and he had exhibited in his manner divine love before their eyes, and yet they were devoid of it. He could not speak of it as among them, and so one has to admit that one is very weak in regard of love; but here it is, "We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren". @1 John 3:14.
If I meet a man who does the will of God I must love him, I must not allow anything against that person, I must regard him in the light of the will of God. He represents a moral triumph; the Lord has brought that result to pass in him. It is well for us to look at things as they are. I see a man who was lawless but now is doing the will of God. He moves about subject to the will of God. It is a great moral triumph.
The silver trumpets¬ blast brought the assembly to Moses. It was a lovely scene, that vast assembly drawing near to the door of the tabernacle, to Moses; as they heard those silver trumpets sounding the whole assembly moved. What would it be today if all the saints on earth came together on the first day of the week to break bread! That can never be, I quite admit, but the day is near when they shall all come. "The Lord himself, with an assembling shout ... shall descend from heaven". @1 Thessalonians 4:16. It is a similar thought to the silver trumpets. He has a right to gather the people, "with archangel's voice and with trump of God and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then we the living who remain, shall be caught up
{69}
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and thus we shall he always with the Lord". @1 Thessalonians 4:16,17.
We shall be gathered together. We can never hope now for *all* the assembly to come together on the first day of the week, but what we may look for are individuals who love the Lord's coming. We may miss many. It is an immense thing to see one -- one who does the will of God. It is a moral triumph, as I said. If you see any one doing that, mark him off and love him, you are obliged to do so; it says, "he that hateth his brother abideth in death" @1 John 3:14 -- a terrible word, as if hatred is moral darkness, and death. We were all disobedient, "serving divers lusts and pleasures ... hateful and hating one another". @Titus 3:3. You see how things become intensified, "hateful and hating one another". It is not to he wondered at, that the spirit of hatred is abroad in the world, because we are hateful naturally. "He that hateth his brother abideth in death" @1 John 3:14; it is really moral death, whereas the circle of love is outside all that.
It is wonderful what God has brought about in the very midst of darkness. The late war was the expression of the pagan state of things, disobedient and hateful, and in the midst of all that God has brought about a circle outside of it, in which love is. It is a wonderful circle, it is like the tabernacle of old, and made of such material as will survive wilderness conditions. In those who do the will of God are all the elements of the tabernacle, the spirit of rigid exclusion of evil, on the one hand, and appreciation and preservation of good on the other. There is a circle maintained where love is free. One of the evidences of it is that I love the brethren. I have passed out of the state of death and hatred into an atmosphere of love. I can say without any doubt, I have passed from death into life, for I love the brethren.
{70}
INTELLIGENCE
@Romans 12: 1; @Ephesians 1: 15 - 19
It will be observed by those who read the Scriptures that the Holy Spirit emphasises the importance of spiritual intelligence throughout; indeed it is one of the great essentials of believers to be spiritually intelligent. The prophet Hosea (chapter 4: 6) speaks about God's people being destroyed "for lack of knowledge". @Hosea 4:6. The same prophet having spoken of the resurrection of the saints, says, "*Then* shall we know", @Hosea 6:3. In that remark one is reminded of John's epistle, which treats in a large measure of this subject, in which he says, "We know that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding". @1 John 5:20. The Son of God has abolished death. Indeed, that by which He was marked off here as the Son of God was the resurrection of the dead, and He has given to us an understanding "that we should know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life". @1 John 5:20. One might say that there is there the combination of all knowledge, in so far as knowledge can be compassed by a finite being -- the knowledge of the true God in a Man, and the knowledge of eternal life in a Man. You recall how in that passage in Hosea the prophet says, "*Then* shall we know". @Hosea 6:3. As raised up we see it. The saints come into the apprehension of the resurrection, for we are raised by faith. We are not literally raised, we are raised "*through the faith* of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead", @Colossians 2:12. As risen, as in the light, by faith, of the resurrection, we begin to acquire the knowledge. "*Then* shall we know; we shall follow on to know the *Lord*", @Hosea 6:3.
If one speaks of the gospels, in them we have the presentation of knowledge, or rather we have everything
{71}
presented from the divine point of view. It is true that "we know in part", @1 Corinthians 13:9, but there *is* such a thing as seeing the parts put together. One thing leads to another, until we see all as one great whole; that is what an understanding of the gospels leads to. "We shall follow on to know". @Hosea 6:3. As we understand the epistles, as we learn "in part", we come to the gospels to see the *whole*.
Romans is the initial epistle, and Ephesians presents to us the full divine thought, in so far as we may apprehend the spirit of wisdom and revelation -- not the spirit of wisdom and *information*, but the spirit of wisdom and *revelation*. We have revelation in the gospels, and in order to apprehend revelation we must have "the spirit of revelation", @Ephesians 1:17, and that can only be received from God. The apostle could not impart it, although he had the knowledge and the doctrine. He could only *pray* for the spirit of wisdom and revelation
In turning to the gospels, one has in mind what John refers to as knowing the true God and eternal life, both things presented within the compass of a Man. God had said through the prophet Jeremiah (chapter 31:22) that He would create a new thing on the earth: "A woman shall compass a man". @Jeremiah 31:22. I have no doubt that the thought of a woman in Scripture is the subjective side, the side of desire, the side of need, and of affection. We read of seven women laying hold of a man; @Isaiah 4:1. They shall be called by his name -- and then God said, I will create a new thing on the earth, that a woman shall compass a man, and I have no doubt that the longings of the apostle in Colossians, Ephesians and Philippians have that in view, that the saints might compass Christ -- not indeed personally, but in wonderful consideration for us God has come within the compass of a Man. In the Old Testament, at Sinai, God thundered; He impressed the people with His majesty and His
{72}
dignity. Even Moses said that he feared. Only in that way could God come within their range. He began in calling Moses back up to the mount to call his attention to a pattern, and the first thing that is mentioned is the ark -- something that could be carried. What is this? Oh, beloved, it is God coming near to us, that He may be, as it were, *compassed* according to the spirit of intelligence which He gives us; in other words, that we might *know* Him. So with all the parts of the tabernacle, bound together as they were in wisdom so that there should be one tabernacle. I think that in that one tabernacle, the pattern of which was given to Moses, you have God coming near to the people. What grace is in that! True enough the cloud ascended up, maintaining the proof of Him who was there -- God Himself, the everlasting God. Moses, knowing it, said, "Thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations". @Psalm 90:1. "From eternity to eternity thou art God". @Psalm 90:2. But then God came in grace within the range of an enclosure, one hundred cubits by fifty cubits -- we might say, within the range of an enclosure of ten cubits, for that was the size of the holiest. God was there and He was known there.
Well, I refer to that, so that we might have the thought of how God would draw near, within our range, so that we might *know* Him. "Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip?" @John 14:9. What was the tabernacle but a type of that? God Himself come down within the range of that enclosure so as to be *known* by His creature. God Himself was there. So in Exodus the tabernacle is said to be according to the pattern, everything made precisely as required. Then God Himself comes in -- it was no less than the divine presence. In the next book He speaks to Moses out of the tabernacle, and says, as it were, Any one who wants to come to Me, this is how you are to come. I am here to be
{73}
apprehended, I am here to be known, I am here to be loved -- already having taken care that *He* had drawn near to *them*, He had approached *them*, having known them and loving them. Moses said, "Yea, he *loved* the people". @Deuteronomy 33:3. And His love would lead Him to come so near, to come within their range, to come within the very thing their hands had made! What wonderful grace! That they might know Him. As was said later of Zion, "God is known in her palaces". @Psalm 48:3. He is known there "for a refuge", @Psalm 48:3.
In turning to the gospels, we see they present that very thing; God had come here in a Man, and in Him they contemplated the complete Pattern. To understand the gospels, it is in the intelligence of the epistles. You know "in part" through the epistles, but in the gospels you are brought to see the whole scheme of divine wisdom presented in a Man. Ephesians speaks of God abounding to us in all wisdom and intelligence, so the first great feature in the gospel is the kingdom. One has remarked that God comes in *kingdomwise* in order to be known *housewise*. The house comes last, John comes last.
Matthew is the kingdom -- hence the lovers of Christ, beneficiaries of redemption, take up the Gospel of Matthew, and the first word you find is "Book". Now books are of divine origin. I know that we are living in an age of books -- of corrupt books, books which when the gospel is understood should be consigned, as they were at Ephesus, to the flames. All should read the standard Book, the divine Book. Many may read this, comment on it, and preach from it, but unless they have the Holy Spirit they cannot understand it. "None of the wicked shall understand", @Daniel 12:10. The *wise* understand, as Hosea says again, "Who is wise, and he shall understand these things?" @Hosea 14: 9. And as Daniel says, "I Daniel understood by books", @Daniel 9:2. You see how a wise man profits by
{74}
books. The Lord has said in the heading of the roll -- in the volume of the book -- possibly the most profound of all books is *that one*. When it was written I do not know, but the very heading of it indicates that there was a Man coming to do the will of God. Any book that has not got that as its basis is worthless. A book that is devoid of that is worthless, fit only for the flames. In that book it was written of Christ -- in fact every book should be about Christ -- "In the volume of the book it is written of me" @Hebrews 10:7. "Lo, I come to do thy will". @Hebrews 10:9. That was what was in that book. If we could read that book we should find much. No doubt it has all come out in the gospel, for that is the great thesis of all books. So Matthew opens with "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham". @Matthew 1:1. What do we find here? We find power in the King, we are in the presence of the King. It is not "Son of Abraham, Son of David", but "Son of David, son of Abraham". He shall set up here a kingdom which cannot be moved. Daniel says, "I saw a stone cut out without hands, and it smote the image ... the gold, and the silver, and the brass, and the iron, so that in those days the God of heaven shall set up a kingdom of which there shall be no end". Before you can have the kingdom you must have the King, and "Jesus Christ, the Son of David", presents to us *the King*. Thus, as I said, the first great feature of intelligence is the knowledge of the kingdom.
In the epistle to the Romans you learn it as it benefits *me* but in Matthew I see it in relation to the whole scheme. I see it as laid down in that book in the volume of which it is written, "Lo I come to do thy will, O God". @Hebrews 10:9. I do urge on young people to consider the knowledge of the kingdom. It is not only deliverance and power, it is an order of things. It affords an assurance of divine authority. One of the greatest and most essential elements at the present
{75}
time is the assurance of divine authority, divine power, divine leadership and divine order -- these are the things among others that the kingdom presents to us.
Now if you have the establishment of the kingdom, the next thing is the preaching. Things are to be known by preaching, so that the preacher says, "I the preacher was king in Jerusalem". @Ecclesiastes 1:12. Not, 'I the king was preacher', but "I the preacher was king". In other words, the King subserves the preaching, and the Preacher is supported by the kingdom. God is preached, the love of God is preached, and the kingdom is preached. And hence, if we have the kingdom, the next thing is preaching. Mark is not a *book* -- it begins thus, "Beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, Son of God". @Mark 1:1. The kingdom is the great background and support of the gospel.
Then next we have Luke -- there is divine order in the Bible -- in Luke, the thought is sympathy; the knowledge of God, drawn near in the sympathies of a Man. The eunuch had been reading about the Lord as a Man, he had been reading about a Man growing up. "He shall grow up before him as a tender plant". @Isaiah 53:2. That should appeal to every young Christian, as to whether you are growing up before men in the world for *their* eyes, or before *God*. Jesus was cast upon God from the very outset of His being; He grew up, it says, as a tender plant before God. There the prophet outlines the Manhood of Jesus. Nothing indeed appeals to one more than the Manhood of Jesus. Luke, to preach Jesus, had to preach His Manhood -- God on the earth in a Babe, *God* was there. Who could deny it? So as to be near, so as to be compassed by us, He has drawn near in such meekness, the Man Christ Jesus.
One often refers to Moses, "the man Moses", one of the finest touches in regard to Moses. Aaron and Miriam had rebelled against the man Moses, the
{76}
meekest of all the earth -- a forecast of Christ. If any one should have known Moses it was Miriam; she had watched him in the river; she knew his beginning. And so, beloved, if we read the gospel of Luke, we have the beginnings of this "tender plant". There was no room for Him in the inn. It is not that there was hostility; exactly it was a consequence, a condition. He was born in the manger. The shepherds find Him in the manger. Matthew presents the dignity of Christ but Luke presents the lowliness and grace of Christ -- coming so low, coming in such meekness. We have got to get it at the beginnings, the Man Christ Jesus. Knowing the Man, you get His sympathies. You see how in @Luke 7 the woman comes in and washes His feet. She began down low at His feet -- that carried to her glad tidings. Wonderful feet! She washed those feet, the feet of Jesus, and then later He is anointed. You see the Lord had come within her range. He has come within our range so as to be *known*, so as to be *loved*.
Then the gospel of John is the final and great feature of divine and spiritual intelligence, because it presents the Son as in the bosom of the Father. In that position He is contemplated. It is not now a question of what He does for me, it is a question of what He *is*, "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father". @John 1:14. The spiritual intelligence involved in that means that I see that God has a *family*; and having a family He has got a house; and having a house and a family, He lives in his house, and is to be known there. The first disciples that were drawn to Christ in John inquired, "Where abidest thou?" @John 1:38. Why should they say that? Why should they ask such a question? Because it suggests the point of view of the gospel. Could anything be more precious, beloved brethren, than to know where He dwells, and to be invited to "Come and see"? @John 1:39. And then, as seeing it,
{77}
to be free and happy there? "They abode with him that day. It was about the tenth hour". @John 1:39. What a time they had! I refer to it because it suggests to us what the spiritual intelligence in John's gospel involves for us.
Let us go back for a moment to the beginning. One would like to say a word for beginners. We have all had to begin -- perhaps most of us have not got on very far. You will find, however, that the epistles to the Colossians, the Ephesians and the Philippians all speak of "knowledge" and the apostle prays that the saints may have knowledge in all things. Now John, in writing to the little children, says, "This is the last hour". @1 John 2:18. He does not occupy them with a long period of time, he brings things within their range. He says, "This is the last hour, and there are many antichrists". @1 John 2:18. Young people are particularly exposed to antichrists, those who are against Christ, whatever they may profess. And so the apostle warns the little ones about it. He says, We know it is the last hour, because there are many of them, as if Satan threatened to bring forward all his forces. There are certain features of Antichrist, and the apostle says, "Ye have heard that antichrist comes", @1 John 2:18, and then he tells them how they are to know him. The Antichrist denies Christianity, he denies the Father and the Son. And then he says, Ye do not need that any one teach you; for "ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things". @1 John 2:20. "You have the knowledge of all things, and the same unction teaches you ... and is true". @1 John 2:27. So you see how God has provided for you in the Spirit.
Romans shows in the passage I have read that the teaching of the gospel brings about intelligence in regard to our bodies. He says, "I beseech you ... by the compassion of God to present your bodies a living sacrifice ... which is your intelligent service" @Romans 12:1 -- that is, it is in the light of what you have learnt of God.
{78}
It is but intelligence to use what is always available and that is your body, and to present it a living sacrifice.
Now one has to go back in the epistle to see how it can be *living*. It says, "If Christ be in you" -- a wonderful suggestion -- Christ in a believer, in a Gentile (for those he was writing to at Rome were Gentiles). "If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin but the Spirit is life because of righteousness". @Romans 8:10. The Lord would only be in your body as a body of righteousness. Chapter 6 shows that the members are to be presented instruments of righteousness. "Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will" @Hebrews 10:7. If that is to be reflected in you and me, it must be in bodies controlled by righteousness, controlled by the Spirit, vessels, as it were, in which Christ is expressed here. What a great triumph! How wonderful! Think of Christ truly reflected in believers doing the will of God. "That ye might prove what is that good, acceptable and perfect will of God". @Romans 12:2. That is to say, the proposal of Christ becoming Man is effective in us, in our bodies. We present them to God a living sacrifice, in them we prove "what is that good, acceptable and perfect will of God.". @Romans 12:2.
Well, I cannot say much more, but that is the beginning of Christian movement. It works out in the way I hold my body. We all have our bodies, and it is an immense thing, as knowing our propensities, to see how God supplies means of putting them to death. So that the Spirit is life in us in view of righteousness. The great end is in Ephesians Paul says, Having heard of your faith and love, I pray that God will "give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him ... that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of ... *his* inheritance in the saints". @Ephesians 1:18. We begin to look at things from God's side. We think of *His*
{79}
calling, *His* inheritance, and the exceeding greatness of His power that "he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead" @Ephesians 1:20 -- not simply that power that works in me for my deliverance, but the exceeding *greatness* of it, for it goes on, "He set him down at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come and hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body". @Ephesians 1:20 - 22.
So you see how intelligence begins by presenting our bodies to God, and culminates in the knowledge of God in that He has placed Christ Head over all things to the assembly, which is *His body*, the fulness of Him who fills all in all. Think of being part of *that*! to learn thus how we are to he the complement of Christ in the aggregation in the future! He is Head over all things to the church which is His body, the fulness of Him that filleth all in all.
How wonderful is the full effect of the full knowledge of God, as it is apprehended by brethren who have the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of God!
{80}
DAYS
@Acts 1: 1 - 4; @Leviticus 23: 9 -17
My exercise in regard of this meeting has been that something might come before its that would lead to a better, and more intelligent, and more spiritual use of our days. I believe that the Lord is about to come, and one is particularly concerned that the time remaining may not be, in any one of us, misspent. So I would call attention to the use of days -- days being allotted periods, each day calling for its own work.
We have, I believe, in the expression "Ancient of days", @Daniel 7:9, as applied to the Lord Jesus Christ, a suggestion as to the perfect way in which His days were used and filled up. Moses, by the Spirit of God, alludes to *years*, giving them a limit, but it is not really the number of years, but the number of days that one spends here which are our concern. The expression, "The ancient of days" would, I apprehend, refer to how the Lord used His. We have in the Old Testament references in regard of days that would indicate that God not only takes account of how years in general are spent, but how days are spent. According to Scripture there is no mourning at the burial of Abraham, for he was a man who is said to have died in a good old age, "old and full of days". @Genesis 25:8. These days were all taken account of by God. And so with Isaac and others, particularly Job, it is said that they were old at their death and full of days. Their lives were not a blank, they yielded something for God daily. In Jacob, as one marked by failure, we have the acknowledgement that the days of the years of his life were not as the days of the years of his father, they were few and they were evil. A humble admission which, alas, many, if not all of us, would be obliged to fully confirm as to ourselves, but then,
{81}
be it so, Jacob made a good finish, and God accepted the finish. He will accept the beginning, as He did when Jacob anointed the pillar, for He said that He would be with him; and God accepted his finish, even although the most part of his life was spent, as he said, evilly.
In the prayer of Moses, the man of God, and it is well to listen to the prayers of a man of God, he says, "So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom" @Psalm 90:12. So with a wise heart we see that every day is precious and we use that day rightly, no part of it is to be lost, but we are to be here "redeeming the time". @Ephesians 5:16. The Lord would impress upon us to face things now. Scripture speaks of "from this day forward". When light comes into the soul the Lord would say, Thou shalt see greater things henceforward, that is, from now on thou shalt see; for day after day involves increased light. "The path of the just shineth more and more", it says, "unto a perfect day". @Proverbs 4:18. What a prospect there is, what an incentive to resolve to use up our days rightly. If rightly used they will issue in something for God every day, and that something accumulates until at the end there is something of value that God knows how to measure.
In @Acts 1 we see how days in this dispensation began; they began with the daily experience of Christ risen. I want you to consider that for a moment. Forty days spent one after another with Christ risen from the dead. Think of the experience they had, beginning with the first day of the week after He rose! Now I would ask you to take note of that, that this dispensation began with the daily experience of Christ risen. In regard of the saints of old, you will remember how God said, "This month shall be unto you a beginning of months" @Exodus 12:2. Whatever month it may have been on the calendar of those days, in the civil year, as we speak, it was the *first*
{82}
month to them. So today each believer knows that whatever month in the civil year he comes to know God in Christ, that that is his first month. Presently he will give it a name, and so in Deuteronomy it is the month Abib, indicating that he has come to a spiritual beginning, he gives it a name. The more you refer to your beginning with God the more definite the first day will become in your mind, and in your heart, you will observe it in relation to God.
So the passover was to be observed in the month Abib on the fifteenth day of that month. They were to take account of the first day of that month, and on the tenth day a lamb for a house was taken from the flock, and for four days abode in the house of each Israelite. Every inmate of the house would live, day by day, for four days with the innocent victim. These are the days in which spiritual history is made. If I do not make spiritual history today, a day is lost and it never occurs again. A lost day is never made up -- in the history of time it has gone.
Now after the passover, having come into the land they were to offer a sheaf of firstfruits to God. It refers, beloved, to Christ presented in His own personal perfection to God, as risen from the dead. Many of us know that Christ has been delivered for our offences and raised again for our justification, but this refers to the saints so identified with Christ *risen*; see @Leviticus 23. Wonderful thought! He is before God, presented and waved there, as if to occupy the divine eye. From that day forward they begin to count for fifty days. I see the saints forming the assembly beginning as to their daily experience with Christ risen from the dead. How many of us have spent one day with Christ risen? Romans is not risen with Christ. The Colossian saints are addressed as "risen with Christ by the faith of the operation of God, who raised him from the dead". @Colossians 2:12. You begin with that. One feels that that truth has but little
{83}
place in our experience, yet *we are risen with Christ*. The beloved apostle said that his great exercise was "to know him and the power of his resurrection". @Philippians 3:10. And he said further, "if by any means I may attain unto the resurrection of the dead". @Philippians 3:11. What kind of days, think you, were thus spent? He said also "we henceforth know no one according to flesh", and then he adds, "if even we have known Christ according to the flesh, yet now ye know him thus no longer". @2 Corinthians 5:16. Think of that! I know no one after the flesh, not even Christ. But to know Him as He is, and where He is, that is the experience essential to our being fitted for what is coming.
And so they began to count the first day after this sheaf of firstfruits was presented to Jehovah. What a day it was, beloved, that first day! How much spiritual history entered into that day! I do not suppose that any of them failed to mark the fortieth day, which Luke calls "*That day* in the which he was taken up". @Acts 1:2. What a day that was to them. For the first day was full of spiritual history -- not public history, *spiritual* history. The affairs of Jerusalem doubtless went on as before; men bought and sold, as they always did, on that first day of the week in the city of Jerusalem. The occurrence of a few days before was a matter of past history, probably what they would call *legal* history, *criminal* history. There can be no doubt that in the criminal annals at Jerusalem it was recorded that a certain man was crucified on that day. And things went on as before, the matter had passed away. But, beloved, in the circle of those who knew Christ and loved Christ, that day was full of spiritual history, history that shall remain when the annals of this world are for ever gone. The Lord was up early on that day and a certain woman was up early. They were starting the day well. In the Old Testament we read of persons who undertook to do great things rising early to do
{84}
them. Abraham rose up early to go to Mount Moriah with Isaac. God Himself said that He rose early to send the prophets.
So here the Lord came out of His tomb early like the hind of the morning, for He was to be seen by His loved ones "skipping upon the hills" on that day; @Song of Songs 3:2. No more in the limitations of the grave into which He had been. He is now outside of all these limitations and He is beginning the day in wonderful activity. He sees one and another, He sees them collectively and speaks to them. That was His day. His heart was free now, He had His own with Him clear of death and the enemy's power, He had been heard "from the horns of the unicorn". @Psalm 22:21. What a day it was for Him! What a day for His own! I dwell on the first day, we can easily add in all the others, for the first gives the initial idea. It was full of experience; indelible impressions were being stamped on those that were to form the assembly. So it is as we live in the light of a risen Christ, as we walk with Him, as we talk with Him, as we know Him where He is, risen, we receive these same impressions. It is as receiving these impressions that we become fitted for Him, so that we should be prepared for the great day that is now so near.
I was noticing today in Matthew that expression, "they that were *ready* went in with him". @Matthew 25:10. How many of us are ready? This is a real thing, beloved, that the Lord would put before us. How am I to be ready to be with Him, suitable to Him, unless I know beforehand what is becoming for that scene? Unless I know by companionship with Christ as He is risen, knowing that I am risen with Him by faith, how shall I be ready, how shall I enter? In Colossians we have the thought of entrance -- not exactly possession of the land -- but entrance, and the education of our souls is in view of association with Christ,
{85}
in view of preparation for the event that is now so near. "Giving thanks to the Father, who has made us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light". @Colossians 1:12. The Father is operating to that end, that we should be meet for sharing the portion of the saints in light. The point is to bring us into correspondence with Him as risen. So we are said to be circumcised with Him in His circumcision by "the putting off of the body of the flesh ... buried with him in baptism, in which ye have also been raised with him through faith of the working of God, who raised him from among the dead". @Romans 6:4. Then, too, we are quickened with Him, the quickening is a real thing, a very present reality and it is by virtue of it that one can fill up his days in association with Christ risen. You will remember how it is said of Elisha that he walked and talked with Elijah after they had crossed the Jordan -- that is the experience that we want, beloved.
Now at the end of fifty days they were to bring out of their dwellings two wave loaves: they had presented the sheaf, but now they were to bring out of their dwellings two wave loaves and present them to God as a *new* meat offering. It refers to the experience one has gained by companionship with Christ risen; it is said in @Acts 1:3, "He was seen of them during forty days".
I see two people entering their house; the Lord had walked with them a considerable distance on the first day, He had spoken to them on the way, He had caused their hearts to burn. That is a fine experience if Christ causes your heart to burn. "Did not our heart burn within us as he talked with us by the way?" @Luke 24:32.
It was a remarkable experience, although they did not yet know Him. No ordinary traveller, however dignified or versatile, could have caused their hearts to burn in talking with them, but Jesus did. And then they walked along and they invited Him into the house, into the ordinary meal room -- doubtless a
{86}
lowly one -- and the Lord went in and sat down as the House-father, and He gave thanks. What an experience for one's house! What an experience for the head of the house to see the Lord of glory, now risen, performing the function of the House-father, for that is what He did. That was an experience, beloved, well fitted to qualify the head of that house to behave becomingly ever after at a family meal. Indeed, there would be an indelible impression produced on that occasion in that household, whoever may have been there. One of the most important things is to know how to be in one's house according to God, for if I am to be there according to God I have to learn how to be there with Christ, I must learn everything from Christ.
They returned to Jerusalem, sixty furlongs off; their impressions must have deepened with every step, until they arrived at the company and related what had happened to them in the way, and how He was made known to them in the breaking of bread. And while they yet spake "Jesus himself stood in their midst". @Luke 24:36. What an experience! Not now for them alone, but for them all. And then the Lord proceeds, in His own gracious way, according to Luke's account, to put them at ease in His presence. "It is I myself", He said @Luke 24: 39, and He showed to them His hands and His feet, and He eats before them. What an impression that must have produced on them ever afterwards. I can understand one of these brethren on a later occasion, when someone may have been perturbed for some cause, how he would act like Jesus quietening his or her spirit, how he would convey to them that he was touched with the feelings of the perturbed one. And there are many other things to be learnt, as apprehending Him risen, in our daily experience.
As John presents it, we see the doors closed on that same day, and someone comes in without the doors
{87}
being opened. What an event! What a wonderful thing it is, Jesus Himself stood in the midst and says to them, Peace be unto you. They would never forget that. Yet it is not far away from us, beloved, as we apprehend Christ risen and touch Him and see Him spiritually. We may know something of these experiences, and I verily believe that these are the very experiences that will cause the saints to be prepared for the presentation; so that when the time arrives we may not feel strange or awkward or uncouth in the presence of the Lord. "The marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready". @Revelation 19:7. She knew Him before, and she has made herself ready. She has had that place all along, and when the time comes she is equal for it, "she hath made herself ready".
Well, the fortieth day arrives, and Luke says, "That is the day in the which he was received up". @Acts 1:3. What a memorable day that was for them! The Holy Spirit stops to give us an account of it later on in the chapter, and then following upon that we have the ten days. He was received up from Olivet, and from Olivet to Jerusalem was a sabbath day's journey. How they would, in every step that they trod on the way, down into the valley across the ravine arid up into the city, how they would be impressed with what they had seen. They saw *Him go up*! Well, now, they come to the city and go to the upper room. Luke shows us the disciples going into the temple; that is the grace of God. God would, as it were, make such a wonderful contribution of grace to the temple, so as to attract the people. Luke does not tell us that in writing to Theophilus the second time, but says, "They went into the upper room", @Acts 1:13, because he is on the line of preparing us for the assembly. The two wave-loaves suggest that. Out of that habitation issued forth, as we may say, the two wave-loaves. They bring out of their dwellings two wave-loaves
{88}
baken with leaven. Sin was rendered inactive in them, they were in correspondence with Christ and they were presented to God. That was the great result of these fifty days with Christ. Peter and James and John, the hundred and twenty, every one of them was distinguished, each of them had a name, and that name indicated some particular feature of Christ -- they brought out of their habitation two wave-loaves and presented them to God. God will have the bread, because the bread refers to the humanity of Christ. One may give much, one may sacrifice much, but God will have the bread of His offerings; He insists on that, whatever I sacrifice I must see to it that my motive is pure.
Well, dear brethren, the days are short, and the Lord would put it upon us that in every one of us in association with Christ, there should be a reproduction of Christ, so that there should be something for God and for Christ at the end. That is what I had in view for all of us to teach us to number our days. Job said that his days were swifter than a weaver's shuttle, What a lot of days were lost -- broken threads. What kind of web is produced of broken threads? For when you begin to weave knowing what you are putting in with every move of the shuttle, neither the warp nor the woof is to have a thread of leprosy. It is a remarkable thing that the type contemplates leprosy in the warp and not in the woof and in the woof and not in the warp. How can that be? I apprehend that if I lay down right principles in my days, in the light of Christ risen I see what becomes me to weave, the whole thing is laid down rightly, the weaving is in my own hands, and the woof and the warp must be the same. They must both be free of leprosy. And so that corresponds with the loaves, they were baken with leaven, but the leaven was rendered inactive, sin was not there. The principle of the weaving is most important, it is
{89}
a very practical thing, as to what kind of woof one is putting in. God calls for self-judgment every moment of the day, and to take up one's cross daily. The apostle could say, "I protest by your rejoicing, I die daily" @1 Corinthians 15:31 -- "Christ the firstfruits afterward, they that are Christ's at his coming". @1 Corinthians 15:23. There is the afterward, but in the meanwhile the experiences come in between Christ the firstfruits and those that are Christ's at His coming. There is experience day by day. How did He die? He died in the power of life; one cannot die otherwise according to God. The dying of Jesus is a wonderful thing. Jesus did not die from exhaustion, He died in the power of life, He died in life. So Paul would be bearing about in his body the dying of Jesus. And that is all the outcome of daily experience with Christ risen.
{90}
READINGS IN JOHN'S FIRST EPISTLE
@1 JOHN 1; @1 JOHN 2: 1,2
In suggesting John's epistle, it was thought that we might see something of life as it works out in the family of God, and of what that life is as first seen in Christ. It says, "The eternal life which was with the Father" @1 John 1:2; this life was *with* the father. It does not refer to what was prior to incarnation, but what is seen in the Lord on earth. "Father" supposes a family. In John's gospel it says, "As many as received him, to them gave he the right to be children of God ... who have been born, not of blood nor of flesh's will nor of man's will, but of God", @John 1:12, 13. That, stated at the outset, indicates what John had in view, and the apostle, in speaking here of the life as with the Father, would impress upon us the kind of life that is to mark the *family*. Think of this life, as with the Father and yet come within the range of the apostles! John says, "Which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled" @1 John 1:1; then, "And the life has been manifested, and we have seen, and bear witness, and report to you the eternal life, which was with the Father, and has been manifested to us". @1 John 1:2. It was with the Father, but manifested, so as to be reported of by competent witnesses; thus those who have part in it may see the nature of it.
I think "that which was from the *beginning*" @1 John 1:1 is emphasised to preserve the life from human admixture. Everything is to be tested by that which was from the beginning. The family is what the saints are here as loving Christ. Two things are stated of it by John: those who form it *receive Christ*, and they are *called* children of God: "See what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the children of God", @1 John 3:1. The life is said to be
{91}
manifested; it came within the range of competent witnesses. In his gospel John uses the expression: "an only-begotten with a father" @John 1:14; it is a figure brought in to emphasise the place the Lord had. All would understand the peculiar place; an only one would have with a father.
This eternal life takes concrete form in the Son. The expression here is not like @John 1:1: "In the beginning was the *Word*", but "*That* which was from the beginning", namely, eternal life. It is the *thing* he is dealing with, as taking perfect form in Christ; in One seen with their eyes, contemplated, and handled with their hands -- to show how real it was. It was not a passing thing but abiding. It was life brought within the range of men, manifested in everyday circumstances. There is progress in the way the apostles apprehended it. First heard, then seen, then contemplated, then handled, "concerning the word of life". @1 John 1:1. The dignity of the Lord's *Person* is guarded elsewhere, but what the Holy Spirit would impress upon us here is the life. In Christ it was brought within the range of men in the most practical way.
"The word of life" @1 John 1:1 would be the thing in expression, and it was verified in the most complete way. It is reported here by the apostle John, who had an unique place in the testimony. He brings it near to the saints, so that the life may be known in its practical bearing amongst us. As an example of *handling* it, John certainly was in close and intimate physical relation with Christ at the last Supper. His word here is that he handled life. He says, "We have seen, and bear witness, and report to you". @1 John 1:2. Light comes to us by way of report. After the Lord rose from the dead, He said, "Handle me and see" @Luke 24 39. He was a real Man after, as before His death. But the testimony here refers to what the apostles saw from the beginning. In @John 15:27, where the witness of the Spirit comes in, the Lord said,
{92}
"Ye too hear witness, because ye are with me from the beginning". They had been with the Lord for that intent. John shows us in this epistle the great features of that life which was "from the *beginning*", and which was "with the Father". @1 John 1:2.
What a depth of meaning this passage gives to the truth of the incarnation of Christ; He manifested to the apostles a life which was with the Father. The truth of incarnation is presented in a very condensed way by John. In his gospel "The Word became flesh, and dwelt amongst us", @John 1:14 but here he is going to address the children, and to speak to them of life. There is consideration for us: "My children, these things I write to you". @1 John 2:1. The report is brought to us by one who was with the Lord, whom "Jesus loved". Things have to be broken up for the children; it is not on the wide platform of the gospel, which has every one in view, but he is speaking to the family. It is never *your* Father, but the Father, because there are other families. With one or two exceptions it is always so in John's writings.
John addresses us first as "*my* children", @1 John 2:1, then as God's children @1 John 3:1. Before he reaches the full truth of God's children, he breaks up the truth, as it were, by placing the family in *grades*, and then speaks to each grade, so as to bring home a special feature of it to each one. He says, in principle, in chapter 1, I am going to speak to you about a thing with which I have been occupied myself with the greatest delight, and I want you to be occupied with it so that it may be your delight: "that ye also may have fellowship with us and our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ". @1 John 1:3. There is a difference between "fellowship with *us*", and "fellowship with *one another*". He is aiming at the establishment of the family, so that fellowship with one another brings us in on mutual ground. In the Canticles it says, "I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey", @Song of Songs 5:1.
{93}
"Honeycomb" is a reference to mutuality. The way in which fellowship is introduced is very interesting. The fellowship which the apostles had was special, as they had been companions with the Lord: "Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations", @Luke 22:28. Obviously we could not come in on that line, but they established a link of relationship with those they addressed, and they in their turn established links, so that the chain comes through unbroken. The fellowship now is "with one another". And He further says, "These things write we to you that your joy may be full". @1 John 1:4.
As the family of God we ought to know our great place and portion. Perhaps we have the *light* of the family, but the *life* of it is the thing that should characterise us. John presents these things with a definite end in view "That your joy may be full". @1 John 1:4. He was well aware of the good times the apostles had, especially after the Holy Spirit came down. No doubt they enjoyed things whilst the Lord was amongst them, but after the Holy Spirit came the things He spoke and did would have their true place with them, and they with John would pass on what they had heard and seen that our joy might be full. He is here not only dealing with things spoken, though including them, but of what came out in the Lord's ways; it was the *life manifested*.
Paul does not treat of this side of the truth; he was not with the Lord on earth. He knew Christ as He is in heaven and develops the truth in connection with Him there. In the future those who were with the Lord in the days of His flesh will have that which is peculiar to themselves; @Luke 22: 29, 30. It is interesting to note in this connection that Paul had been fifteen days with Peter in Jerusalem and no doubt would he greatly affected by what Peter would communicate to him of the Lord's life on earth; @Galatians 1:18. This epistle does not contemplate us as
{94}
out of the world but in it, and the ministry of John was intended that we might enjoy this life notwithstanding. It is to be enjoyed in our relations one with another. Hence the need of walking in the light, as God is in the light, that we may have fellowship one with another. The meetings of the saints should be thus marked, hence the enjoyment of brotherly confidence and love. "We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren". @1 John 3:14. This life was manifested to the disciples; it was there in spite of the contrary scene through which He passed. It was what He was as *with the Father*.
In regard to ourselves, we could not enjoy this life as in the wilderness since it belongs to the land; it is known and enjoyed amongst the saints. It is something that we have as come together; the deep satisfaction and joy of holy spiritual life instead of the terrible corruption and moral death that exist in the world. He does not take us out of the world; in fact the Lord prays definitely that we should not be taken out of the world, but kept from the evil. Thus, although actually in the world, we have and may enjoy this eternal life which is in God's Son. This life is incorruptible, and it is a wonderful thing to experience, filling us, as it does, with holy, spiritual joy.
"That which was with the Father" @1 John 1:2 refers to the Lord's life here; to what was seen in Him in the days of His flesh. God had promised it and now it had taken form in a Man on earth. It could not be limited to the three years, or so, of the Lord's ministry, for who would undertake to say that in any part of the Lord's life here eternal life was not manifested? John says, "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us", @John 1: 14. This includes His life from the manger to the cross. As a matter of actual witness by the apostles, it was from the time they followed Him. That manner and expression of life
{95}
had never been on earth before to be contemplated, it was the eternal life which was with the Father. As a boy He said to His parents, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" @Luke 2: 49. So that whilst the apostles could only witness what they saw, it does not infer that it was not there before they saw it. If we were more in the good of this life, we should have great joy in contemplating its perfection in Christ, and this is what the Spirit of God has in view; that we might know the blessedness of the life that belongs to us. The prayers of the Lord Jesus, which the apostles heard, would be expressions of the life which was with the Father, but there were many things besides in which the life was expressed
Our enjoyment of this life is specially realised when together. There are many opportunities of fellowship and the thing is to have what belongs to the family distinctly before us; it should not be mixed with what is natural. There is, of course, the natural side, and that is not wrong, but the thing is to keep the life that belongs to the family of God *free*. Take Bethany as an example. The Lord went there after His entry into Jerusalem and spent the night. It was a spot that was congenial to Him, and where He would be free. So as to fellowship it does not mean simply keeping separate, although implying it, but that we have part in the life that belongs to the family of God. There are those who have not part in it. As Peter said to Simon in @Acts 8:21, "Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter". We have the thing in belonging to the family, and however intimate our unconverted relatives may be with us, we have to say to them, "You have no part or lot in this matter". Fellowship is in the light, and it does not admit of what is merely of nature.
The fellowship of the apostles was with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ, and John had in his mind the full joy of the saints through his report of
{96}
this life. If we had seen John he would have told us what he and all the apostles enjoyed; he would convey the blessedness of it to any Christian company that they might share in the fulness of joy. What the apostles reported was light, rendering us independent of man and the world; as the light becomes effective in us it makes us full of joy. The breakdown of the professing thing does not come into view here, but what John would establish is right family relationships so that the saints could be happy together in this life. You want to get the thing that was from the beginning; to see the life in Him. They asked Him, "Where dwellest thou?" and He said to them, "Come and see ... and they abode with him that day". @John 1:38,39. That gives an idea of the thing. Before you get joy to the full you must first have the objective. Chapter 1 of our epistle is largely objective. The mariner looks up to take his bearings *from heaven*; he also makes soundings; the latter corresponds with the introspection which this epistle contemplates. It is "in him" first. This chapter is clearly what is "in him"; it is what was seen objectively by competent witnesses, and particularly by one whom Jesus loved. He sets it forth, first in Christ, then in the saints: "which thing is true in him and in you". @1 John 2:8. So, "If ye know that he is righteous, know that every one who practises righteousness is begotten of him". @1 John 2:29. But the first thing is to know that He is righteous. In the end of the epistle it says, "He is the true God and eternal life". @1 John 5:20. You do not begin with the truth of His Person, but with what He expressed, because what is in John's mind is to bring the children in to the present good of eternal life.
The end of the epistle is written in the present tense and from the viewpoint of His death and resurrection: "This is he that came by water and blood". @1 John 5:6. We are in the circumstances in which He was. His wonderful life was seen while He was in
{97}
these same circumstances here; hence the apostle brings it so near to us. "That which we have seen and heard we *report* to you". @1 John 1:2. The saints were to be brought into the life. Then there is the *message* -- he had something special from God. "And this is the message which we have heard from him, and declare to you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all". @1 John 1:5. It is not now a question of John's own feelings, but of the message. The first thing the children have to learn is "that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all". @1 John 1:5. In speaking to them he is aiming at this, that there is no darkness in God, and there must be none in us. We can understand why the first thing recorded of God in @Genesis 1:3, in bringing order into the creation, is that He said, "Let there be light", and He divided the light from the darkness, because He is light. It is not God is love in chapter 1 of our epistle, but He is light. A brother gets up to speak to the saints, and if full of love, as John was, he impresses the saints that he loves them; that is, "These things write we to you". @1 John 1:4. Now he says, I come to my *message*; that is a serious thing. John had a message, and he gives it. Is there any darkness in God? None. Then we may ask Is there any darkness in us? The message is very brief, but how full it is! Darkness is anything of the flesh; or any reservation we may have as the result of making provision for the flesh. Saul spared Agag. "The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin", @1 John 1:7, from all that is of darkness. The expression, "God is light", @1 John 1:5 is that as revealed He exposes everything. "That which makes everything manifest is light", @Ephesians 5:13. "God is love" @1 John 4:16 is a question of His *nature*. Light is God in relation to what Satan brought in; everything is exposed by the light. The revelation of God's attributes is necessary, sin having come in. Light is relative.
It is a most important thing for the saints to know,
{98}
that there should be no part dark. Some one said that light exposes, but love removes what is exposed. A son should be perfectly at home; the expression, "The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin", @1 John 1:7 ensures this. It is to the end that the saints should be perfectly restful in the presence of the light. We have fellowship with one another as we walk in the light, and the blood of Jesus Christ, God's Son, cleanses us from all sin -- it does not say sins, but *sin*. The presence of sin does not disturb you; you are quite restful in the knowledge of *what the blood does*. It is not only what we have done that is in question, but also what is in us. The blood meets this so that there is no reservation with God or with each other. In regard to anything that has happened, provision is made for that: "He is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins" @1 John 1:9 and "if any one sin, we have a patron with the Father". @1 John 2:1. John writes so that there should be no disturbing elements. The Patron with the Father is looking after our every interest to the end that we may not be affected and disturbed by the presence of sin. I am not to be disturbed by it, because He has died. Where there is confession, there is forgiveness, and this results in transparency.
@1 JOHN 2: 1 - 11
The opening verse begins with "My children". @1 John 2:1. It is parental, an expression the apostle could use; his place among the saints warranted it. In chapter 2 it is more John's family, but in chapter 3 it is the family of God. If there is one thing that the saints need more than another it is this parental care. There are very few who have the moral weight to address the saints in this way. It is to be distinguished even from the authority of the teacher. Paul said, You may have ten thousand instructors,
{99}
but not many fathers; @1 Corinthians 4:15. Paul claims those who were the direct fruit of his ministry. John here rather addresses the saints generally in parental interest. He could speak thus on account of his great experience and his affection for the saints. In the Revelation he is the "brother and companion in tribulation" of the saints @Revelation 1:9. John would seem to refer to his position as known among the saints, particularly the Jewish believers, as one having experience and affection not merely as an apostle. He received no distinct commission such as Paul received, but the Holy Spirit records the incident connected with his call: he was with his father Zebedee in the ship, so he was marked as a family man from the outset. That works out in his writings and ministry so that in using these words, "My children" he would use them knowing that he had a moral right to do so.
In his second letter John addresses "the elect lady and her children". @2 John 1. The elect lady would suggest the maternal thought of what should appear in any local company. As a father, he would appreciate in the children the marks of maternal care. He says, "I rejoiced greatly that I have found of thy children walking in truth". @2 John 4. In the third epistle he again speaks of "my children". He says, "I have no greater joy than these things that I hear of my children walking in the truth". @3 John 4. Gaius suggests the paternal, and the elect lady the maternal side. The features of the parents are to be seen in the children.
The apostle was writing them that their joy might be full, but the message was, "God is light". @1 John 1:5. Then he says, "My children, these things I write to you in order that ye may not sin". @1 John 2:1. The word that comes to us as one of the features of this letter is that we should not sin. It is well to be reminded that we should not sin. The fact that we have sin is no warrant for us to commit sin. "If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves". @1 John 1:8.
{100}
Jacob was concerned as to his twelve sons. He says, "Hearken unto Israel your father". @Genesis 49:2. He had something to impart to each, a blessing, even for Daniel To enjoy the blessing it is well to be reminded of the dangers that exist. The epistle we are considering opens up with blessing, the blessing of eternal life, but in order that we should not miss it, the message comes in so that we should be on our guard against sin, because sin robs us of the blessing. God has provided a means of preservation, so that it immediately says, "If any one sin, we have a patron with the Father". @1 John 2:1. We have an Advocate in Jesus. The enjoyment of the blessing depends on our being maintained in communion with God. Hence our Advocate is with the Father. Jacob blessed all the tribes, but if they were to enjoy the blessing, they must be on their guard against their natural proclivities; each had his own danger. What he said was light for the tribes from the very beginning to the end; light on their whole course. Moses¬ blessing ( @Deuteronomy 33) does not afford any of these warnings, because the saints are viewed in the light of God's purpose, as having the Spirit, whereas Jacob views them historically. This epistle includes both sides -- our actual historical condition, and our abstract state as born of God. Jacob's blessing brings in the bad as well as the good; Moses speaks of the good only.
In the introduction we have the message that "God is light", @1 John 1:5, and the actual conditions in which the saints are found here. The second chapter is the mixed condition of things in which we are found. In that way the advocacy of Christ becomes exceedingly important. Even if sin occurs, we are preserved in connection with God. The Lord said to Peter, "I have prayed for thee", @Luke 22:32. He had prayed for him in anticipation of his fall.
This chapter runs parallel with @Luke 22. In the
{101}
latter we have, first, "The hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table", @Luke 22:21, that is, one of the number. That is there to remind us of our capabilities. Then the next thing is their contending with one another as to which should be the greatest, and then Peter saying, "With thee I am ready to go both to prison and to death", @Luke 22:33, and the Lord has to say, "The cock shall not crow today before that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me". @Luke 22:34. That is what you get here, but the advocacy begins before the things happen.
We have often been reminded that the same word is used for "Comforter" in @John 14, but here we have *Christ* before us as the Advocate. John would have us to know who is there and the service the Lord is rendering us. Our Patron with the Father is Jesus Christ, the Righteous. If it is a question of the blood, it is the blood of God's Son, but the Advocate is One who is never lawless. "The *Righteous*" is a very strong way of putting it. That is what He *was*; it involves His work. As you think of the history of the assembly from the beginning this service is all the more appreciated.
On the providential side we see the care of the Father, even the hairs of our head are numbered, but on the side of the maintenance of the purity of the relationship of the family, the advocacy of Christ provides for it and the same One who is our Advocate is made the propitiation for our sins. "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness". @1 John 1:9. The advocacy of Christ brings about the confession and forgiveness. Here our souls are set on a sure foundation. We have here the provision made in view of the long history of sin in this world, so that we might be preserved in communion with God. Every sin committed by believers has been met by Him who is the propitiation for our sins and "for the whole world" @1 John 2:2.
{102}
So God is "faithful and *just*" to forgive our sins. The propitiation is what He *is*; the bearing of His work remains in Himself in the presence of God in all its value. It is in relation to the "whole world". There is no other propitiation; it is not exclusive, He is for the whole world, and for all time.
@Luke 22 is very remarkable in that way; it groups together the external features which mark the saints throughout the whole period, in what we might call mixed conditions, the conditions we have to recognise in our relations to one another. @Luke 22 and @John 13 go together, only Luke gives us more the public conditions; there is a possibility of one having his hand on the table and yet being a betrayer; and then there are those who vie with one another as to which shall be the greater; and then there is one who professes to have more love than the rest, and he denies the Lord. That is what you get in @Luke 22. In @John 13, you get the betrayer, but he goes out. His hand is not said to be on the table. No doubt the light of Christ's service forced him out. Then there is Peter; he does not go out, but he says, "Thou shalt never wash my feet", @John 13:8. He is a true believer who would assert his own will even to the Lord. He placed the Lord in the position of One who erred; he said in effect, he knew better than the Lord. Then John was there. He lay on the Lord's bosom. That is @John 13. Peter had to *beckon* to John. He was at a distance. I think @1 John 2 runs parallel with these two chapters. It is what we are here as in our mixed conditions and relationships, but later we shall find that we are viewed in another relationship as the children *of God*; those that are born of God who do not sin. In the second position, he says that he that is born of God does not sin. We have to reconcile these two statements. The Lord's table is the testing-point for us all. This is the message, that God is light, and then if we walk in the light as God
{103}
is in the light, we have fellowship one with another. The Lord's table covers that.
Verses 3 and 4 raise the question with us as to whether we know God or not. Are we keeping His commandments? "Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments. He that says, I know him, and does not keep his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; but whoever keeps his word, in him verily the love of God is perfected". @1 John 2:3 - 5. There is a distinction between "commandments" and "words". The love of God is perfected in him who keeps His word. The commandment is placed first. There is here a challenge to every professed believer in Christ. The test is the commandment. Are we subject or not? That is the point of recovery from lawlessness; we keep His commandments.
You have "writing" in both the *present* and *past* tenses. The present is to set the saints in motion "These things I write to you". @1 John 2:1. And then he says, "I have *written* to you, fathers". @1 John 2:14. He writes in the past tense to the fathers and to the young men, showing that he was leaving with them something by which they would be exercised as remaining down here, while he was going away. "Have written" corresponds with the commandment; he left something that was to remain with them, but when he says, "I write" it is a present thing, What has been written apostolically and left to the saints has an abiding effect. Paul said, "The things that I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord", @1 Corinthians 14:37. The "word" is wider. A commandment is a definite authoritative pronouncement, it is not for us to question the rightness of it. For instance, "He spoke, and it was done". @Psalm 33:9. We have often referred to that. The world was made in wisdom; *speaking* would be the unfolding of God's architectural wisdom in the physical system. Wisdom was there developed
{104}
in His word; He spoke, He conveyed His thought. "Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God" @Hebrews 11:3; the *word* conveyed the wisdom of God. Faith understands it. The mere scientist does not understand it. "*Through faith* we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God", @Hebrews 11:3. "*He commanded*, and it stood fast". @Psalm 33:9. Here, it is not a question of His wisdom, but of His *authority*. The commandment becomes intelligible to you, it is a question of authority, but the "word" conveys His mind. The commandment would be largely *specific* in character. "Love one another" @John 15:12. "Love your enemies" @Matthew 5:44. "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect". @Matthew 5:48. Through the "word", the mind of God, including the mystery, is unfolded.
Judas inquired in @John 14: 22, 23, "How is it that thou wilt manifest thyself to us, and not to the world?" and Jesus answered, "If any one love me, he will keep my word and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him". We begin with the commandment, where departure exists. The great test is the commandment; then, as subject, you get into the mind of God, so that here you have the word *after* the commandment. The same principle would apply to the law. You have specific commandments, but you have the wonderful unfolding in type and figure afterwards of the mind of God. (Compare @Exodus 20 and @Exodus 25 - 40.) The doxology of the apostle in @Romans 11:33 would take it all in: "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!"
The Lord's commandments come into evidence as the test of *love*, "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me". @John 14:21. The Lord would indicate to such a soul what is His will, not only in regard of his path in the wilderness, but in relation to the house of God. You have a place in
{105}
the house of God, and He is over it; and whatever He has said in the way of commandment, as in relation to the house of God, you have to regard it.
We are speaking now not of the ten commandments, but of *His* commandments; the Lord in his own way reduces the ten to two. As in Deuteronomy you have things brought down to the level of affection through Moses¬ personal exercises and love for the saints, so the Lord takes up and reduces the ten to two, that is, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God ... and thy neighbour as thyself". @Matthew 22:37,39. "On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets". @Matthew 22:40. The five books of Moses and the prophets have to be read in the light of these two commandments. You love the Lord, and you love the saints. We are reminded of @Psalm 119 (one which every young believer should read constantly), "Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy word. With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from thy commandments. Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee". @Psalm 119: 9 - 11. In that psalm the law is said to be an inheritance. It is all really embodied in what the Lord Jesus commands.
In a household you may lay down certain things specifically and the question comes up with the wife or children, and they are settled in accordance with the specific commandment. But there are a thousand things that come up that are not provided for, and on every such occasion the wife would say, "That would not suit my husband", or the children would say, "That would not suit my father; father would not like that". That is being governed by the "word". Through the word, the mind of the person who speaks is known.
The "old commandment" @1 John 2:7 is a word which they had from the beginning. During the Lord's ministry here, what He said would take the form of
{106}
a commandment to any one that received it. The more you know the Lord, the more you take every word as law. John sets forth Christ as the "Word". Mary listened to His word.
We sometimes hear young believers, and those of older age say, "I do not find any verse of scripture against that". We are not governed by having a specific word for everything, but what is needed is a knowledge of the mind of God; affection discovers it. Those who have it keep "his word", which conveys the whole scope of His mind. The word is more comprehensive than the commandment. You want every word of His mouth.
There is "the old commandment", and every part of it is precious; but then he says, there is a new one. Most believers do not know about the new one. It is what is new that tests us: "Again, I write a new commandment to you, which thing is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing and the true light already shines" @1 John 2:8 -- what is true in Christ in heaven and what is true in the saints now. We are today in the light of a new commandment, "Which thing", he says, "is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing and the true light already shines". @1 John 2:8. In John's gospel the Spirit has to say that "the darkness apprehended it not", @John 1:5, but here it is *passing*. This involved the coming down of the Spirit from heaven and His present operations here. Darkness has had its day. It is being moved. It is no longer fixed. This brings out what a marvellous position the saints occupy as corresponding with Christ in the light of this new commandment. The path of the righteous shines more and more to the perfect day. The new commandment refers to what is *in us* as corresponding with what is in Christ. Speaking in a general way, John's gospel is objective, and this epistle is subjective. What was true in Christ in the former, is true in the saints in the
{107}
latter. It means that the Holy Spirit has come and is operating in the saints, and that has the complete removal of darkness in view.
It is very striking here: "Which thing is true in him and in you" @1 John 2:8, not that it *ought* to be, but that it *is* true. And the mark of it is that I love my brother. "He that loves his brother abides in light and there is no occasion of stumbling in him" @1 John 2:10. Love is the thing worked out. Love is light in that way; hatred is darkness. So that if you say you are in the light and hate your brother, you are yet in darkness. "He that hates his brother is in the darkness, and walks in the darkness, and knows not where he goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes". @1 John 2:11.
We get something of the idea in what Jude says; "Keep yourselves in the love of God". @Jude 21. The darkness then has passed. You abide in it, but it is a process that is always going on. The shadows are being dispersed, the light that has come in is dispelling the darkness. It is a blessed thing to *keep ourselves* in the love of God.
In the first and second chapters believers are viewed in their mixed condition, whereas later they are viewed as born of God; they are identified *wholly* with the divine nature, as born of Him. It is said that they cannot sin. To view the believer in the latter way involves that we have, for the moment, to dismiss from our minds what he is as having sin in him.
To love your brother involves that you lay down your life for him. Love has to be *found out*; you cannot really define it. You can speak of the effects of it, what it does. @1 Corinthians 13 gives you the features of it.
"Whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected". @1 John 2:5. I apprehend that one who keeps the word is a full grown man. The love of God is perfected in him. The love of God perfected in you
{108}
would save you from one-sidedness or from special friendships. It renders you like God Himself. It fits you for the house of God.
The Ephesians and Colossians loved in the Spirit, they had love for *all* saints; and *brotherly* love is proved in our genuine enjoyment of the society of the brethren or of our brother. Some of us are apt to get on party lines. To love like God is to love universally. The brethren are lovable; one must discover the lovable virtue in order to draw it out. The effect of being in the love of God is that I express it to those who are born of God. You will find your joy in it without the "I must do this" and "I must do that". "We ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren". @1 John 3:16. It is a reflection on the Corinthians that the apostle had to speak of it as he did, as of something that was not among them. He describes it as "a picture on the wall", whereas it should have been in their hearts actively. The universality of the love of God is worked out in the four gospels, in Christ, and it has its full answer in the heavenly city. The light of the city is "most precious", @Revelation 21:11, and it lies foursquare. It is universal in its bearing. It reflects God Himself.
@1 JOHN 2: 12 - 29
"I write" refers to *present* exercise. "I have written" shows that the effect of it would continue.
In the addresses to the seven assemblies ( @Revelation 2, 3), there was the writing and there was the Spirit speaking. All was written in a book, but "what the Spirit saith" is more present ministry at any time.
All John's ministry is characterised by writing. We see this in the gospel, in the epistles, and in the Apocalypse. His ministry has in view the protracted period until the coming of the Lord. Peter's ministry referred more to current needs. Writings are of deep
{109}
importance when those have fallen asleep in Jesus, who by their personal ministry have introduced the dispensation. John says that if one added to or took away from what was written in the Revelation the judgment written in the book would fall upon him. Writing gives the idea of permanency, and is more accurate as a standard. Paul wrote to Timothy hoping to come shortly, that he might know how to behave himself in the house of God. The Holy Spirit uses these writings today; in them we have a standard of truth, maintaining a range within which we have to keep.
"I write unto you" has in view the current need of those addressed; whereas, "I have written unto you" is something left on record with trustworthy persons. The little children have nothing left with them. John does not say, 'I have written unto you, little children'. He says, "I have written unto you, fathers", @1 John 2:14, and "I have written unto you, young men". @1 John 2:14.
You would not entrust much to little children, they are objects of affection and care. There is more said to them than to the fathers and young men (verses 18 - 27); it is in the way of warning and protection in regard of the things to which they were exposed. There is a special word for little children in 1 John 2: 26, "These things have I written to you concerning those who lead you astray".
I think the Holy Spirit would instruct us in the need for a current ministry which applies to all saints, whether fathers, young men, or little ones; and then there is something left with those who are matured.
There are classes of Christians in the family that can be entrusted with things, so the fathers are noticed as specially trustworthy, having "known him that is from the beginning", @1 John 2:13 and the young men as being "strong, and the word of God abides" in them @1 John 2:14. These are the qualifications for trust. The
{110}
apostle Paul says, "This charge I commit to thee, son Timothy". @1 Timothy 1:18. There is divine wisdom in the classifications given, the suggestion being that those who are more advanced spiritually are more responsible, but little ones are not to be burdened, the wisdom of God is seen in reminding us of this in our relations with one another, namely, that you do not burden little ones. They are like those who are weak in the faith, you would not put burdens on such. (See @Romans 14.) The whole family get the good of what was written to the little ones in verse 18 and onward -- it appears in the general epistle.
The natural mind might inquire *what* he wrote. You miss the point if you inquire that. He says, "I have written unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning", @1 John 2:14, and "I have written unto you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth in you". @1 John 2::14. The point to get hold of is that there is an obligation resting on elder brethren and on younger brethren and no special obligation, no church obligation is to be imposed on little ones, or you will do them harm. "Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations". @Romans 14:1. I think "having known him that is from the beginning" means that this class of believers understands the four gospels. The Lord said, concerning Lazarus, "Loose him, and let him go". @John 11:44. The epistles release the soul. Romans and the other epistles release the soul from the world and self and all that would hold it, and as let go you go to the gospels. That is, you sit down and contemplate as John puts it, "we have contemplated his glory". @John 1:14. I think that is what the "fathers" would do.
Earlier in the chapter it says, "Whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected". @1 John 2:5. Perfection would mark a father. In "fathers", "young men", and "little children", we have the family in its grades of development. There would
{111}
be among them mutuality of sympathy and interest, care and respect.
The father is characterised by maturity, and his interests would be universal. It is said of the holy city that it lieth foursquare. There are as many gates on the east as there are on the west. I think the fact that it lies four-square suggests the complete idea, the full growth. You cannot move a father by disturbing occurrences, everything you bring to him he has already thought out. He is "steadfast", unmovable.
The "little children" may be seen in Romans, the "young men" in Colossians, and the "fathers" in Ephesians. I think that the man is "let go" in Ephesians, he is no longer held by anything, because he has got the breadth, the length, the depth, and the height; he knows the love of Christ; he has a wonderful outlook. He apprehends the assembly as that in which is the glory of God for ever.
The believer begins in Romans. At the end of the epistle the apostle's desire is for establishment, and for this Colossians and Ephesians are needed. Of course the youngest believer may glean in the gospels, but I have to be set free by the epistles; that is, I am made free to sit down and contemplate in the gospels the various glories of Christ, not now as meeting my need, but as accomplishing all the will of God.
As Romans is understood rightly, the believer sees that he is a very great person, being a son; he has the spirit of adoption. You get the full divine thought in that on the personal side, I am a *son*. Well, if I am that, I can afford to be less than that. If I have to assert my greatness I am not greater than what I am publicly but, as in the good of Romans, I am prepared to be less publicly, and in my service and walk here, than I really am. That is what Romans teaches us, that a man should think
{112}
soberly of himself, he should not be inflated. The believer is thus in accord with Christ.
In the measurements of the ark the "half" appears in the length, the breadth and the height; that is seen in the gospels. The Lord was everywhere less publicly than He was personally. He says to the woman, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him". @John 4:10. I think that the contemplation of Christ in the gospels would enable the believer to shrink publicly; to be less than the least of all saints; to do anything for the Lord's sake.
The apostles in their administrative capacity were within the reach of the people. The altar of incense was two cubits high, implying what Christ is before *God* as man, and the saints with Him. You come to these things in Christ, you see them in Him, and you are formed of the same material. The gospels enlarge that in every way. The Lord came into this world as a babe. Think of the shrinkage publicly! and yet He was God over all there. You see it everywhere in the gospels, "I am in the midst of you as one that serves" @Luke 22:27; the disciples were disputing as to who should be the greatest. It is in the light of my great position in Christ that I can afford to serve.
In his public testimony the Christian is bold, there is no shrinkage before Satan. "We were bold in our God", Paul says @1 Thessalonians 2:2. He was as bold as a lion; and so Peter and John. You do not shrink before the enemy, there is double strength. James and John were "sons of thunder" @Mark 3:17; but while I may be bold in front, I am content to be anything that God may apportion to me for the sake of the testimony, even in the most insignificant position. The apostles were the off-scouring of all things, and they accepted it. John the Baptist accepted the principle of the "half" when he said, "He must increase, but I must decrease". @John 3:30.
{113}
As regards the three grades here, I think that this chapter gives the public position where the work of God is seen. One is recognised not on the ground of growth and spiritual progress. All the saints are included in verse 12 on the ground of being forgiven; that is our common position, but God is fair in discriminating, and those who have progressed in the truth are recognised. There are distinctions flowing from sovereign appointment, and there are distinctions which are the outcome of growth or development.
What is said to the young men indicates that it is harder to overcome the world than to overcome Satan. Overcoming the wicked one, having to do with him personally, is one thing; but then there is the world, and he is behind that too, and the young men are particularly exposed to the things of the world. The resources of energy and vitality in the young men lay them specially open to the ambitions and ideas of the world. It is fearfully seductive, so that a special word of warning is given them.
Romans presents the little children. The Holy Spirit is the Spirit of adoption whereby we cry, "Abba, Father". @Romans 8:15. The Thessalonians were "in God the Father". @1 Thessalonians 1:1. The young Christian is regarded in that light. The young man has the word of God abiding in him. Such an one reads the Scriptures, he reads them regularly and carefully and acquires the word of God through them.
A danger with the young men also is in regard to what is religious, corresponding with the temptation of the Lord. The enemy took Him to a pinnacle of the temple. Desire to have a place among the saints is a great danger. Every motive that has ever inspired man naturally is included in the "lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life" @1 John 2:16; those things are what Satan presented to the Lord in principle.
{114}
Paul said to Timothy, "Give attention to reading" @1 Timothy 4:13, also, "Give thyself wholly to these things". @1 Timothy 4:15. And again he said, "Thou hast fully known my doctrine and manner of life". @2 Timothy 3:10. There is a great lack in reading and following up what is for the saints today. One has to pay attention to all that is coming out from the Lord. How great is the thought of "the word of God abiding in you". @1 John 2:14. It is the present mind of God.
The young man who came forth in the way ( @Mark 10:17 - 22) took notice of the One who gave character to the way, but when put to the test, he loved the world, he could not surrender, he had great possessions, and he went away sorrowful. The Lord looked upon him and loved him, but he went away sorrowful because he loved the world. "Love not the world" @1 John 2:15 is a word that we need to take account of. Paul emphasises it in writing to Timothy, "Flee also youthful lusts". @2 Timothy 2:22. Demas loved the present world.
What comes in from verse 18 to 26 is probably what is most necessary because, alas, most of us are young in the faith, and the danger is in regard of antichrists. The young men are not exposed to that, nor are the fathers, but the little ones are. The danger is in the "last hour", the critical time. I think the hour suggests a crisis, and so he says, "according as ye have heard that antichrist comes, even now there have come many antichrists, whence we know that it is the last hour". @1 John 2:18. That is the sign. One has been struck lately with the number of persons and systems that have come up which are against Christ. The development has been enormous and it is sweeping away the outward shell of Christendom.
"Even now", he says, "there have come many antichrists, whence we know that it is the last hour". @1 John 2:18. We have to learn what the Antichrist will be by these that have already come. Then he tells us how to finally determine the Antichrist; he denies the
{115}
Father and the Son. The antichrists may feign to own Christianity, but they are liars; that is what the apostle emphasises. The bold, lying statements that are made today and passed by those who are nominal Christians are dreadful. They allude to the humanity of Christ without His divinity, and they couple Him with Shakespeare or Plato. But the spirit behind all this is easily traced by the unction from the Holy One. The little children are thus preserved.
"The last hour" is the great crisis for us. The fact of the many antichrists proves we have entered on it, "whence we know that it is the last hour". @1 John 2:18. They are not necessarily unified, they do not coordinate as yet. The apostle brings in the test, the Antichrist denies the Father and the Son. The liar denies Jesus Christ come in flesh; we have to discern the liars. Jesus Christ come in flesh is that the Lord was really human here. This was the foundation that Paul laid; John lays emphasis upon it in chapter 4. The spirit of Antichrist denies it, but when the Antichrist comes he will throw off Christianity, he will deny the Father and Son. That is what is coming.
The generality of the saints are little children spiritually, and hence the danger of the many antichrists. The unction is the resource, as it says, "The same unction teaches you as to all things" @1 John 2:27; that is the position now. I have no doubt that the Lord is graciously helping and that the Spirit is teaching the saints generally, and one is encouraged that there will be preservation of what is of God until the end of the blessed service of the Spirit.
The unction is the Holy Spirit in this particular way, not exactly for our affections, but for our instruction. There is room for the Spirit, that is our position and thus we are in every way independent of man's natural ability.
{116}
@1 JOHN 3
"If ye know that he is righteous, know that every one who practises righteousness is begotten of him", @1 John 2: 29. I suppose the writer had God in his mind, but God as in Christ here in the manifestation of righteousness. The fact that he does not specify by formal designation only emphasises this. We have "the Father", God, "his Son Jesus Christ" in chapter 3, but the "he" and "him" of @1 John 2:29 refer to God as in Christ manifesting righteousness. Righteousness is to mark those begotten of Him. Christ loved righteousness and hated lawlessness; this marked Him as a Man here, but we have to look at righteousness as from God's side. We have to take account of God as working out righteousness, so that it is known that every one who practises righteousness is born of Him; without specifying any of the Persons in the Godhead, the apostle presents God as in Christ.
As a consequence a new generation comes into view; those who practise righteousness must be begotten of Him; and then it follows that the Father is pleased to clothe them with the ineffable dignity of acknowledging them as His children: "That we should be called the children of God". @1 John 3:1. The epistle to the Romans works out that God is righteous. In a way it is an expansion of this verse.
This, of course, includes His work on the cross; the great truth of righteousness is worked out so that God can beget children. The practice of righteousness comes out in them in chapter 3, but that God is righteous must be first manifested, and I think Romans works that out.
"Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, and rivers of waters in the streets". @Proverbs 5:16. What is characteristic of God becomes characteristic of the children, they bear the character of God in the presence of the world.
{117}
The family of God is clear; set up in righteousness it practises righteousness. The children of God have a wonderful place; we are called children of God. God takes care of His children, but the children manifest the moral characteristics of the Father. Of others it is said, "Their spot is not the spot of his children", @Deuteronomy 32:5. We are to be the "children of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world", @Philippians 2:15.
It is remarkable that John hardly ever speaks of sons; with perhaps one exception ( @Revelation 21:7), he always speaks of children, but if we are to fill the position of children we must know the relationship of sons. We are children *here*, as the verse just quoted says, "in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation". @Philippians 2:15. We are sons *before God*. "Now are we the children of God" @1 John 3:2; as God is righteous, every one who practises righteousness is born of Him. So that when you see one professing to be of His children not practising righteousness, you have adequate grounds for questioning his position; he is not maintaining the character of his Father.
God is manifested as righteous. In @Ephesians 3:15 the Father is referred to as naming the families "Of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named". Here we get our name, as it were: "Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the children of God". @1 John 3:1. It is not *our* Father, but *the* Father; other families were also to be named. You will observe it is not children of the Father, but children of God.
God has come out in Christ and attested that He is righteous, so that in begetting children He begets them as already cleared, so to say; there is nothing attached to them, no reproach attached to them. Indeed, every family that the Father names is
{118}
characterised by righteousness. Peter says that in every nation he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted of Him. Every family that God names is characterised by righteousness, but the higher the revelation the higher the character of the righteousness that each family exhibits.
In taking up Abraham, God accounted him righteous; the family features are developed in the light of that. It is a great thing to see that there is nothing attaching to the family; the working out of righteousness involves that God has disposed of all that. The family is begotten in the light of the manifestation of righteousness; God is righteous, and those begotten of Him practise righteousness. I think Romans is the light in which the principle of righteousness is developed in the family. Of course Colossians and Ephesians contribute. God has put us into a sphere of righteousness dominated by affection as shown in Christ.
In our epistle it is *the* Father, not our Father; all the families are named of Him. "Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the children of God". @1 John 3:1.
The children of God are viewed as apart from sin: "He that is born of God sinneth not". @1 John 3:9. Naturally we were born in sin and shapen in iniquity, but as born of God we are born in righteousness.
The previous history is not taken account of; it is dealt with from the death of Christ. In a sense, all the attributes of God enter into the birth. @John 3 is the beginning of the thing; the emphasis there is on the "again"; the first birth is not counted; but God begets in righteousness and what He is is seen in the children. There was a previous history, but it is settled in righteousness; for thousands of years it had been an open question, but it was settled in the death of Christ. God begets children who are clear of all charge of sin. @John 3 is the affirmation that
{119}
another birth there must be, for the old thing was reprobate, but here what is before its is the moral nature of God seen in His children; so that "he that is born of God sinneth not". @1 John 3:9. God begets in the light of the death of Christ. In principle God had been operating thus from the outset -- "my Father worketh hitherto" @John 5:17 -- but then the question of righteousness was not settled, it was an open question until the death of Christ; now all is clear The gospel makes that clear, so that God's begetting is in the light of Romans; not only the nature of God, but His attributes must enter into the begetting.
From His own side God had been working from the outset in view of redemption, but His righteousness was not *manifest* until Christ died. Now God is known in His nature and attributes and all enters into the paternal thought. All awaited "the period fixed of the Father". @Galatians 4:2. The children were there, but in the position of minors in the house, but "when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son ... that we might receive sonship". @Galatians 4:4. The full position of children as a family, not as minors, was accorded to all those who received Christ, "who have been born, not of blood nor of flesh's will nor of mans will, but of God", @John 1:13.
"He secureth the needy one on high from affliction, and maketh him families like flocks". @Psalm 107:41. From the very beginning God wrought to gather families for the glory of Christ out of every condition that Satan ever set up; in this very result shall be seen the great triumph of God over the enemy. In the successive eras of evil, God in power and patience brought out families according to the testimonies presented. The family idea is ever in evidence; they may be in different measures of intelligence, but they were there. Each, of course, shall hear some distinctive correspondence to Christ. He died "not for that nation only, but that also he should gather
{120}
together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad". @John 11:52. There shall be a unified sphere of things even if it be made up of many families, yet they are all bonded through one headship and one parentage.
Those who received Christ were given the right to take the place of children of God, "even to those who believe on his name", @John 1:12. One is prepared to receive all the greatness and glory of Christ as they are unfolded. Those are the ones that are given the right to take the place of children; that is their privilege, they take the place of children but here (@1 John 3:1) it is that the Father designates them, "that they should be *called* the children of God". He has the right to do so. Then there is that which is common to all the families; while they may differ in their intelligence, yet the root principle is common with them all. Hence in Revelation you have a song raised by the elders and living creatures, but it is that in which every family can join; it celebrates the great common foundation on which they all subsist before God. We shall find that there is that in which we can rejoice with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the rest of them, that there is a common note; while each family will have its distinct note, there is a common note of the whole of the congregated families of God.
The Lord when refuting the Sadducees¬ error says, speaking of the resurrection, "they are ... sons of God, being sons of the resurrection", @Luke 20:36. It is that which is common to them all, although there are various stages and degrees in which they enter into it. There can be no rivalry, each family should know its own place, and will rejoice in the higher note that another family will sing; they will rejoice even though they cannot join in it fully. The song in @Revelation 14 is sung in heaven in the presence of the elders, but a company on earth are privileged to learn it, and none others can learn it
{121}
but themselves, so that they have that distinction, but the singers above are evidently of a higher order.
Angels constitute a family. Families are grouped according to the light under which they are brought forth. Those before the flood, for instance, would be grouped by themselves. And Israel would be a distinct group before and after the giving of the law; we have several groups in Revelation, so that the indication is to many families. While we get representative men suggesting a family, like Enoch before the flood and Abraham after, yet we have to remember that the grace of God went outside even all that, witness Melchisedec and Job.
You have indications of different families in Genesis, in Melchisedec, king of righteousness and king of peace. He is only one man mentioned, but he is mentioned as independent of Abraham; he was there before him. Then we have Job, in whose day there were sons of God appearing before God. We assume that these are angels, but as a matter of fact we know very little about it. It is simply an indication that God has treasures in reserve, as the result of His gracious operation, which will amaze us when we see them.
"Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us" @1 John 3:1; it is for us; we have a known designation as in this world. "Therefore the world knoweth us not" @1 John 3:1 is a consequence following upon the rejection of Christ and the place He has put us in. "For this reason the world knows us not, because it knew him not". @1 John 3:1. Here again it is Christ, but God in Christ, it is what Christ was here. As representing God here, He was in the world and the world knew Him not. The fact of it is that the world is not able to take cognisance of Christ, morally; they could take account of the miracles, but Him they knew not. In measure it ought to be true of us as Christians that what came out in all its fulness in Christ must
{122}
become characteristic of us, and so the world cannot understand the motives that govern us. The Lord's brethren -- they could not be closer -- did not understand Him, they said, "if thou doest these things, show thyself to the world". @John 7:4. It shows the helplessness of the flesh to apprehend what is of God as set forth in Christ.
The Lord has not as yet come out as representative of what we shall be. It says, "When *he* is manifested" @1 John 3:1; we have to wait for that. The designation "children" refers to us here; I do not think it will continue. It is not what we *shall* be. The Lord will come out and describe in manifestation what we shall be. Everything morally attributable to the children of God came out in all its fulness in Him here, but it came out in Him *parentally*. I mean that He was not a child; He was here parentally, so to speak, that is, He represented God in this respect. The character of the children must come from the parent. We are not viewed parentally; He was here as a parent, as the use of the expressions "children", "daughter", etc., indicate. He is "The everlasting Father". @Isaiah 9:6. When it comes to what we shall be eternally, He describes it as son. We wait for that; sons is what we shall be. It is what He is Godward that is going to abide. He was a Son here.
"When the Christ is manifested who is our life, then shalt ye also be manifested with him in glory" @Colossians 3:4; that is the point, manifestation in glory, so that we shall be like Him and we shall see Him as He is. That is where John and Colossians link.
The children correspond with what God was in Christ *here* in a parental way, but what we shall be corresponds with what He is *now*. Paul says that we know Him not after the flesh; we know Him as He is. In bringing many sons to glory, God made the Leader of their salvation perfect through suffering. Sons are led to glory. And yet the way in which He maintained the character of God here in the
{123}
presence of an opposing world is an example for the children. We learn what is becoming in the children from the parents. I think it is well known in the world that the parents are to describe what the children are, but when you come to what we shall be, we are brethren of Christ, we are sons of God, that is what He is before God as Man.
Here it is not the image, it is the *likeness*; we shall be like Him. In @Romans 8:29 it is image -- that we should be "conformed to the image of his Son". Likeness brings us into accord with Him, as before God: "Like him before thy face". Image is somewhat stronger; the idea is that we represent Him. He will be the Firstborn among many brethren; every one of the brethren shall represent Christ; they will be dispersed throughout the universe. Adam was set in representation of God; he was made "after our likeness". @Genesis 1:26.
Verse 3 shows the effect of all this on the believer in his walk down here, in a scene of pollution; we purify ourselves as He is pure. The hope is in Christ. John makes much of what you do *yourself*, you purify yourself. The standard is very high. The hope of being like Christ in that day leads to purification by the believer; purifying oneself involves mortifying the deeds of the body. Every bit of the manifestation which the Spirit makes to me of Christ must result in the setting aside of something that is in me.
It is a question of displacement, but it is also a question of implacement, the implacement of what is pure and after Christ.
@1 JOHN 3: 7 - 24
What we had on the last occasion might be recalled with profit in connection with this scripture, namely, that the children learn from the parent; the parental idea being expressed in Christ. "Even as he is
{124}
righteous" @1 John 3:7 refers to the Lord Jesus viewed in a parental way. This chapter presents the children of God. There are only two generations: "the children of God", and "the children of the devil"; one practises righteousness, the other lawlessness. "He that practises sin" is a *course* of evil rather than an act. The Christian might sin, but when you see a person practising sin, you would say that such an one was not of God.
In verse 7 it is "children" in relation to the apostle, but in verse 10 it says, "In this are manifest the children *of God*" @1 John 3:10. They are manifested in their love towards the brethren. Children are subjects of care, and in them are seen the features of God the Father; as in @Ephesians 5:1, "Be ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children". That would be parallel with this passage. Ephesians usually gives the *fulness* of thought so that "beloved children" brings in their endearment to God.
The idea of children implies that such are under the Father's care and are to be representative of Him, and this is what is worked out here. So that one would emphasise the parental side as seen in the Lord Jesus Christ Himself. It is what He was to them when here. You get this idea in John's gospel; it is alluded to in chapter 21, "Children, have ye any meat?" John 21:5. Also in @Luke 8:48, "Daughter, be of good comfort". We get many similar expressions in the other gospels showing how extensively the Lord expressed this parental feature; and it must be so, for He made God known; and one of the features of the revelation is that God is known, not merely in terms, but in this practical expression of parental love and sympathy. It magnifies the personal greatness of the Lord when you view Him thus: everything of God was perfectly set forth in Him. Nothing is more interesting and touching than the parental feature coming to light in the Lord's care for His
{125}
own, and in the love He expressed for them. When it says, "He that practises righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous", @1 John 3:7, it refers to what the Lord was here; what the Parent was, so to speak, is worked out in the children. Your feeling towards the Lord in that connection is akin to that which you have towards the Father Himself. The idea of "children" does not run into eternity. Strictly, it is a relationship which belongs to us as in this world. Sonship refers to the counsels of God, and to glory, but "children" covers our position here in a contrary scene, hence it is that we come under His care. That is why in verse 2 it says, "*Now* are we the children of God". @1 John 3:2. What we shall be has reference to the counsels of God.
You would not address the Lord as Father; still in @Isaiah 9:6 He is called "everlasting Father" and the disciples when He was here would so regard Him. The more spiritual they were, the more they would recognise Him as the Head of the house, the "House-father". He took that place in the family (@Luke 24: 30), and when the last passover Supper was being partaken of He was in the position of Parent. That was in the Lord's mind when He said to Philip, "He that has seen me has seen the Father" @John 14:9; in Him the Father was expressed.
It greatly helps if we bear in mind that the term "children" is a provisional one; it may not appear to be so when you think of its ordinary use among men, but it is so spiritually. The term covers our sojourn here. There was the parental expression of the Lord Jesus towards the disciples, and the more you look into it, the more you will see that it must be so, for every movement of the heart of God towards us is of necessity expressed by Him. So that He could say to the Father "that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them", @John 17:28.
{126}
As remarked already, a practice is a course, it is not an isolated occurrence; but as stated earlier in our consideration of this epistle, we have to look at things abstractly. This chapter deals with the children of God abstractly, hence it says, "he cannot sin, because he has been begotten of God". @1 John 3:9. @1 John 2 indicates a very mixed condition, so that the possibility of sin in us *is* recognised, but in this chapter it is not. "Whoever has been begotten of God does not practise sin" @1 John 3:9 is an abstract thought; that is to say, the believer is taken account of entirely in relation to what is born of God; he is looked at from that point of view, and such an one does not practise sin.
Life comes to light in @Genesis 1 on the *third* day. "And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth" @Genesis 1:11. God puts down at the very outset of the Bible a denial of evolution and it is denied right through. Things are to be "after their kind", no admixture, so that the seed is *in itself*, and that seed cannot be altered. You cannot develop it into something else. And so, here it is, "His seed *abides* in him" @1 John 3:9; the divine seed is there, and is true to its kind. Those of the wicked one are also true to their kind; they practise sin, for Satan sinned from the beginning.
"Born again" in @John 3 is born anew. It is the necessity of it that is emphasised, but when you have the *character* of the thing as here, the full thought, it is "born *of God*" and it is seen in those who practise righteousness. New birth is necessary because of what the flesh is, but you have to wait for the idea of being born of God until you get the character of God. It is "begotten again to a living hope" in @1 Peter 1:3; then in verse 23 of that chapter, "Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which
{127}
liveth and abideth for ever", @1 Peter 1:23. The living and abiding word of God is more than the initial, sovereign act, as in @John 3. "Born of the Spirit" and the seed abiding, refer to the effect of the word on your soul. Born of God implies the indwelling of the Spirit, so that the character of God shines out through you, and gives the fulness of the thought, you are like Him in righteousness and in love.
In this chapter you get a fully developed family who reflect the character of God. So, too, the children of the devil manifest the devil's characteristics. The "seed" is the divine nature, which involves the indwelling Spirit. It is helpful to look back to the beginning of Genesis; John synchronises with Genesis more than any of the evangelists, because he deals with the beginning of things, as Genesis does, and he refers to the seed. The divine seed remains in the believer, and is of its own kind; that is what God is working out today, and it cannot be set aside. We have all sorts of theories advanced based on evolution, but those who hold them cannot get over this: "his seed abides *in him*". The evolutionist cannot deal with this, the children of God are here living and abiding in Him. This wonderful thing exists and nothing can overthrow it.
In Genesis we get, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth" @Genesis 1:1 and in the gospel of John you have, "In the beginning was the Word". @John 1:1. John goes further back, but it is the same line of thought.
1 Chronicles is a book written by a lover of the testimony. It bears the marks of a writer who had the testimony in his heart (like David who had the ark in his heart) and he begins with Adam, as much as to say, Not one iota of the mind of God from the very outset must be lost in this record; nothing must be left out.
{128}
Chronicles has to do with David and David is reached in chapter 2, which shows that the Spirit had His mind on David, because he took Zion and brought in the ark. Luke corresponds with this in the New Testament; he is a writer who also loved the testimony. The Lord took him up to write from that point of view, so that he links on with 1 Chronicles. In his gospel you have the whole testimony of God linked up from Adam to Christ; Luke loved the testimony, that is the thing. John is dealing with the beginning; he is an abstract writer, and had to meet subtle and spiritual opposition to the truth; that is what had to be dealt with. He gets at the foundation of the evil and saps the ground from under the enemy's feet.
John sees only two classes: the children of God, and the children of the devil -- no intermediate class. If he were present to deal with the opposition to the truth today, you would see how he would deal with it; he would put all who oppose in one class. They pretend to differentiate and bring in development, but he dismisses them at once; they all belong to one class, and are not entitled even to be heard.
"To this end the Son of God has been manifested that he might undo the works of the devil". @1 John 3:8. The manifestation comes out in certain features. In @Romans 1:4 He is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead". The devil sinned from the beginning, and his works are manifest but now the Son of God is manifested, and enters the lists with Satan. He takes up this tremendous conflict which began in the wilderness and ended in His resurrection. The children of God would be no match for the devil, but the Son of God *is*; He undoes the works of the devil. The Lord proclaimed His mission to destroy the works of the devil when He said, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me" @Luke 4: 18. He proclaims that He is
{129}
going to release souls from all the bondage they have been brought under by the enemy. It was a wonderful moment in the history of the world when the Son of God was manifested, entering the lists with Satan, not only to *bind* him, which He did, but to *defeat* him, that He might *undo* all his works. What patience is needed in undoing; taking account of souls and of Satan's works in them; the undoing of his works in a soul requires time. Things have to be undone one by one. The Lord in referring to the woman in @Luke 13:16 said, "Whom Satan hath bound, lo, these eighteen years". He singled her out, and undid that work.
If we revert to the beginning of our histories we recognise the many things that were undone from day to day. It is all the patient work of the Lord; every item is to be undone, and a moral process is going on even now, with a view to putting that which is of God in its place. We need to be subject to the Lord lest we hinder this work of undoing in ourselves.
In our scripture this manifestation is looked at as having taken place; it "has been manifested" @1 John 3:8; it was there *morally*; but Colossians treats of a future manifestation that shall be *public*, and we shall be manifested with Him, as in verse 2 of this chapter.
Then we come to the *message* (verse 11), which is evidently very important. "For this is the message which ye have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another". @1 John 3:11. The message is the conveyance of the present mind of God as meeting the need that exists. This would really show how the works of the devil were undone by a company here in love one to another. The devil sinned from the beginning and injected his ways into Adam and Eve, but the working out of Satan's character was in Cain, just as the working out of Ham's character was in Canaan. Cain was the one who came under God's judgment in a peculiar way as a murderer; that is what Satan is.
{130}
Doubtless the reason for the message here was that love was waning.
Then he says, "We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren". @1 John 3:14. It is a great thing to pass from death to life. The enemy would be content to have the Lord in glory, but to have a people kept so that they manifest the traits of the Lord *here* is what excites his animosity. He would sweep the saints from the earth if he could. It is an immense thing to know your company and to know that, as loving them, you have passed from death unto life. One has often referred to the principle of "dead reckoning". Sometimes you raise the question as to how you are getting on, and you say, "Well, I am making progress, through grace things are different from what they used to be, I find more interest in divine things than I did". That is what one would call in nautical language, "dead reckoning". Of course, if you go too far on that line you may become self-occupied and confused; but it is a great comfort to know that these things which you observe in yourself are the fruit of the divine nature, and are not of the world, or according to the flesh.
John treats of the brethren on the ground of profession. It is abnormal not to love your brother, but Cain was literally Abel's brother and you will find that God repeatedly uses the word 'brother' in raising the whole question with him, as if to force upon Cain the awful fact that the one whom he slew was his brother: "The voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground" @Genesis 4: 10. In @Hebrews 12:24 we have"the blood of Abel"; but when Cain is addressed by God it is, "*thy* brother". That is the serious thing.
You love your brother, but he is responsible to love you too. That is the way you know your brethren, they "love *one another*"; in this way they
{131}
are manifest, and you know them. It is a great point at the present time that you know your brother, because there are imitations The word 'brethren' has gained a place in the world-system on this account, for Satan has taken it up, and hence there are *classes* of brethren. All this is the subtle work of the devil to becloud this great thought of the brother. The children of God are to be manifest, and are recognised by the features of righteousness and love. The four gospels, if you analyse them, will enable you to determine who the brethren are. They "hear the word of God, and *do it*", @Luke 8: 21. This us how they are brought to light. It is a question of bringing forth "fruit after his kind". John knows of only one kind, those who have the divine seed in them, and who can say, "We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren". @1 John 3:14. There are many of the Lord's dear people who are entangled in systems not according to His mind. He loves them and we love them; for we can discern what they are by their walk, even though we can love them only in the abstract. It may be we are walking with persons who are not manifesting munch, if any, of these traits of which we are speaking. That is a very solemn matter also.
Hatred soon manifests itself; Abel did not have long to wait to discern that Cain hated him. The Lord says of His enemies that they hated Him without a cause, and it is so often of a Christian. John recognised his brethren. He says, "Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you" @1 John 3:13; and then goes on to say, "We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren". @1 John 3:14. You have different feelings towards the brethren, you are more at home with them than with anyone else.
Then he shows how love is known: "Hereby we have known love, because he has laid down his life for us". @1 John 3:16. You say, My feelings towards the Lord's
{132}
people are different from what they are towards those outside, So far so good. Verse 14 answers to that, but then you must not be content with that, you must learn to love. There is a divine standard for it, it is not an indefinable thing that you cannot express. If you look at the Lord Jesus, you see what love is in all its fulness, in that He laid down His life for us. That is the lesson of the whole period of His life down here, as we have it in verse 16, "Hereby we have known love, because he has laid down his life for us and we ought for the brethren to lay down our lives". @1 John 3:16. It is only as we meditate upon that, and are exercised about it, that the truth of it would be manifest in our lives. Verse 16 is objective; verse 14 is subjective. Look at the perfect picture in Christ: ponder over it. It covers the whole period of His life here, and to lay down our lives for the brethren is the great answer in us to the love expressed.
Verse 17 would indicate that this was not being carried out, so that John goes on to say: "Children, let us not love with word, nor with tongue, but in deed and in truth", @1 John 3:18. The apostle Paul was marked by this love, he "died daily" for the saints, and that is what John would have in the Christian company. Then he adds, "Hereby we shall know that we are of the truth and shall persuade our hearts before him" @1 John 3: 19. These are comforting things in the light of verse 16. And then he says, "If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart and knows all things. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, we have boldness towards God". @1 John 3:20,21. That is what is to be aimed at, establishment in love, and being quite restful about everything. In the main we realise how little we come up to loving in deed and in truth. In our heart we feel our best sacrifice is feeble in the light of Christ's. In 1 Chronicles when David was spiritually at his highest he calls God's attention to the vast wealth that had been gathered together for
{133}
the house. But after all, it was of God Himself: "Of thine own have we given thee" @1 Chronicles 29:14. It is a man knowing God and feeling his own littleness in His presence. God is greater than the heart and knoweth all things. We are led on here to reconciliation. If our heart does not condemn us, it is a perfect state practically before God, and we are doing the things that are pleasing in His sight.
It is very helpful and comforting to know that God is greater than our hearts, so that we have no reservations with God. It is like Paul; on the one hand, he deprecated what he did because it was so small, but on the other hand he says, "I have fully preached the gospel of Christ", @Romans 15:19. His heart was not condemning him, and he could turn to God with the sense that he was pleasing to Him. "And whatsoever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments, and practise the things which are pleasing in his sight". @1 John 3:22. There is perfect agreement between our hearts and God. It is reconciliation from the subjective side; whereas in @2 Corinthians 5:18 it is "God ... *has* reconciled us". In doing the things that are pleasing in His sight, we are pleasurable to God practically.
It brings us back to what God indicated in @Genesis 1:12 "The herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed was in itself". Then, in order that all that should be regulated, you have the great light in the heavens on the fourth day and on the fifth day, a multitude of moving creatures having life, and on the sixth day, crowning all, man is created, after the image and likeness of God. John's epistle brings us up to the sixth day, where we have understanding. It is life expressed in intelligence. The subjective corresponds to the objective. In verse 23 we have, "And this is his commandment, That we believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and that we love one another". @1 John 3:23.
{134}
That is the full divine thought: to believe on Him and love one another. "And hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given to us". @1 John 3:24. This is a perfect state of things, and one that is brought about entirely by Himself. The commandment is that you believe on the name of His Son, Jesus Christ, and love one another. There is the idea of renown in this full title: "His Son Jesus Christ".
@1 JOHN 4
One sees that in a day when Paul's ministry was failing to maintain its first results John's comes in as a *reserve*. John speaks of the Son, but with the desire to bring about the liberty of love in the hearts of the saints. When love is lacking, the Spirit cannot effect what He has before Him.
Verse 1 contemplates the activity of "spirits". "Believe not every spirit, but prove the spirits". @1 John 4:1. There never was a day when there was more spiritual activity than the present. Men in our days have come to recognise spiritual power, but, alas, it is power of an evil character and source. We are exhorted to *prove* the spirits. They assume to have the mind of God in taking on a prophetic character: "Many false prophets are gone out into the world". @1 John 4:1. Jezebel arrogated to herself *all* prophetic authority, representing the Romish system; but here it is "many". John in this epistle does not describe the evil as co-ordinated, but speaks of the variety of spiritual activity.
The great movement at the time of the Reformation released men's minds from a certain bondage in which they were held and since that time there has been great licence for the mind of man to work, but no co-ordination; there are many voices. At the same time, they all, in principle, deny "Jesus Christ
{135}
come in flesh;" @1 John 4:2. In one form or another, as under Satanic power, they deny that the Son of God *became a real Man*.
"Jesus Christ come in flesh" involves the condemnation of every man as after the flesh, and that is why these spirits oppose it; they serve the order of man set aside by Jesus Christ coming in flesh and dying. These evil spirits are not simply in the atmosphere, they are in *men*, and their voices are always being heard. As gone out into the world, they carry the light they obtained in the assembly, but you may see the characteristics of the world in them.
It becomes a question of the Spirit of God or the spirit of imitation -- of which are you under the influence? We are to test every voice; does it confess "Jesus Christ come in flesh"? If the voices do not stand the test, we refuse to listen to them. "Jesus Christ come in flesh" does not emphasise the Lord's deity exactly, but is more to show the *order of man* that was here for the pleasure of God. We are called upon here to prove the spirits, to prove them by what they are going on with. If they do not *confess* "Jesus Christ come in flesh" they are not of God, whatever else they may do, or say. These evil spirits oppose the moral bearing of what came out in Christ. In "the systems" they formulate there is the maintenance *only* of the man set aside in Christ. In the assembly there can be no recognition of that man, but of the Man who has come out from God; and inasmuch as that recognition involves the working out of love, we can see what John has before him.
Doubtless these false prophets once professedly belonged to the Christian company. In @1 John 2 it speaks of those that went out because "they were not of us". In going out they carried into the world the knowledge of certain facts relative to Christianity, but they have steadfastly worked to defeat the truth.
{136}
Judas began this movement -- he went out "and it was night", @John 13:30. There are these two great forces at work: the Spirit of God to maintain what has come in by "Jesus Christ come in flesh", and Satan seeking in every way to nullify it. The position is clearly defined. "Greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world". @1 John 4:4. The Holy Spirit operates in the Christian company and Satan in the world -- the world nominally Christianised. Satan operates on men's minds; they are ever ready to go on with the man after the flesh. We are in the world in which these spirits are active and we do well to take heed to the word of exhortation and prove them: "Hereby ye know the Spirit of God: every spirit which confesses Jesus Christ come in flesh is of God and every spirit which does not confess Jesus Christ come in flesh is not of God". @1 John 4:2,3. Does the voice exalt Christ? If it does, every loving heart responds. If it does not glorify Christ it exalts the man set aside by His coming and you have done with it. Bring in the test at once -- will it glorify Christ or the man set aside in His death? Is it of God? Otherwise it is of Satan. The test is thus simple.
It says, "They are of the world"; although they may pretend to recognise the Lord Jesus, they are simply of the world. In proving them we take notice of their sayings and actions: "For this reason they speak as of the world, and the world hears them". @1 John 4:5. We were noting in the Proverbs the man that speaketh "froward things", @Proverbs 2: 12. There is also "the strange woman" that "flattereth with her words" @Proverbs 2: 16 but the man has that feature of the world which speaks froward things. Then later in the book it says, "A man of Belial, a wicked person, is he that goeth about with a perverse mouth; he winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his feet, he teacheth with his fingers" @Proverbs 6: 12,13. Early in the book, as noted, he is simply a man that speaks
{137}
froward things, but in chapter 6 you get development. He brings his principal members into the thing. It is the world of literature and science, the *masculine* side; and then you have in the *strange woman* the *seductive* side. It is Satan in the world operating by these agencies to ensnare and overthrow the people of God. In our chapter you have what corresponds to this: "They are of the world", whatever their profession this type of man is antichristian. It goes on to say, "Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly", @Proverbs 6:15.
We need to pay attention to the way the apostle John uses that word "of". It indicates the origin and source of good or evil, The apostles were men who were marked by the character of Christ; they were like Jesus Christ but they were stamped, as you might say, officially as "of God". They carried with them the stamp of God which is so important. Hence their word is authoritative and final: "We are of God; he that knows God hears us". @1 John 4:6. So that there is mention made here in a distinct way of God in His representatives and the world in its representatives. The apostles distinctly represented God. It is a fact of immense importance that in this world there were those that represented him and whilst that was true of the apostles in a special way, it is the mind of God that it should be true also of us. We should take up and carry on this representation of God in our measure.
One is struck with the fact that those to whom John wrote are addressed as *children*. One is speaking of the simplicity of the thing; we are to he marked by affection. Where there is a lack of love, it is because the Spirit of God is grieved and so fails to produce it in those who should have it. The Spirit was given that these things might be wrought out effectually and that the saints might be preserved in love and simplicity, and thus answer to the thought
{138}
of God in leaving us down here. Satan is seeking to exercise a spiritual influence over God's people, to draw them away from God's intention for them. If we are preserved, in self-judgment and dependence these things will have no effect on us. I think the Lord introduced what would overthrow this influence when He instituted His Supper. The Lord's supper tends to produce mutual affection, and to maintain it. We have got to be preserved here in simplicity, and then all these voices will be detected and we shall not fall under their influence. The Spirit thus has liberty to work among the saints. As we love Christ we are not going to promote anything set aside in His death. We must not argue things out; we are to be simple concerning evil. It is a very simple pathway in which we are found; but the lover of Christ clearly detects what is antichristian. It is not possible for people to partake of the Lord's supper in a spiritual way and support antichristian ideas.
Discerning of the spirits clears the ground, so that we have a circle free from these things, as it says, "Beloved, let us love one another". @1 John 4:7. While the evil spirits are discerned, they have no place in this circle. Indeed, they are used by Satan to destroy it. There is now in this world a system of divine affections that God can find pleasure in. What one observes is that so many of the Lord's people do not know where to turn, there are so many voices; but God has brought about a circle where love is: "Beloved, let us love one another". Where it is unknown, the dispensation is not understood for it is in it that God is now known. What marks the children of God is of God; God is known in His house. The first paragraph of our chapter clears the ground so that we may reach the circle. The love of God is shown in that He "sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him". In the circle of the brethren you
{139}
have life -- life is there -- so that as in it we are proof against these spirits; and in it we have passed from death unto life. The love of God is active towards us as in the circle. We come into the light of what God is to us. That is what lies behind the Lord's supper; if we come to it in a spiritual way, love becomes active; and we are developed in love, so that the breaking of bread and the drinking of the cup take on a spiritual meaning. There is light among the brethren and the love is known that God has to us: "God has sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him". @1 John 4:9. The Lord would greatly help us to be free of these wicked voices that are about. Saints are often baffled by them. But the company of the saints is where the light of God shines, and deliverance from these voices is known. But Satan does not leave us alone; his constant effort is to overthrow and to draw us away from that circle, but God would maintain us in it.
After the spirits are dealt with, we are free to dwell on the wonderful character of God's love as seen in the sending of the Son into the world that we might have life through Him, and that He might be the propitiation for our sins; then John says, "We have seen, and testify, that the Father has sent the Son as Saviour of the world". @1 John 4:14. We are made to see the majesty of divine Persons in their intervention in grace; there is a grandeur about that sentence: "The Father has sent the Son as Saviour of the world"; and God would present that even now. Alas, how many real believers are deceived by these spirits! 2 Timothy contemplates such; they are so mixed up and involved in the world that we have to retreat to the knowledge that "The *Lord* knows those that are his" @2 Timothy 2:19; only He knows all. But we should be on the look out to be of service to everybody represented in the loaf which we break. On the other hand, John's ministry is to bring to light the children of God: "In this
{140}
are *manifest* the children of God". @1 John 3:10. They are marked by righteousness and love.
In John's gospel you have the remarkable history of Peter given as John views it. Peter was a true believer, he loved the Lord, but had to appeal to the Lord regarding it, as if he had not proved it in his conduct: "Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I am attached to thee", @John 21:17.
You could hardly define divine love, it is seen in its *results*: "Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us". @1 John 4:10. Through the testimony of this love God has formed a sphere down here in which He dwells. It was through the gift of His Son that we might live through Him. It is through this testimony, as made good in them by the Spirit working in them, that there is a people here in whom God's love is known, who dwell in love and so dwell in God and God in them. To those people these voices would appeal in vain; the *overcomer* is described in this epistle. The shining out of God now is contingent on this love-circle. How blessed to be found in the circle in which God dwells -- He in us and we in Him! It must be *my* circle. If I leave the influence of it, I am under that which comes from the world where is developed the man that was set aside by the One who came to make the love of God known.
"No one has seen God at any time". @1 John 4:12. This is said also in @John 1:18. Here it goes on to say, "If we love one another, God abides in us, and his love is perfected in us". @1 John 4:12. In the gospel it is, "The only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him". @John 1:18. What a remarkable relation there is between Christ in the bosom of the Father for the declaration of God, and God dwelling *in us*; He is thus known here. The opposition of Satan is specially to what is *down here* for God. In verse 15 we see that in him by whom Jesus is confessed as Son of God, God abides, and he in God. One would
{141}
emphasise the greatness of the sphere where divine love is. But how can it be developed in the souls of God's people if they are indifferent to the Lord's supper. If the Lord's supper becomes formal with us there is no development in our affections. One feels that we have to grasp what was in the mind of the Lord when He instituted His Supper. It was not only that we should call Him to mind, but there was to be a development of affection in every one of us as the consequence of partaking of it, to the end that the characteristics of God might be seen.
How to find those in whom the love of God is known is an important inquiry. The Spirit of God is here to indicate it to us. It is a circle where Christ is exalted, and where the man that is set aside by the coming of Jesus Christ in flesh is refused. "Hereby we know that we abide in him and he in us, that he has given to us of his Spirit" @1 John 4: 13. Room is made for the Spirit. There is confirmation in the activities of the Spirit. We may have to go back and look over things historically to determine where we are, but the *confirmation of one's position lies in the Spirit*; we get it by the Spirit; one is sure of his position because of the Spirit. We cannot deny the reality of the Spirit in His activities among the saints. Historical things have to be met, for God does not pass over anything. For example, the well-known unfaithfulness of a certain company of eighty years ago remains. If connected with those responsible for it, I must judge it in order to be clear, but then my confirmation as to where I am lies in the Spirit. It is a wonderful fact that the Holy Spirit is here in the assembly (verse 13). "And we have seen, and testify, that the Father has sent the Son as Saviour of the world". @1 John 4:14. The apostles had testified to that great fact; they had seen and testified "that the Father has sent the Son". @1 John 4:14. It would apply also in measure to those who are in this circle of love. The message of the gospel
{142}
would be going out from them. One was thinking, too, of the influence of this circle in relation to the households of His people; God has graciously blessed a great many of our households, but one feels that He would emphasise the majesty of the gospel: "We have seen, and testify, that the Father sent the Son as Saviour of the world", @1 John 4: 14, should have some answer in us. We should support the apostolic testimony by the conditions in which we are found as dwelling together. One was noticing in the Book of Ezra that in the great recovery of that time, the Sidonians and the Tyrians were given meat and drink and oil to bring cedar trees for the house of God (@Ezra 3:7). So now, in the present recovery, God would bring out the full bearing of the gospel; we should go into the region of Tyre and Sidon; @Matthew 15. We are not to be limited to the households of God's people. We should be great enough to bear witness to the universal character of the gospel so that those outside may be brought in.
The testimony is supported in that character of life so perfectly exemplified in the Man Christ Jesus. What is to characterise us in service is what marked Him, who humbled Himself; @Philippians 2. That is to be the standard, and we are to know no other; the commandment is to "love one another, as *I have loved you*". @John 15:12. He indicates and reflects what was in Christ. We must not be selfish, but as those who sacrifice themselves in the service of love. This marked those who gave up their ease and worldly advantage to bring to us these wonderful things; our leaders who spoke the word of God; @Hebrews 13: 7. Is there among us, as the people of God, that which suggests this sacrifice? Was it nothing to the Father to send the Son, and for the Son to come? It was self-sacrificing love. We are to sacrifice ourselves in the pursuit of the objects of divine love. Self-sacrifice characterises the circle so that every
{143}
one who goes out must be characteristic of it. Thus we are able to say, "Whosoever will, let him take the water of life *freely*" @Revelation 22:17.
@1 JOHN 5
We saw at our last reading that the Son had been sent as the propitiation for our sins, and as the Saviour of the world, as seen in @1 John 4: 10, 14. Obviously the subject of that chapter is love. Verse 11 says, "Beloved, if God has so loved us" @1 John 4:11; and "if we love one another, God abides in us, and his love is perfected in us" @1 John 4: 12; and again, "God is love, and he that abides in love abides in God, and God in him" @1 John 4:16; and, "Herein has love been perfected with us that we may have boldness in the day of judgment" @1 John 4: 17; and then again, "there is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear" @1 John 4:18; and in verse 21, "And this commandment have we from him, That he that loves God love also his brother". @1 John 4:18. So that the great subject of chapter 4 is love.
Chapter 4 answers to the Book of Deuteronomy, which was preparatory to Israel entering into Canaan and chapter 5 answers to the Book of Joshua, which records their possessing the land. In chapter 5 we have the Lord coming by water and blood: what is involved in his death, and the presence of the Holy Spirit, to the effect that we have eternal life. So that this chapter brings in the land of Canaan; the gift of eternal life being in the Son: "This life is in his Son", @1 John 5:11. But the end of chapter 4 and the first paragraph of chapter 5 have to do with our position here, and the effect in our confession.
The last verse of chapter 4 is put in the way of a commandment, showing that it is imperative that whilst you love to do the thing, it strengthens the position when it is imperative that it should be done. If you love God, the commandment is to love your
{144}
brother. It is what the Lord had in mind before His departure when speaking to His disciples.
We have the message in chapter 1 that God is light and in chapter 3 the message that we should love one another. A message is something that comes from a distance by a messenger; and the person that carries it necessarily comes into your mind. Joab said to Ahimaaz that there were no tidings suited to him. He wanted to run, and knew something about what had happened, but he had no *message*; when he came to David his tidings were uncertain and indefinite; he had to stand aside until Cushi came. John would be fully qualified to bear such messages as, "God is light", and, "We should love one another".
Christians might say that they love God, but that is not enough; they must love their brother. The commandment brings in divine authority. You cannot disregard your brother. Sometimes it may look impossible to love him, but we are under *command* to do so. The loving one another is the evidence of eternal life: "We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren" @1 John 3:14 but in chapter 5 he deals with life as a definite subject. In chapter 1 it is presented objectively in Christ: "That which was from the beginning" @1 John 1:1; in chapter 5 it is presented more subjectively, as showing how we are brought into it, that we might consciously know that we have eternal life. Loving one another is the evidence of life. Chapter 5 deals with it as in the Son and John presents that which enables us to determine that we have it as a possession, and not merely as title: "These things have I written to you that ye may know [have the consciousness] that ye have eternal life" @1 John 5: 13. It is "in the Son", as to the setting of it, but one is conscious of having it by the things that John writes.
With regard to the titles of the Lord in this chapter:
{145}
the force of them is apprehended more clearly when you see that John's ministry was to the Jews. They were in view, and the test was whether they would believe that Jesus was the Christ, the Messiah; if they did, it proved that they were "born of God". But there was a further thought: "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" @1 John 5:5. Believing that He is the Christ shows that one is born of God. It would be more applicable as a test to a Jewish believer, but in itself it did not take him out of the Jewish world. The testimony on the day of Pentecost was presented to Jerusalem and, later, that God would send Jesus Christ to them, if they repented. Anyone accepting the testimony of @Acts 2, 3 and 4 would believe that Jesus was the Christ but @Acts 9 brings in "the Son of God", and answering to it, the Jew would be taken outside of Jerusalem morally "Who is he that gets the victory over the world" would include what was set up there. The Son of God connects us with a new system, having heaven as its centre. The thought in "the Christ" is that everything would be accomplished by Him that God purposed. Paul was a "prisoner of the Christ Jesus" @Ephesians 3:1 for the nations, so that "the Christ" has reference to us Gentiles too. In speaking of the mystery the apostle says, "which is *Christ in you* the hope of glory", @Colossians 1: 27. It is the working out of the "prisoner of the Christ Jesus for you nations" @Ephesians 3:1. In @Ephesians 3 Paul goes on to show that he had received the revelation of the mystery, which involved the working out of all the divine thoughts in Jew and Gentile as one body. It is a wonderful achievement! At the end of chapter 2 of that epistle he shows what "the Christ" had brought about: "Broken down the middle wall of enclosure", @Ephesians 2:14 and came and "preached the glad tidings of peace, to you who were afar off ... and to those who were nigh". @Ephesians 3:17. He not only preached
{146}
the glad tidings to the Gentile and Jew but formed them into one body, and set up in that one body all the divine thoughts. In chapter 3 Paul says, "I am a prisoner of the Christ Jesus for you nations", @Ephesians 3:1 and prayed to the Father for them, that they might "apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge, that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God". @Ephesians 3:18,19. The application of Christ to the Gentiles is very forcible. As the Christ, He sets up everything, and then maintains what is set up. But the Son of God takes both Jew and Gentile out of the world into a new order of things entirely.
We have another thing in chapter 4 the *confession* of the Son of God, not only belief in Him but the confession of His name. The name signifies all that is presented in the Son in testimony; whoever confesses it, God dwells in him. This brings in Paul's ministry; the confession of the Son of God made room for God. The house of God is really contingent on the confession of the Son. Saul would be an example of that when in Damascus "straightway in the synagogues he preached Jesus that he is the Son of God", @Acts 9: 20. That was a confession, and God dwelt in him. It was the beginning of things. The house really comes out of that; room is made for God. So that the confession of the Son of God immediately provides a dwelling-place for God. It might be said, The dwelling-place was present at Pentecost; that is true, but the position was not clearly seen until the confession of the Son of God came in. Early in Acts the links with the temple were not broken, and it is when you come to chapter 9 that you get the setting of the house.
The idea of a dwelling suggests that things are congenial. The Son builds the house, and then brings in a system of affections, of which Solomon is
{147}
a type. Notwithstanding all the affection seen in David, he is not allowed to build. It was Solomon who built the house, if you take up Solomon's history, you get the idea of a house. Jehovah loved him, and named him Jedidiah, and said of him, "It is he who shall build a house for my name I will be his father, and he shall be my son", @2 Samuel 7:13,14. If the Son builds the house, He considers for the family that shall reside there; hence the confession of the Son is of immense moment in regard to the house: "Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him". @1 John 4:15.
He "came by water and by blood, Jesus the Christ", @1 John 5:6. The order of man enters into that, and His coming is in connection with the *means* of cleansing; cleansing is necessary if we are to be brought into Canaan, and we must have these elements of water and blood to release us in view of entering. Here the water comes first, whilst in the gospel the order is reversed, because he is dealing with practical cleansing. Of course the judicial side is before the Spirit in the gospel, but John has before him in this epistle our being brought into the consciousness of eternal life, and for that the water is essential. It is the application of the death of Christ, not exactly for sin, but for moral cleansing. There are many who see their title to life clear but connect it with the blood; whereas entering into it consciously necessitates the water. This cleansing would be from the world system and also from the flesh in us; it corresponds to the laver in the court of the tabernacle.
There are many who rest in the fact that "it is the blood that maketh atonement for the soul". It is one thing to have the title to a thing, but another to have the consciousness of it. There is title in the blood certainly, even as there is title in the handful of fine flour (@Leviticus 5: 11 - 13) for that matter - that is enough to give you a footing before God -- but for
{148}
the consciousness of eternal life you need more than the handful of fine flour. Here we have the threefold testimony, "the Spirit, and the water, and the blood". @1 John 5:8. It is the Spirit that bears witness -- that is general -- but then He applies the water and the blood. They agree in one to the truth that we have eternal life, but the Spirit is necessary as a complete witness. He gives us the consciousness of it. The water is clearly for us, the blood for God; but all was fulfilled in the cross. We needed the water, but what God needed to meet His holy judgment against sin was the blood. The Lord said to the penitent thief, "To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise". @Luke 23:43. His own death was in principle the water. The application of death has to come to pass in respect of us morally; it is the only way through which we cross the Jordan. The washing of water by the word is the same thing; the *word* is the intelligent expression of the death of Christ. With regard to the "coming" of verse 6, the apostle has before him the sphere of the testimony, and sees the Lord coming into it through death. Paul says, "Coming, he has preached the glad tidings of peace to you who were afar off, and ... to those who were nigh" @Ephesians 2:17, meaning the sphere of the testimony of God. The Lord has come into it, not by incarnation, but as having died, it is a matter for faith to apprehend. He is in heaven literally, but has come into this sphere as having died, and as having died He has the means of relieving every one who has faith, in order to bring them into the enjoyment of the blessing of God. So that we are in a wonderful time. We look at Him as having died, and therefore having the means of setting us all perfectly free for the enjoyment of the blessing of God.. Actually God has crowned Him in heaven.
The threefold witness is that which is presented objectively by way of testimony. Then you have in
{149}
verse 10 something for yourself; the believer has the witness *in himself*. In verse 11 we have what is presented collectively in the saints, the fact that they have eternal life: "This is the witness, that God has given to us eternal life; and this life is in the Son". @1 John 5:11. The fact of eternal life being possessed by the saints is a witness on the part of God. It is not now a question of preaching, but of the fact that the saints have it as the gift of God. We have the Son by way of intelligent faith and affection, it is what we have in our souls; the believer characteristically has the Son, and having Him he has life. Whilst the apostle is dealing with the individual mainly in the chapter, he says that God has given to *us* eternal life, which would be a collective idea; it refers in principle to all saints, We must have the company to have the conditions of life, that which answers to the land of promise. The witness that God has here cannot be set aside or refuted, because it is in *life*. Jannes and Jambres tried to produce life but could not, and were compelled to say, "This is the finger of God". @Exodus 8:19. What Moses did could not be imitated. It is not a mere theory, but something known and enjoyed here on earth, and it cannot be overthrown. It is the same character of life as spoken of in @Psalm 133, that is, life in a collective way, where brethren are dwelling together in unity. It is heavenly in character enjoyed on earth: "as the days of the heavens which are above the earth", @Deuteronomy 11: 21. It is also our eternal portion. The Lord has come by water and blood, so that we may be free to enjoy it, that there might thus be a witness for God. It is a marvellous position, because it refers to the saints brought out of the world, delivered from the flesh, set up in relation to Christ and to one another in the enjoyment of the blessing of God; such a testimony cannot be set aside or imitated. Each believer necessarily has eternal life individually, but the position of it is *in*
{150}
*the Son*. Paul had it, for example in Galatians 1:15,16 he says, "But when God ... was pleased to reveal his Son in me". As witnessing for Christ in the synagogue at Damascus he had life, and none could touch him. Peter had made a confession similar to Paul's during the Lord's ministry on earth. He developed the first part of that confession, "Thou art the Christ", @Matthew 16:16 in his service; but Paul brought in the second part of the confession, and it was not simply the announcing of a doctrine, he preached in the synagogue that Jesus is the Son of God; it was consciously known by him. With Peter, the Lord said, "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it *to* thee". @Matthew 16:17. Paul says, "But when God ... was pleased to reveal his Son *in* me". @Galatians 1:15,16. There is a difference there.
No doubt the witness on the part of God was in Antioch -- that he had given to the saints eternal life; @Acts 13. One does not know of any better illustration of the statements here found than Paul himself. He may be taken to illustrate every phase of them. It is wonderful what he possessed in the way of intelligence and affection. Eternal life is a wide and comprehensive thought but to have life in your soul is a wonderful thing, and usually refers to *power* there, it is like @John 4, the water becomes a fountain springing up *into eternal life*. He who has the knowledge of the Son of God in his soul enjoys the blessedness of eternal life, and there is power in such a one, and moral superiority to circumstances. Peter did not develop the thought of the Son of God. The Lord gave him the keys of the kingdom. But the truth of the Son of God involves the house, so that the opening up and developing of the truth of the Son of God was left for Paul. The Lord did say to Peter what He would do: "On this rock I will build my assembly" @Matthew 16:18; the thought of building was in the Lord's mind, but Peter had to wait for that. It was not communicated to Peter who would be used
{151}
for the building; for this service He sovereignly brings in Paul.
Life and eternal life are not dissimilar in character but the Spirit of God uses the word 'eternal' life to show that there is nothing to succeed it, for there is no termination of it. The word 'eternal' is a well-known term. Scripture has its own vocabulary and that word has its own meaning there; it is applied to God Himself, hence we cannot make the word 'eternal' too strong, in whatever connection it is applied. When we apply it to life itself, we have something beyond creature power, as in Satan, to destroy, or the believer to lose: "They shall never perish", @John 10: 28. The earthly saints will have it too for they will not die at all. They are not as privileged as we, for besides having this great blessing, we have heavenly ones.
For full development everything awaited Paul's ministry. He is the architect and erecter of the structure, whereas Peter's work was in the foundation, and his name is there; @Revelation 21:14. It is the Son ruling as King we have to take account of. It is a great thing to see the antitype of Solomon on the throne in Christ, and then as building the house. First we have Solomon *ruling*, and we see the wisdom which marked his starting out; he could tell which woman was the mother of the child. He was a remarkable man as a ruler, but when you see him as a *builder*, you have another character of things before you and that is where the truth of the Son of God is so important, it brings in a new system of things.
In verse 13 he says, "These things have I written to you that ye may *know* that ye have eternal life who believe on the name of the Son of God". @1 John 5:13. We have got the secret of why he writes; it is that we might know consciously that we have eternal life. It is, as one has often remarked, like the soundings that a mariner takes after having taken the position
{152}
of the sun. You take account of what is in yourself; that is, by the soundings you discover what God has effected in you. Then by keeping the position of eternal life as in the Son clearly before you, you are preserved from self-occupation in the process. A person might have eternal life as a matter of light, but the right understanding of this epistle enables the believer to have the consciousness of having it. He sees what God has effected in Christ and what He has effected in him -
Verses 18, 19 and 20 are all in line with what we have been saying. In verse 14 it says, "If we ask him anything according to his will, he hears us". @1 John 5:14. You know that God heard you; as having the consciousness of it you are sure. It is like Ahasuerus the king holding out the golden sceptre to Esther, she knew that she was heard and accepted. The Lord said, "I knew that thou always hearest me", @John 11: 42.
The process through which one goes really means that if we did not have the authority of Scripture for this, we could not say these things; we assure ourselves by this authority; we face the matter with the authority of Scripture. But we analyse and find what is of God in us and what is not. We know there is that in us, namely, the divine seed, which cannot sin but we draw a line of demarcation between that and what is of the flesh in us which can only sin. This epistle is really the consummation of a process which begins in @Romans 7. It is the subjective side: "with the mind I myself serve the law of God; but with the flesh the law of sin". @Romans 7:25. This process enables one to detect the workings of the flesh, and is largely worked out in @Romans 7. John's epistle enables one to look up to Christ and see every divine perfection there; but then I must look at myself and analyse my experiences, failings and thoughts, and see where I am. In the presence of all this one can say, with
{153}
the authority of this epistle, one knows consciously that one has eternal life: "These things have I written to you that ye may *know* that ye have eternal life". @1 John 5:13. It does not say, Believe on the Son of God, but on the *name* of the Son of God (verse 13), showing that we have come to know the honour and renown that reside in that Person. It is the result of growth in the knowledge of the Son of God. You believe on Him, and you see that His renown fills the whole sphere.
John does not tell us what the sin unto death is, it is left for us to determine, as having spiritual discernment. The entire enjoyment of what has been before us is nullified by allowing idols. The true God is presented in One having come by water and blood. He is the true God. We can only see God in Christ. Verse 20 is characteristically Christian knowledge. Knowing the Son of God has come would indicate a knowledge of the Father. It is remarkable that the Lord should be presented to us here at the finish as the true God. It is really the fulfilment of @John 17: 3: "That they should know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent". The thought that He is the eternal life suggests His manhood, it is what He is as Man on *our* side. As the
"true God" He is on God's side. God in His essential being can never be seen or approached. Verse 20 refers to the fact that God is made known in a Man. He has come out in a Man to be known and worshipped; so that there is no excuse to turn to idols. That which was contemplated by the apostles from the beginning, which was heard, seen and handled, was reported, that we might have fellowship with them, so that like the man in @John 9 we fall down and render homage to Him.
{154}
ESTABLISHMENT
@Romans 16: 25
We find in this scripture the thought of establishment. The apostle in finishing his letter, breaks out in this remarkable doxology, desiring that these Roman Christians should be established. He had said that God would bruise Satan under their feet shortly. God has not only bruised Satan under the feet of Christ, but He bruises him under the feet of the saints. This is a word of great encouragement for troubled believers, of whom, alas there are many. They are troubled because they are unestablished, and unestablished souls are exposed to the disturbing activities of Satan. "God shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly". @Romans 16: 20. Hence the apostle gives definite word to the believers in Rome as to the bruising of Satan, but then there was this further thought in the finishing of the letter that they should be established, and that God had power to establish them.
One is reminded, in referring to the subject, of the words of Agur (@Proverbs 30: 1 - 4), who had learnt evidently through experience to be a very humble man. I refer to him because he introduces certain inquiries relative to this question of establishment and shows that it hinges on our knowledge of God. He says, "Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended? who hath gathered the wind in his fists? who hath bound the waters in a garment? who hath established all the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou canst tell?" @Proverbs 30:4. The understanding of divine establishment hinges on our knowledge of God, and our knowledge of God must be according to revelation, a revelation which has brought out the great fact of God being a Father and of His having a Son. "What is his name?" he says, "and what is his son's
{155}
name, if thou canst tell?" @Proverbs 30:4. For you things hinge on what *you* can tell. All has been told out from the divine side. Revelation is complete: "The only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him". @John 1:18. Now it is, "if thou canst tell". You see, christians are supposed to answer questions. Meetings such as these are most important, for in them the Holy Spirit brings to us certain features of the truth, which may be needed; but then, if questions are put to you, what can you tell? Are you going away with contentment that somebody else can tell something? What can you tell about God? He ascended, He descended, He gathers the wind in His fists. Can you tell anything about these things? The north wind strikes you in adverse circumstances; God gathers that in His fists. Some of us here know something about it. And then He binds the waters in a garment. Satan can act upon the waters but not bind them in a garment; his action is necessarily limited. God limits satanic action; He can hold the wind in His fists and bind waters in a garment. Then he says, "He establishes the ends of the earth". @Proverbs 30:4. Think of the power of God! Job made fine speeches, silenced his three adversaries, but God addressed him, calling his attention to created things. Job, silenced, put his hand upon his mouth, @Job 40: 4. "The invisible things of him ... are clearly seen - . - by the things that are made", @Romans 1:20. The earth is thus referred to as representing divine establishment. God "built his sanctuary ... like the earth which he hath established for ever", @Psalm 78: 69. Thus He establishes the saints. "He that establishes us with you in Christ - .. is God", @2 Corinthians 1: 21. The most elaborately founded empires have collapsed, but what God establishes remains. So that the question is put to us, "What is his name, and what is his son's name?" @Proverbs 30:4. I would urge then the inquiry as to how much you can tell, whether there is this knowledge
{156}
of God in the saints which is referred to in @Proverbs 30, whether we can give an answer to every one of the hope that is in us. We read in @1 John 2:27 that the unction teaches us of all things. As thus taught, we are able to answer questions. John says, "We know", @1 John 5: 19 - 21. I urge this, because many of us are content to listen to things and enjoy things that are given out, but what can we tell? The apostle is praising God here (@Romans 16: 25 - 27), but it is the God who has power to establish us according to his glad tidings; he gives us the standard in connection with which God establishes the saints. What do we know about Paul's gospel? He speaks of "the radiancy of the glad tidings of the glory of the Christ", @2 Corinthians 4: 4. Through Paul's gospel we learn that the believer is not only justified and saved from the authority of darkness, but he is made fit for heaven; he is a son. The believer is established according to *that* gospel.
Then there is "the preaching of Jesus Christ". @Romans 16:25. This refers to the moral greatness of Christ. It is the Man anointed rather than the anointed Man. The former refers to the moral features of the Man as they were manifested in Him here on earth; the latter is what He is in heaven. In Paul's preaching I see how he brought forward "the man", the Lord as here. If I am to be established by the power of God it is according to that, according to the preaching of Jesus Christ. The third thing is the mystery; we are to he established according to this also.
You will bear with me in emphasising these things because, while one rejoices in the interest there is among the people of God, one discovers a great want of spiritual intelligence. There is thus a word for every one of us in the question, "What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou canst tell?" @Proverbs 30:4. And so the apostle desired that the saints should be established "according to the revelation of the
{157}
mystery, which was kept secret since the world began, but now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the everlasting God". @Romans 16:25,26. Think of being admitted into that, the *secret of God*! God Himself kept it securely hidden since the world began, but now I am admitted into it and I am to be established in connection with it. Think of having a part in the *mystery of God*!
These are wonderful things, and I speak that every one may look into the Scriptures more and read of these things for himself. The apostle says elsewhere that he combated for the saints that their hearts should be comforted and knit together in love unto the full assurance of understanding of the mystery of God in which are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; @Colossians 2:1 - 3. They are all there for us, and God would have us established in connection with them. The Roman Christians obviously had not attained to these things. The apostle had not yet ministered among them, but he had it on his heart that they should be established. God had power to establish them and it should be according to his gospel, according to the preaching of Jesus Christ, and according to the mystery.
I feel encouraged to call attention to this passage in connection with what we have had, so that each saint should go away with the inquiry as to what *he* can tell. The apostle said to Timothy, "Thou hast fully known my doctrine". @2 Timothy 3:10. Timothy would listen to everything Paul said; he was a learner. The apostle could entrust him with the testimony; he says, "The things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also". @2 Timothy 2:2. So that it becomes a question for everyone, What can I tell? what can I impart to others?
{158}
EXPANSION
@2 Corinthians 6: 11 - 18; @2 Corinthians 12: 1 - 5
I have in mind to speak about expansion, a word simple to understand and much used among men and used in Scripture in a spiritual way. The believer, having the light of God revealed in Christ, and having come into the light of Christ as Man before God, has material in his soul for expansion. But as is usual when the Spirit of God would encourage the saints to go in for further spiritual things He has to exhort, and in exhorting to bring in negatives, hence we have here, "Be not unequally yoked together with unbelievers", etc. @2 Corinthians 6:14. In drawing near to the realm of the spiritual, the Holy Spirit invariably brings about in the souls of the people of God, the sense of the necessity for contraction. The way in is narrow. The Lord says, "Narrow is the way and straight is the gate that leadeth unto life". @Matthew 7:14. So that in view of the narrowness of the way, and the straightness of the gate, the necessity for reduction becomes quite obvious. Big men are at a great disadvantage. And as we have seen in our readings, Rahab, when speaking with the spies sent to Jericho by Joshua, referred to the destruction of Og by the Israelites. "We heard what ye did to the two kings of the Amorites, Sihon and Og, how ye utterly destroyed them, and our hearts melted". @Joshua 2: 10,11.
She proceeds from the occurrence at the Red Sea to an occurrence forty years later. Passing over many doings of the people in the wilderness, doings that were shameful -- they had made a golden calf; they had rebelled against Moses -- but she passes over all that and says, "We heard what ye did unto the two kings". Now I mention this, dear brethren, to bring before you how a spiritual person takes account of exploits of the people of God by reduction. Reduction
{159}
can only be by the Spirit. Now I say that for the young ones here who may not as yet have begun to avail themselves of the Spirit of God, but He is available to you for reduction: "If ye by the Spirit put to death the deeds of the body ye shall live". @Romans 8:13. Do not attempt it otherwise. The Holy Spirit is available to you for the mortification of the flesh. This is what Rahab takes account of.
In the book of Deuteronomy, which in a special way treats of things spiritually, we have the dimensions of the bed of Og. He could never enter by the narrow way. Of course he was king of the Amorites, but he represents a feature in our spiritual history. He would be a man taken account of at Corinth. "Ye are puffed up", says the apostle @1 Corinthians 5:2. Who could measure up with Og? See the size of his bed! He was a man of great stature, but his very stature would preclude a possibility of his entering. Og is the man in the flesh. It is that big "I" that stands out before us when we do exploits. "They measure themselves by themselves" said the apostle @2 Corinthians 10:12. The habit of setting one brother over against another leads to the recognition of natural ability and attainments and party feeling. These things have to be abandoned if we are to enter Canaan. They may, in some sense, find recognition in the wilderness, but Rahab took note of the destruction of Sihon and Og. They were brought down by spiritual power in the saints. Rahab spoke of what the Lord did at the Red Sea and what the *people* did to the two kings. The latter type refers to the work of the Spirit in the saints. The Spirit, in that way, teaches us what a sister Rahab was. The Holy Spirit loves to dwell on women of worth, because they represent the subjective results of the work of the Spirit. @Proverbs 31 speaks of the virtuous woman. Rahab comes under that head. She took account of the exploits of the spiritual in Israel. It was by the power of the Spirit typically these two
{160}
men were brought down. They were utterly destroyed.
Rahab herself has to undergo a most humiliating experience on the day of her salvation. She was saved *alive* and set outside the camp of Israel; @Joshua 6: 23. She is not immediately brought into the camp. What exercises she would have as she saw the city sword-swept! She was set outside the camp. She would thus learn that the camp of God was holy. And then the Spirit of God tells us, "She dwelleth in Israel unto this day". @Joshua 6:25. I refer to her because in her we see the spirit of reduction.
In the first letter to the Corinthians the man after the flesh is shut out. The apostle insists on the cross, where he was judicially terminated. One said, "I am of Paul", another "I of Cephas", and another "Of Christ". @1 Corinthians 1:12. Parties with leaders existed, and there were dissensions amongst them, at the Lord's supper; and so the apostle rebukes even them. The first letter is like the "whip of small cords" @John 2:15 with which the Lord cleansed the temple. No "package" was to be carried through the temple. No secret compacts among brethren, social distinctions, preferences, etc. -- all these things are foreign to the house of God. You see, if you apply that today to Christendom there is very little left. But God will apply it. It is our business to apply these principles now. 1 Corinthians contains them.
The second letter brings in expansion. You cannot have expansion in the Spirit without reduction in the flesh. The apostle addresses them as one who had been down into death; @2 Corinthians 1:8. His very life was threatened. But God delivered him. He is brought up from the grave, as it were, and thus used to open up the heart of God to them, in the covenant and the truth of reconciliation. The covenant is what God *is to us* in Christ, and the reconciliation is what *we are to God* in Christ. In the light of these two truths we are called on to expand.
{161}
Unless we understand the covenant somewhat we will be in poverty and under restraint. So in @Isaiah 56:3 we read, "Neither let the son of the stranger that hath joined himself to the Lord, speak, saying, The Lord hath utterly separated me from his people: neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree". You see, the Spirit of God is dealing with people labouring under disabilities. All this clearance that I have been speaking of may bring about in some a legal state, whereas God would have us free. He says of the eunuch, "Even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls, a place and a name better than of sons and of daughters". @Isaiah 56:5. And of the son of the alien, "Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt offerings and sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar". @Isaiah 56:7. What a word of encouragement for every soul here who is labouring under any disability! The son of the alien necessarily labours under limitations and the eunuch labours under limitations. Whereas God would have you to know that as taking hold of His covenant He gives you a place and a name in His house, better than of sons and daughters. God would impress upon us the importance of the covenant. How He sets our hearts free. "Perfect love casteth out fear". @1 John 4:18. And where is perfect love to be seen? He has given His Son for you. I believe there are many saints labouring under assumed disabilities. They have given up the world, they earnestly desire to be with the people of God. They have joined themselves to the Lord, yet through want of spiritual intelligence labouring under disabilities. As a believer you are not the son of an alien. You are "no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens with the saints, and of the household of God". @Ephesians 2:19. God would disabuse your mind of these disabilities. He says, "I will make you joyful in my house of prayer". @Isaiah 56:7. How attractive
{162}
it is! You are there in perfect liberty in God's house, and He will accept your offerings, however small.
The results of the working of the flesh among them is dealt with in the first epistle to the Corinthians. Now the positive side is the love of God, and this the new covenant opens up. I think we have found a little of that since we have been together. "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". @2 Corinthians 3:17. That is @2 Corinthians 3. Chapter 4 brings out how completely the minister of the covenant was in accord with the covenant, and the next chapter brings out *what pleases God*. As in accord with the covenant we are in accord with reconciliation. We are moving about in the body, agreeable to God. "We are zealous, whether present or absent, to be agreeable to him", @2 Corinthians 5: 9. And then he goes on to say that "If one died for all, then were all dead, ... that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again". @2 Corinthians 5:14,15. "Though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more". @2 Corinthians 5:16. "If any one be in Christ, there is a new creation". @2 Corinthians 5::17. There is first reduction and contraction, then the expansion of the heart of the saints by the presentation of the love of God, reconciliation and new creation. They are not only presented doctrinally, but in the apostle's life and ministry. Whether present or absent he wished to be agreeable to the Lord. He had a definite object in life. Then he said, "We do not know any one after the flesh". @2 Corinthians 5:16. Only *he* could say it, perhaps, but it is a wonderful thing to have such great spiritual experience brought near to you in a man of like passions with yourself. So that if any one be in Christ, it is new creation. We are not literally in new creation yet, but did it ever dawn on you that there is such a thing as new creation? "Old things are passed away behold, all things are become new". @2 Corinthians 5:17. I do commend to you that remarkable statement.
{163}
In the next chapter he gives us a list of some thirty-five or more things or circumstances which he had experienced himself; @2 Corinthians 6: 4 - 10. Then he says, "Our mouth is opened to you ... our heart is expanded". @2 Corinthians 6:11. They were his children; he says, "I speak unto you as children; let your heart also expand itself" @2 Corinthians 6:13. He had presented the truth to them, being himself a witness to it in his ways, and now he appeals to them to become enlarged. And then he uses negatives. "What fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness? and what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel? and what agreement hath the temple of God with idols?" @2 Corinthians 6: 15,16. The questions answer themselves, and their very answers involve absolute contraction from the side of the flesh. This must be if there is to be spiritual expansion. And I do warn young people especially about entering into any alliance, marital or otherwise, with unbelievers.
So the apostle is led, in giving the list, to refer to the temple of the living God. But they were it, and he goes on to say, "God has said, I will dwell among them and walk among them". @2 Corinthians 6:16. One has often thought of God walking amongst the saints. Suppose God walked about amongst His saints in their homes, their business, what would He find? We read that the Lord looked around in the temple first, then cleansed it, and then walked and answered questions in it; @Mark 11.
Well, now, that was about all as to 2 Corinthians, except that in chapter 12, after speaking about cleansing in chapter 7 (chapters 8 and 9 deal with the "giving" of the saints), in the succeeding chapters he brings forward the things that he suffered. He was let down through a window in a basket. And now he says, "I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord. ... Such an one ... caught up into
{164}
paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter". @2 Corinthians 12:4. One has to stop there, because one has to confess that one knows little of visions arid revelations of the Lord, but one would contemplate that we are men in Christ. In that day when we are free from the trammels that hold us now we shall appear as men in Christ. We shalt be manifested with Him. So the church is presented as composed of such, not babes in Christ, but men in Christ. Here it is presented in one person, fourteen years before, but in Ephesians it is, "Until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ". @Ephesians 4:13.
Paul had a most humiliating experience in being let down in a basket, and now, as a man in Christ, he is caught up to the third heaven, into paradise. As here in the flesh he needed the reducing experience of the basket and the "thorn", but expansion belongs to a man in Christ.
{165}
THE YEAR OF RELEASE
@Deuteronomy 14: 22 - 29; @Deuteronomy 15: 1,2; @Philemon 8 - 20
These scriptures may appear to be far apart and unrelated, but I hope to show that though they are such from a historical point of view, yet they are intimately related, and deal with precisely the same thing, namely, the establishment and maintenance of right relations among the people of God. God would have amongst His people family relationships, not only in name but in immediate and permanent activity.
In mentioning the fact of the family, one is led to think of it as presented in an extensive way through Scripture, it being a primary thought with God, and what is primary with God He cherishes so that from John's point of view, the immediate and permanent result of the Lord's becoming flesh was, that a family came into evidence. It says, "He came to his own, and his own received him not". @John 1:11. John sums up the ministry of Christ in the midst of Israel briefly saying, "As many as received him" -- there were some who received Him -- "to them gave he the right to he children of God", @John 1:11, 12. That is what we are here and now.
In his first epistle, John also says, "Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be *called* the children of God ... Beloved, now are we the children of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be", @1 John 3:1, 2. Not only are we accorded the right to take the place of children, but we are called such, we have a known designation -- "the children of God".
Now I wish to speak on these lines, and would seek to show how the family is endowed, so that there should be the means whereby our status and dignity are maintained in this world. The book of Genesis
{166}
yields more family instruction than any other book in the Old Testament. Deuteronomy corresponds in result. Genesis affords the instruction that bears fruit in Deuteronomy. That is, the people were to go into the land as a family. This chapter (@Deuteronomy 14) says, the people were the sons of Jehovah, and then the Spirit of God prescribes their food. We all know the effect of food in the bringing up of children, in the forming of their constitutions, so that the relationships being formally recognised, the food is prescribed.
But prior to all this, there was the original patriarchal influence and example (I trust you will follow my remarks). God had said to Moses, "I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob", @Exodus 3:6. These are the patriarchs, and Jacob, the last of them, shines in his true patriarchal instincts, intelligence and energy as he was about to pass off the scene. One refers to him with a peculiar kind of feeling. Our minds last evening were directed to a glorious sunset. Such a sunset is absorbing in its splendour, and I would liken the end of Genesis to a sunset such as was described to us. Jacob hears that Joseph, the object of his tenderest affection, is coming to him; the one upon whom the preservation of the family depended, and it says, "Israel strengthened himself". @Genesis 48:2. There is no evidence that he took a stimulant. The power was in him, he strengthened himself although of advanced age. He rises to the occasion in the energy and power of *Israel*, and received Joseph, saying, "I had not thought to see thy face". @Genesis 48:11. He also says, "Thy two sons ... shall be mine". @Genesis 48:5. He knew he was going to die, but was in the energy and strength of Israel, and consciously a patriarch. Joseph's sons were now *his* sons. And further, he says, I am going to indicate what they are to be. Joseph, on his part, with true parental affection, brings the lads "out from his knees", @Genesis 48:12, and the
{167}
patriarch blesses them. It says, "Guiding his hands wittingly", @Genesis 48:14, indicating who was to have the first place. (See @Genesis 48.)
Now, beloved, this parental designation is not far away from us. It refers to "the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in the heavens and on the earth is named", @Ephesians 3:14, 15. The Father names the families, and has given us the first place. Let us accept it. Of all the families named of the Father, the Church has the first place; even so in Israel, we have Joseph instead of Reuben, and Ephraim instead of Manasseh, and Levi taking precedence of all! Who devises such changes? God in His wisdom; and in that wisdom He has selected us to be first -- to have a unique place, the one nearest to Christ. We are *named of the Father*. As Israel, in remarkable intelligence, representing God Himself, designated Ephraim's greatness and multitudes, in whom the people were to be blessed, so God has designated us in wisdom, and more than wisdom, being "rich in mercy", and "for his great love". @Ephesians 2:4.
Think of this for a moment: "For his great love, wherewith he loved *us*, ... hath quickened us together with Christ ... and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: that in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2: 4 - 7. And so the apostle goes on, in his own energetic, loving way, to say, "Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God" @Ephesians 2:19. That is what we are today. Our heavenly position is designated on account of His great love wherewith He loved us. Who could explain that love? No one. We bow to it, owning it is sovereign. We should rejoice in God's sovereignty, because of what it means to us. If there is anything that will give impetus to our affections
{168}
in a coming day, it is the knowledge of the great love of God underlying the position of the church.
Well, Jacob is about to die, and expresses these parental instincts, in view of leaving a family behind him. He says, "Gather yourselves together, and I will tell you what will befall you at the end of days", @Genesis 49: 1. He would have them to know what should happen. They were to represent him, and in doing so to have a great place here; so he says, "I will tell you". Then he says moreover, "Assemble yourselves, and hear" @Genesis 49: 2. That is to say, there is not only the evidence of the mind of God in the great patriarch, but the sons are to hearken to *Israel* -- it is the spiritual side -- their *father*. And then, at the end, it says, "All these are the twelve tribes of Israel, ... and he blessed them: everyone according to his blessing". @Genesis 49:28. In other words, the tribes are set up fully endowed. And as Isaac, in an earlier day, had blessed Jacob, saying, "See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field" -- the field representing rich soil whence income would be derived -- so Jacob, according to Isaac's blessing, was sustained by corn and wine; @Genesis 27: 27, 28. The tribes, in like manner, are richly endowed, and Deuteronomy takes that into account.
Moses, the writer of the Pentateuch, was aware of all these things, and in reading those books we should always remember that it is a retrospective view, written by a man who had been forty years in the desert with God and the people; he looks back and records everything from that standpoint. It is only thus we can understand the Pentateuch aright, and so in referring to the family, he says, "Ye are sons of Jehovah" (@Deuteronomy 14: 1), not now the sons of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. We read in chapter 26, that an Israelite is to come with his basket of firstfruits to Jehovah and say, "A perishing Aramaean was my father". @Deuteronomy 26:5. There is nothing about that in
{169}
@Genesis 48, it does not depict a perishing Aramaean. Jacob is Israel strengthening himself, blessing the tribes, and representing God in so doing, though outwardly in weakness, having gone down to Egypt with a few. Spiritually he was *Israel*, progenitor of millions (not "a few") and these are now "sons of Jehovah".
Well now, the endowment is what will sustain us in our dignity, so the first thing is, what will your property bring in the first year, the third year, and the seventh year. In the seventh year you are so wealthy, spiritually, that you are able to "make a release". I can only briefly speak upon these three points, and would seek to enlist the interest of everyone here as setting out in his spiritual career.
That career is composed of hours, days, weeks, months, years. You have to wait a year before you can make any definite reckoning as to your acquirements. You may think you have acquirements, but your brethren know differently. You may think you can speak well and attempt to preach, but you have to wait a year in order to make a definite reckoning. It is the tithe of the first *year*, not of the first quarter, or the first half year that you bring to Jehovah. The inheritance was divided amongst themselves, each man was to have an allotment according to his needs; and now what will you do with it? You must spend a year on it, and a year is a considerable time for a young person. Time passes swiftly with the old, but with the young it is not so swift and so you sow your seed in the Springtime, and you have to wait. "The earth bears fruit of itself", @Mark 4:28 and you are cast on God for it. During all these months between the sowing and the reaping you are cast on Him. Many things may intervene: You have to watch the sky, to look out for weather and be continually on the alert, if you are to have a crop. You say you love God, that is like a crop growing.
{170}
Then you look after it all the more because God looks for a tithe. You have to appear before Him and you must not come empty; if you have no crop, how can you bring a tithe?
I speak especially to yearlings. You are to go where God has placed His name with your tithe. You may think you have a fairly good crop, but when you come up to Jerusalem with your tithe and lay it down alongside of others¬, you may be very humbled about it. There are comparisons, you see. Here is a man from Beer-sheba. Look at his tithe, see his bag of money; think how many fatlings he can buy and the number of people he can entertain! Consider this brother, he has had a good year, for he has looked after his farm. And even in his youth he takes account of the Levite. Young people are not prone to have respect for the Levites. A Levite is one who will not minister to your natural feelings. He will not recognise your family claims, nor will he appeal to you naturally. But God says, even in your first year, do not forget him. He disregards his father and mother, and has no respect for family feelings when it is a question of his service. You must take him into account, and the more you do so the more you evidence your spirituality.
We now come to the third year: three in Scripture, denotes a complete period. It is completeness as to testimony. Every third year the Israelite who brings his tithe stores it within his gates. His doing so shows that he can be trusted. God does not say to him, You must come up to Jerusalem, for He can trust him to store up in his own gates his tithe. He is not like the man in Luke's gospel who had no room where to bestow his fruits, and purposed to pull down his barns and build larger, and there to store all his fruits and his goods. That man was not thinking of others at all. He certainly could not be trusted. God says to him, "Fool, this night thy soul
{171}
shall be required of thee", @Luke 12:20. What is going to become of his goods? Whose shall they be? These were given to him to enjoy, not to store up. He did not know whose they should be. Solomon says, the man that comes after may be wise or a fool. (See @Ecclesiastes 2:18, 19.) What will the fool do with your goods? Squander them, it may be. So the word here is, "At the end of three years thou shalt bring forth all the tithe of thine increase the same year [all of it], and shalt lay it up within thy gates: and the Levite (because he hath no part nor inheritance with thee), and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, which are within thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and be satisfied; that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hand which thou doest". @Deuteronomy 14:28,29. It refers to a "local brother" -- to use a familiar expression -- whose farm has done well, who has progressed spiritually and has added to his wealth; he has laid it up within his gates, and all the local brethren share it with him. That man can be trusted.
John, in his gospel, contemplates believers that can be trusted. The Lord, indeed, elsewhere, speaks of being faithful in that which is another's, otherwise who shall give you that which is your own? This is that which is our own. Our spiritual wealth is our proper endowment, and the man who is allowed to store it up within his gates can be trusted. He has already been up to Jerusalem and has measured up with his brethren, and now in the third year he is, in a sense, perfected. The Lord uses the word in regard to Himself, referring to His resurrection; @Luke 13: 32. The apostle says in Philippians, "As many as be perfect", that is, their senses are developed; they are not one-sided but are balanced, and such are to "walk by the same rule", @Philippians 3:15, 16. In the presence of a perfect man "the meeting" does not lack anything. He is wealthy and shares it
{172}
abundantly with the stranger, fatherless arid widow, and especially with the Levite. The Levite is ever in the mind of God, and must ever be in the mind of the saints. He has no inheritance on earth, and so has to be the special care of the spiritual.
Now the seventh year is the year of *excess*. In that year time Israelite was to make a release. Not only do you show hospitality to your brethren and those who are near to you, but you remove everything that would tend to limitations. I hardly know of anything more pleasurable, in a way, than to be released from what involves bondage. It may be trespass; there is much trespass amongst us. A man who trespasses is obligated to the one against whom he trespasses, but the word here is that you make a release in the seventh year. You are not only "perfect", but spiritual. You are formed in Ephesian character, and as such are marked by excess. It says, "At the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release. And this is the manner of the release: Every creditor that lendeth ought unto his neighbour shall release it; he shall not exact it of his neighbour, or of his brother because it is called the Lord's release". @Deuteronomy 15:1,2. You are now like God Himself. In the seventh year one is, so to say, entirely on the divine side. You see what God is doing: that He has remitted His claim against every man and woman on earth. "When they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both", @Luke 7: 42. That is God's attitude; it is His wonderful year of release.
Now the Christian is brought wholly to the divine side, to the release, not of every man, but of the neighbour and the brother (the stranger is not admitted here). So that instead of being in bondage on account of any claim we, as creditors, may have on them, we release them, and they are free to resume their occupations on their lands, and so develop them. A man bound to a creditor can make but little
{173}
headway, and many of us have suffered on that account. There is no wealth when you are bound to a creditor. Moses said, there shall not be a time when there will be no poor amongst you; the spiritual man therefore opens his hand bountifully to such, for it is "the Lord's release".
Now I have read the verses in Philemon because there is a striking correspondence between them and those in Deuteronomy already considered. The apostle Paul is the creditor and Philemon is the debtor. One need have no fear in having a creditor like Paul, because he is a wealthy man; he can write a substantial cheque, sign it with his own hand, and send it by the hand of one who was once a slave. He sends this cheque to his debtor, and says, Philemon, here is an opportunity for you: this young man left you, and is indebted to you, for he was your slave. In the meantime he has been converted; he is now my son, and is a great comfort to me. I would like to keep him, but I would do nothing without your mind, I therefore send him with this cheque, signed by my own hand. If he owes you anything, include that in it -- put it to my account but remember, you owe to me yourself also. What I wish to do is to establish brotherly relations between Onesimus and yourself.
Now that is the substance of the letter. It is the spirit of Deuteronomy, perfectly expressed in the beloved apostle. He says, I do not claim this for Onesimus as one having authority. I might so do, but for love's sake I rather beseech thee "being such an one as Paul the aged". @Philemon 9. That is, he appeals to him on moral grounds, and says, I send this young man, a brother beloved to me, and I wish that he may be so to you. He is so to you, much more than to me, both in the flesh and in the Lord. Philemon, like many of us, required the gracious touch of a spiritual man, so that he might remit his claim; and
{174}
does it not appeal to you, dear brethren, to remit *your* claim?
It is "the Lord's release", let us then relax our hand from the loan, and in virtue of it, we shall have family circles where there is liberty, where we shall enjoy the affections of brethren beloved, instead of slaves. There is a great deal of misunderstanding and slavish fear amongst us, whereas the year of the Lord's release would enable us to remove all this by remitting all our claims, so that our brethren should be free and no longer slaves. We are truly free, as born of the free woman, and the Lord would have us to be in the liberty of wealth. Poverty tends to slavery, but spiritual wealth maintains us in practical liberty with one another. May the Lord bless the word!
{175}
THE WORK OF THE MINISTRY
@John 20: 17 - 23; @Luke 24: 48; @Mark 16: 15 - 18; @Matthew 28: 18 - 20
I have been thinking about service or ministry. You will remember how, in the epistle to the Ephesians, it is said that the Lord, as ascended into heaven, having led captivity captive, has given gifts unto men, "Some apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers". @Ephesians 4:11. These were to be, as it is said, "for the work of the ministry". @Ephesians 4: 12. You will see that the Lord has ever exercised wisdom and discrimination in the allotment of the gifts. Some apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers. God is the "God of measure", and gifts are dealt out according to His measure. The apostle Paul refers to this in regard to his gift. He laboured according to the measure which God, who is the "God of measure", apportioned to him. Gifts were given according to the order in which they were required in the ministry; they were "for the work of the ministry". -
Now my thought is to present, as the Lord may enable me, from these passages what is needful in ministry. I begin with John and work backwards, according to the order of the books. I begin with John because he is intended for the last days -- the last word, as it were, to us. We are to take up everything in the light of the last communication, and the gospel of John is, I believe, the last divine communication to the assembly -- later even than Revelation -- and it behoves us to view all that preceded in the light of this book. It throws light on all that preceded it. It is the gospel, as most of us know, of the Person of Christ, presented to us by one who was peculiarly loved by Christ, so much so that he is said to be "the disciple whom Jesus loved". @John 21:21. He is thus a type,
{176}
for in these last days what counts specially is love. John says of himself that Jesus loved him, and there is abundant evidence that he loved Jesus. His love was reciprocal, and so he tells us (chapter 14) that he that has Christ's commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves Him. The test of love is in keeping the commandments. And then, again, when the Lord is questioned by Judas, not the Iscariote, as to how He would manifest Himself unto them and not unto the world, the answer is "If a man love me he will keep my words and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with him". @John 14:23. The commandment is first, and then the word. The commandment separates me from all that is contrary to it. The "word" is his *mind*, so that in keeping His word, as loving Him, there are conditions for the divine dwelling. The Father and He would come and make their *abode* there. It is not merely a visit.
Thus you see how John signalises love in a day of general departure, such as this, from the commandment of the Lord. And so I bring it forward now in regard to service. He tells us that the Lord in commissioning the disciples -- breathed into them. This is preceded by the verse I have read to you in reference to His communication to Mary Magdalene, in whom there was responsive love. The Lord honours her by speaking to her of the wonderful relationship into which the disciples were to be given entrance. I refer to this so that we may see that service emanates from the family circle. Qualifications for it are not acquired in the seminaries or universities. They do not afford the education that ministry requires. What John would insist upon is the family circle -- that those who minister according to God are sent forth from the bosom of the family. The disciples are the brethren of Christ. The Lord had just said to Mary, "Go to my brethren" (not 'the brethren'
{177}
now, but "my brethren") "and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father and to my God and your God". "Mary came and told the disciples", etc. @John 20: 17,18. She delivered her message.
In the light of this message they are in a certain place, not "in assembly" -- that is not the word to use, for it is not the assembly that John is concerned about now, but that which underlies it -- *family* relationship. Relationship with, God as Father, relationship with Christ as His brethren. That is the position. They had shut the door for fear of the Jews. They would not have the family in any way corrupted or impaired. The doors were shut. The circle of the family of the brethren is to be immune from all religious corruption and contamination. The Lord stood in the midst. He *stood* there. He is not sitting, because, as I understand, He is going further, and He says, "Peace unto you". @John 20:19. I am not speaking, for the moment, of the privilege of the saints Godward, but of the features of the circle from which the Lord sent out His commissioners. He says again unto them, "Peace unto you". @John 20:21. Having called attention to His love for them, as witnessed by the wounds in His hands and His side, they were to be imbued with the thought of love, as attested by His wounds. Having shown them his hands and His side. He *again* says, "Peace" -- the double portion, that of the first-born. Peace! It is a thought that pervades John, showing that inside there is to be peace. And then He says to them, "As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you". And then He breathed into them. What I see in this, dear brethren, is that the Lord intended representation, and representation must be founded on likeness, and likeness involves the spirit of the one whom I am like. It is not only likeness in physical form, but morally, and for that you must have the same spirit. Now we should not shirk from the idea of representation. No one should
{178}
attempt service without the idea that in some way he represents Christ. He had that in His mind.
Now I dwell on that for a moment, for service may be used on other things, and not accompanied by this. I am to be the representative of Christ as He was the representative of God "The image of the invisible God", @Colossians 1:15 as it says. There must be that in order to serve according to God. He says, "Receive ye". It is not only that the gift is available, but it is to be *received*. "Receive ye Holy Spirit". @John 20:22. You can understand, therefore, that as breathed into by the Lord He made available to them all that was necessary for representation. In the fourth chapter of this gospel we have the *giving* of the Spirit, and in the seventh it is the *receiving* of the Spirit. "This spake he of the Spirit which those that believed on him should receive". @John 7:39. And so here it is "Receive ye Holy Spirit", and then He says, "Whosoever sins ye remit they are remitted". @John 20:23. What a commission, dear brethren, in a world of apostasy and where the people of God are led away in the drift! Sins of "ignorance" exist in all the varied denominations. Here the Lord puts a weapon into our hands, as representing Him in His service. You are to forgive them. You do not hide their sins -- you bring them to their attention; but it is only to forgive them. You are not retaining sins; true, where the will is at work, of course, our attitude must be different; we have to say to such an one, "Your sins are upon you; we are unable to remit them". But in general, according to John, the weapon of deliverance in our hands is forgiveness; it is the weapon of love. I think we can see, brethren, how serious the commission is, and yet how blessed. He has furnished us with the means -- His Spirit. So that in service I think of Him -- I think of His way of doing things; I have got the means because I have His Spirit. So that I approach those whom I would serve in the
{179}
spirit of forgiveness. I set them at ease. I am not charging them with anything. It is the spirit of forgiveness.
Now I want to pass on to Luke. This evangelist would make the service *dignified*. The whole of the last chapter of Luke has reference to the Lord's priestly service so as to qualify them to be witnesses. He opens their understanding that they might understand the Scriptures. The Scriptures had spoken of His death and His resurrection -- the law of Moses, the prophets and the Psalms. And so he says, "That repentance and remission of sins should be preached". @Luke 24:47. Now a representative is one thing, a witness is another, and, mark, what He is dealing with here is not that they were His witnesses -- it is that they are witnesses of the thing. They are competent to bear testimony as having seen the things. I lay stress on the great importance of having the understanding opened so that we may understand the Scriptures. It is in them that we see the full bearing of the things the Lord speaks of here. The Scriptures have announced them, and now they have taken form, and He says, "Ye are witnesses of these things". @Luke 24:48. Of course, the apostles had a special place in this respect, but the question arises -- "Of what am I a witness?" This question should arise with every one of us. Of what can I speak with the positiveness of a witness? What is it that we can bear testimony to with positive certainty?
And then He goes on to say, "Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you". @Luke 24: 49. That is to say, the Spirit is given to them in divine faithfulness. The Father's promise -- a very precious thing. The Lord adds, "Tarry ye in the city until ye be endued with power from on high". @Luke 24:49. Now, that is what I wanted to dwell on particularly. There is spiritual intelligence as the understanding is opened, and there is thus competency to witness, because in a
{180}
spiritual sense I have seen. How am I to bear witness? I am to be clothed with power *from on high*. You do not go on the witness-stand, so to speak, tremblingly or in fear or in shame. You are clothed with power from on high; it descends from heaven. It is a question of spiritual *dignity*. The minister of Christ is to go forth, not with apology, for why should he apologise in bearing witness of such wonderful things? Why should he apologise even because of himself? He is *clothed* with power from, on high. Where is man in all his dignity alongside of the apostles, alongside of Stephen and of Paul? "They could not resist the wisdom and spirit with which Stephen spake". @Acts 6:10. His face shone. He was a heavenly witness, reflecting the dignity of his master.
In Mark it is a question of *faith*; we are to have all these things with faith. There I am looking at what is not seen. I am not occupied with external credentials of Christianity. Learned men ransack history to establish theories and hypotheses in regard to the origin of Christianity, and they find themselves peculiarly handicapped, for there is no literature. There is no record of any Christian literature in the *early* days of Christianity. The Old Testament was there of course, but nothing else. Literature was not *then* needed, for it was a question of *faith*. The dispensation of God was "in faith"; it was a living thing, seen in *persons*. What marked them? "These signs", said the Lord, "shall follow those that believe". @Mark 16:17. Not apostles, not ministers, but "*those that believe*". "They shall cast out devils in my name", etc. @Mark 16:17. There was no need to write a book to prove that such people were from God. They were, themselves, the book. Evil would lift up its head, as in the case of Elymas, the sorcerer, who would turn, away the proconsul from the faith. He was struck blind. Then there was that woman with the spirit of Python,
{181}
who said, "These be the servants of the Most High God". @Acts 16:17. She did not deny God, nor that they were His servants; but she had a demon. There are people talking glibly today about God, but denying Christ. If Paul were here he would cast the demon out. It is well we should accept with humility the "day of small things". They that believed in the early days had power. I do not say there is no power now, but it is relatively very little. "Thou hast a *little* power". @Revelation 3:8. The gospel of Mark, I believe, is the first of all Christian literature that is extant. It was written, no doubt, for Gentile believers. It was written to give an account of the ministry of Jesus. "The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God". @Mark 1:1. There is nothing about His birth or His boyhood, it is the "Son of God". What Mark stresses is *faith*. The Lord appeared to the eleven, in the verse previous to what I read, upbraiding them with their unbelief. They would not believe the testimony, and if you cannot believe on competent testimony you are not a Christian. They disbelieved the testimony of Mary and of those who were going into the country who had seen Him risen. But now they believe, and He says, "Go into all the world", etc. @Mark 16:15. Mark has "the whole creation" in view; "He that believeth shall be saved". @Mark 16:16. It is a question of believing or not believing. And so "these signs", he said, "shall follow those who believe". @Mark 16:17. I want everyone here to look into this carefully, because at the present time ministry can only be in faith. There can be no power to cope with the enemy otherwise.
Now I go on to Matthew. Matthew tells us that the Lord sends a message through a woman to whom He appears, to tell His brethren that they should see Him in Galilee. Now Galilee is a long way to Jerusalem. What Matthew would impress us with, first of all, is that for ministry you must *go* to the Lord, and it will cost you a journey; but what He
{182}
has to impart is precious -- it is worth the journey. You have got to reach Him. Things do not come to you merely by reading, by study. You have got to go to Galilee. You have got to read, to be sure. Timothy was enjoined to "give attention to reading". @1 Timothy 4:13. But in order to minister, in order to affect people, you have got to go, as it were, to the Lord in Galilee. If we aspire to minister (and it is a good thing to aspire to minister), we have got to go there. It involves strenuous exercise; as Paul says, "For this cause I labour", @1 Timothy 4:10 etc. The Lord says, "Tell my brethren that they go into Galilee and there shall they see me". @Matthew 28:10. The order He was about to give them was a most extraordinary one. It was not simply to preach, but to "Teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". @Matthew 28:19. He meets them in Galilee. It is a question of distance, you see. It is a King we are dealing with. He is a great King -- the King of kings, and the Lord of those that exercise lordship. He is to be reverenced and respected. And so, as they met Him they came and "held him by the feet, and worshipped him". @Matthew 28:9. Some doubted, but they worshipped Him. This is most wholesome. He comes to them, and says, "All power is given unto me" @Matthew 28:18 -- a great fact. It is a King who is speaking. Matthew presents the King. Elsewhere we learn that the disciples were to be made a kingdom. We are made a kingdom and priests unto God. He says, "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye, therefore, and make disciples of all nations". @Matthew 28:18. How are we to "make disciples"? That requires power; "make" here implies skill and moral power. For this one has to be a king, and this is by coming under the influence and learning from Him in whom the full thought of kingship is set out. It is said in Proverbs that there are four stately things, and the last one is, "A king against whom there is no rising
{183}
up", @Proverbs 30: 31. That contemplates great moral power. What influence have I got? How am I to rule ten cities by and by if I cannot rule now? The first thing is to rule my own spirit. If I am to rule, I must rule myself first. The Lord exerted a marvellous influence in this world in a lesser way, so did Paul. And as you are influenced by the Lord you will be an influence. "All power is given unto me in heaven and on earth". @Mathew 28:18. Paul brought Christ in among the nations; he presented in his own Person, as far as he could, the features of Christ. He says in speaking of the Corinthians, they had reigned as kings -- but what kind of kings? According to men. One who is a king after Christ has greater influence, and it is thus, and thus only, that disciples can be made.
And so the Lord goes on to say here, "Teaching them and baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". @Matthew 28:19. How much do you young people here understand that as baptised you are brought into all that? We have further -- "Teach them to observe the things that I have commanded you". @Matthew 28:20. It is one thing to *teach* you certain things, but another thing to teach you to *observe* those things. "What things soever I have commanded you". @Matthew 28:20. Look at the so-called Apostolic Church, based on this scripture, and what do you find? The things that Christ commands? No. It is "Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition". @Matthew 15:6. The Lord would bring us back, to observe the things that He has commanded. No one can be a true servant save as he takes these things into account. How can I teach anyone to observe the commands of Christ, save as doing it myself? Paul says, "I show unto you a way of more surpassing excellence". @1 Corinthians 12:31. That is the point. The way of love is not only spoken of -- it is *shown*; and so here it is "Teaching them to observe the things, whatsoever
{184}
I have commanded you". @Matthew 28:20. And then He says, "Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world". @Matthew 28:20. May we not reckon on that? I should never come to these meetings or undertake any service except as relying on this promise.
Well, I trust that what I have said will help us to understand what ministry really involves, and to furnish that, so that in these weak, small days there might be something that will correspond with what there was at the beginning in the way of ministry and service.
{185}
THE INHERITANCE
@Acts 13: 1 - 3; @Joshua 18: 1 - 10
*(Summary of Reading)*
We were talking together this afternoon of the inheritance and saying that Judah had his special portion in the south and Joseph in the north. The position of these two tribes indicates sovereignty. But there were seven other tribes whose portions were not allotted to them, and it appears that these get their portions in connection with the house of God. The two earlier divisions would correspond with the earlier chapters in Acts. We hear nothing of Peter and John being separated for their work by the Spirit, and that would correspond with Judah and Joseph, but the subsequent divisions of the inheritance were in connection with the house.
The house of God in its full bearing came out in connection with Paul's ministry; it was there in principle before, but as a universal thought and conception it came out at Antioch. Paul at Damascus had announced in the synagogue Jesus as Son of God; he had gone up to Jerusalem to make acquaintance with Peter, thus linking himself wisely with what was there; there was no interference with what was already established. This is typified in Judah. Barnabas and Paul then (Barnabas being linked with Jerusalem) set out on their ministry, thus featuring mutual sympathy. They laboured a year in Antioch, and then we get *prophets* coming down from Judaea. One of them announced there was to be a famine over all the habitable earth. This dearth, in the government of God, prepared the way for the house -- for that feature of it which expresses universal sympathy. Those at Antioch who were well-to-do determined to minister to their brethren
{186}
in Judaea, which they did, sending it by Barnabas and Paul. So the sovereignty of God wrought by the Spirit to bring about universal sympathy and spiritual feelings and to overthrow national barriers. The Gentiles took account of the need of their Jewish brethren and helped them, sending it to the elders by these two brothers. We may say that, answering to the type, the tabernacle was now set up.
The introduction of the Gentiles in Acts would give adequate expansion to the thought of the house. The tabernacle was the house of God; Shiloh was the gathering place. Judah had a great place in the purpose of God, "The sceptre will not depart from Judah, nor the lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come, and to him will be the obedience of peoples", @Genesis 49:10. That indicates the gathering centre. It says in Joshua, "And the whole assembly of the children of Israel gathered together at Shiloh and set up the tent of meeting there, and the land was subdued before them". @Joshua 18:1. There is nothing of rivalry seen at Antioch. This famine gave opportunity for the expression of Christian affection toward the Jewish brethren.
Such conditions existed at Antioch that the Spirit was free to bring out divine thoughts, and we begin here to get an insight as to how things would work out among the people of God. There was a good deal unknown yet as to what *individuals* may have. You cannot determine your own position. God has to make it clear in the house. We may know the extent of the territory, but that is only the first thing; these men in @Joshua 18: 4 were sent to make a survey of the land subdued before them. There are certain ones to whom God has given a place; some have gone. It is perfectly clear that God in His sovereignty raises up men and gives them special places. There are "lots" still unknown, but if we pursue a right course -- we may encounter opposition --
{187}
God will come in and each will have his place and there will be no confusion.
Perhaps we are more familiar with the general thought of the inheritance than with the particular way we come into it, but it is important that each brother and sister should know his or her divinely given portion and place. Simeon cannot select Dan's place, or vice versa. One of the most striking things is, that Simeon's portion was not made much of. Moses did not mention any spiritual blessing for him in the distribution in @Deuteronomy 33. It is a very testing thing to look for one's name on the list and find it is not there at all. It is humiliating to be left out of account among the brethren. The man of God -- Moses -- leaves Simeon out; he has to take his part in another brother's territory; he gets his portion in the territory of Judah. Then that is a test to Judah, which is a further thing.
The principle of sovereignty tests us as to our position with God on the one side and love to the brethren on the other. I suppose there is nothing so exclusive as divine sovereignty. Simeon comes in on account of God's faithfulness. God has not forgotten him; he gets Beersheba and other towns. Simeon might say, I have got some wonderful towns; Beersheba was where Abraham lived; and Jacob was there, and had a vision which showed that however much it might appear that the promises were not going to be fulfilled through his going to Egypt, yet they were to be fulfilled. God says to him, I am the God of thy father, Isaac. Christ is risen and everything is secured for us in Him. Though the man of God may leave you out, *God* comes in and your place is secured. "The man of God" is a remarkable term. It is usually spoken of in the singular, he is one who is acting for God. Simeon does not lose in the end; his case teaches us to be content with obscurity. If you are waiting for indications
{188}
in the house, it will lead you to pay attention in the house and you will learn your place. You may rely on certain features bringing you into notice, but if a man is to know his place he must find it out in the house of God. Each one should know his gift, God has set certain in the assembly. He would have us to know soberly the relative value of the gifts. There are firstly, secondly, thirdly, and "after that" others in connection with this disposition in sovereignty; @1 Corinthians 12: 28.
Paul had a gift, and Barnabas had a gift, and they had been using their gifts, and using them effectively, but as yet no direct portion had been assigned to them. It is most important that the brethren should see that whatever you may have your place has to be indicated by the Holy Spirit in the house; @Acts 13: 2.
Recognising divine sovereignty would make you willing to be only thirdly, or even "after that". That is what we do not like naturally. There are prominent gifts and minor gifts in the category. But that side is preparatory to @1 Corinthians 13. You come properly to the conditions in which the inheritance is enjoyed in chapter 13. In @1 Corinthians 12 we get the disposition in sovereignty of those set in the assembly, but all is in view of the surpassing excellence of what comes out in chapter 13.
When God is setting up a man and allotting him his portion He uses expressions to bring him down. We get an illustration of that in @Joshua 1:1, "Jehovah spoke to Joshua the son of Nun, *Moses¬ attendant*, saying, Moses my servant is dead; and now, rise up, and go over this Jordan, thou and all this people, unto the land which I give unto them, to the children of Israel". Joshua is not spoken of yet as the "servant of Jehovah", though he gets that title later in the book. The reference to the spies and Rahab confirms that the Lord is not going to accredit
{189}
any one. Israel got help through the agency of a poor, despised, discredited woman. We get nothing like that in connection with Moses¬ ministry. Even in Paul's case, he comes in *after* Barnabas; it says Barnabas and Saul. Happily he was in keeping with that -- there was no rivalry with Paul.
We see the thing worked out more distinctly in those that are prominent, but every one has got a part in the inheritance. Paul said, "*Learn in us*".
The question is, What have we got in the dividing of the land? What are we possessed of with which we can minister to divine Persons?
Barnabas and Saul were two wonderful brothers. If you went to Antioch and asked the saints what they thought of them, they would have given them the first place, but that would not determine their position in the house. The Holy Spirit said under certain conditions, "*Separate* me now". @Acts 13:2. What comes out first is the beautiful spirit of the brethren. It says, "Now there were in Antioch in the assembly which was there, prophets and teachers ... and as they were ministering to the Lord and fasting". @Acts 13:1,2. Those are the conditions the Lord had His place, they ministered to the Lord. The sceptre and the lawgiver have got to be recognised. Thus they would not turn from the truth. The sceptre is the rule of Christ, and the lawgiver is regulation. They ministered to the Lord and denied themselves in fasting. The principle of self-denial is most important. There have been noted men who gave up their comforts for the sake of the people of God, and God honoured them. Priestly conditions and priestly service were present. God said, "Take Aaron ... that he may minister to me in the priest's office". @Exodus 28:1. It is a wonderful thing that God has brought about priestly conditions in the assembly in the Gentile world. It is striking that it is not in connection with their prophesying and teaching, but in connection with what was
{190}
priestly that the divine mind was made known in "the assembly which was there". @Acts 13:1.
There was that which was set up for God at Antioch. When Barnabas and Saul went to Jerusalem with the money, and the brethren asked them about Antioch, they could give an account of what God had wrought. He had brought about assembly conditions in the Gentile world. The Lord said in @Luke 24:41, "Have ye *here* any meat?" When we come to a place, we want to find out what the brethren have got. Paul could say, God has wrought at Antioch -- not through the official element, but *God* has wrought: He has brought about assembly conditions in the Gentile world. He was going to distribute the inheritance and He has been doing it ever since. There is still more to be allotted in the house of God.
Joseph had the north land and Judah the south, which we might connect with Peter and John. In the earlier part of the Acts there had been a fixed state of things already; Paul would not interfere with that; there were those to whom God had definitely allotted their portions. We have to respect what is already fixed. But there is a brother who has his inheritance, a large territory in the south -- the most favoured part of the land -- is he ready to let in Simeon? That is what brings out what God has already wrought. Jerusalem gave Paul the right hand of fellowship, there was brotherly feeling with Judah in that way; Judah and Simon went up together to fight against the Canaanites in @Judges 1. Supposing God gives you a place and another brother comes in, are you ready to give way? The greater you are spiritually, the more ready you will be to admit any one who comes in. After all, it is all ours.
It is the same spirit as we get in @Luke 14:10, "Friend, come up higher". If I went up higher to start with, I should have to go lower to make room for another. It is a question of divine appointment. It is refreshing
{191}
to see a magnanimous spirit in a brother; he is great enough to make room for the most insignificant gift. Peter and those in Jerusalem recognised Paul. The Holy Spirit is now distributing, and we want to make room for what the Holy Spirit will do. When the conditions exist, then He speaks; things go through a regular course and at the right moment the Holy Spirit speaks. Where there is a priestly state and assembly conditions the Holy Spirit dominates the brethren and they get their portions. The great thing in the house of God is to give the Holy Spirit freedom; He acts freely under certain conditions. Think what the Holy Spirit would be to us if we gave Him freedom. Shiloh was the gathering centre; the Lord has recently emphasised the house, but the body should not be left out of sight. The body is for the expression of Christ, and the gifts are for edifying but the Spirit speaks in the house of God. He indicates His mind and the allotments are made. I think family feeling would come with it, and the brotherly spirit. Judah is able to let in Simeon, he does not want it all. There is no thought of a brother dominating everything. The more *you* have, the more wealth *I* have. We were speaking of the number of workmen who were working in the temple for Solomon; @1 Chronicles 22. What a wide distribution it suggests.
I suppose this has in view the seven tribes; and what it signifies is the completeness of the family. The outlook of it is very wide; it has regard to all the saints.
It makes room for the Spirit. There is, alas, a great deal of divine competency not liberated for the service of the brethren. The Holy Spirit called Barnabas and Saul, they were competent vessels and they became more so when they were separated for their service. That should exercise us all, whether what is there is available for the service of the brethren.
{192}
The Lord would not have the saints without sufficiency; men of God knew that in the past. They could not tell what the Spirit would do, but those who knew the Lord knew that He would not leave the saints without sufficiency. There is no thought of the spiritual wealth of the assembly on the divine side being diminished or the gifts taken back. He gives the gifts and there is no thought of His recalling them. There are many breaking bread who are perfectly capable of serving the brethren in love, and they do not exercise their capacity. The Lord is saying, "Loose him and let him go, for the Lord has need of him". @Matthew 21:2,3. He knows where they are, though we may have to do the loosing. Brethren who have ability oftentimes do not exercise it. "Take heed to the ministry thou hast received that thou fulfil it", @Colossians 4:17 was said to Archippus. Make room for the Spirit and He will use what is there. There may be very little, but what there is He will use. If love is in activity there is power to edify, as we see in @John 21. John is the unknown quantity; Peter's part is plain enough.
{193}
THE INHERITANCE
*Notes of Reading with J. Taylor and C. A. Coates on @Joshua 16*
C.A.C. I should be glad of help as to the general thought of the inheritance, and how it is divided in a practical sense today?
J.T. So should I. What have you had before you?
C.A.C. One can realise in some measure that the inheritance is too great to be taken up by one individual, or even by a section of the people of God; but how does the distribution work today? Do you enjoy a different portion of the inheritance from what I enjoy?
J.T. Surely. I suppose the section of the book which treats of the present mode of distribution would be chapter 18, where the tent of meeting is in view: "And the whole assembly of the children of Israel gathered together at Shiloh, and set up the tent of meeting there; ... And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes whose inheritance had not been distributed to them". @Joshua 18:1,2. Then at the end of chapter 19, "These were the inheritances which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel distributed by lot in Shiloh before Jehovah, at the entrance of the tent of meeting". @Joshua 19:51. I thought that there we have what applies to the saints right down to this dispensation. God indicates at the outset that certain ones were to have certain portions, and some others, but all subsequent dispositions were made in the house.
C.A.C. How would that work out in its bearing on ourselves?
J.T. God has to do with it, but the saints are brought into it in their judgment of things, the place
{194}
they acquire. The land was subdued before them; that I suppose, refers to apostolic power and authority, but subsequently the disposition of God was made in relation to the assembly. The saints come to the judgment of it in the tent of meeting. How that works out in detail would be a matter for each to think over.
C.A.C. Is there any particular scripture in the New Testament that would help in regard to this distribution?
J.T. The early part of Acts brings it out. We see God's direct disposition in the apostles; there is no question as to Peter's place or any of the others. Then Barnabas comes in moved by God, the truth lays hold of his heart, he brings his money and lays it at the apostles¬ feet. But his place in the testimony was not made clear immediately, it took time, the apostles did not even appoint him; there is more development in the house.
C.A.C. Yes, in that way as recognising the house, each would be spiritually exercised to find his right place.
J.T. You will observe in the end of chapter 19 that Eleazar comes before Joshua: "These were the inheritances which Eleazar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun ... distributed by lot in Shiloh before Jehovah at the entrance of the tent of meeting". @Joshua 19:51. There it is not apostolic authority as in Moses or Joshua, but priestly. The place the priestly element has in all assembly matters is of the first importance, because after apostolic judgment ends we have to depend on the priestly element.
C.A.C. I suppose the practical weakening and possibly the absence of the priestly element led to all the disorder in the assembly.
J.T. Quite so. So the selection of Barnabas and Paul was by the Spirit; the twelve had its part in it.
{195}
C.A.C. Would that be indicated by attention being called to the fact that Joshua was old? The Joshua side of things was passing off, referring to the weakening in the assembly of spiritual lead of apostolic character.
J.T. Yes, that raises an interesting point, because all the chapters in the Acts from 6 to 12 point to a certain weakening in Jerusalem. The delegation of everything by the apostles to others seems to indicate that they were relinquishing their responsibility; and Peter's imprisonment in @Acts 12 brings out a certain peculiar position in Jerusalem -- they prayed and prayed for him in the assembly, and yet they did not believe when the answer came. They did not believe the Lord was answering their prayers in relation to Peter; there was a weakening at Jerusalem, but at Antioch there was indicated a priestly state. Barnabas was there, and names were given of certain ones in the assembly there. They were marked by ministering to the Lord and fasting, so the priestly element was found elsewhere than in Jerusalem. In that connection the Holy Spirit asks for Barnabas and Saul; He says, "Separate *me*", @Acts 13:2. I thought that the Holy Spirit acting thus implies the intimate knowledge that God has of conditions among us.
C.A.C. I suppose you would say that it is not in the mind of God that things should be conserved in the assembly by apostolic power. His thought was to remove the apostles, but that things should be sustained in priestly and spiritual power in the exercises of the brethren.
J.T. Yes, that is most important and comes down to ourselves.
C.A.C. We see that the apostles were unable in their later years to correct the state of the assemblies. There is a distinct weakening, so that both Paul and
{196}
John had to witness the sad state of things in the assemblies; and they did not seek to adjust them by apostolic power but left them to the moral exercises of the saints.
J.T. Quite. In Deuteronomy, when Moses was to be removed, Jehovah directs that he and Joshua should appear before the tent of meeting so that the leader should continue. But, whilst he was divinely appointed and nominated, yet the consummation of all was at the door of the tent of meeting; God brings in the saints. There is nothing arbitrary in what He does; He carries us with Him if we are ready for it.
C.A.C. Would that be confirmed by the thought of the habitation of God by the Spirit at the end of @Ephesians 2? Then we get a parenthesis in chapter 3 which brings in spiritual and priestly state; then the distribution of gifts in chapter 4 and the allotment of grace to every one of us according to the measure of the gift of the Christ. That is linked somewhat with the inheritance.
J.T. It is indeed. So the saints are carried forward. Jehovah enjoined that Moses should compose a song which he taught to the people. That was something they would have subjectively, and not only did Moses compose it but Joshua was linked on with the service of the song. Then the Levites were directed to put the book of the law in the ark; it was conserved there. Christ looks after that, as it were. It was put there that nothing should be lost. There was a song to be taught to the people and under these circumstances Joshua takes on his ministry. We see how God carries the people on with Him in what He is doing. There is nothing arbitrary; everyone assents to what is done. So, while we have fixed principles, they can never be dissociated from priestly state; they lose their power if they are.
C.A.C. No divine principle can be rightly applied otherwise.
{197}
J.T. Divine principle in other than priestly hands loses its familiarity to us and becomes strange.
C.A.C. I remember a striking remark of J.N.D. : "Divine principles in the hands of unspiritual persons are like a sword in the hands of a drunken man". I suppose at the door of the tent of meeting the divine allotment would be seen in its completeness without any defect. In taking possession there was failure, there were defects; people stopped short of the divine apportionment, of taking up the inheritance. What are we to learn from that?
J.T. Judges and Joshua representing the direct disposition of God, each has its own presentation of what happened as to Achsah and Caleb. They represent elements of appreciation of what God gave. In Joshua we have the daughters of Zelophehad; without these elements what God confers is sure to be misused, but with these elements and others a right appreciation of the mind of God stands out, and divine things do not go begging, as, alas, they often do. Caleb and Achsah show they appreciate what God gives, and so do the daughters of Zelophehad; they come forward and ask for their rights. There are those who fail to take what God apportions of the inheritance, which shows their want of appreciation of the thing.
C.A.C. The fact of the little moment that remains to us is highly important. There is time for us still to possess if we have failed in the past. There is long-suffering of the Lord to us-ward. If there has been defect and anything unsuitable there is space yet for repentance and getting right. So, in principle, if I have not possessed what has been given, there is a little space yet to make it good, which is encouraging to me.
J.T. It says that the children of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim took their inheritance. The daughters of Zelophehad in the next chapter show their appreciation
{198}
of it: "They came near before Eleazar the priest and before Joshua the son of Nun, and before the princes, saying, Jehovah commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren". @Joshua 17:4. Achsah asked for springs as well as her inheritance -- upper and nether springs. Things cannot be continued without water, they grow hard and dry. On the other hand there is a desire to have what we have among our brethren; that is what the daughters of Zelophehad sought for. We do not want it independently.
C.A.C. I suppose the thought of the inheritance would bring in the brethren. It is "according to their families" -- that is repeated more than once.
J.T. Quite so. Another thing that comes out in the distribution of the inheritance is the irregularity of the boundary lines. According to Ezekiel they will be long lines straight across the land. There will not be then the same need for brotherly giving and taking as there is need now.
C.A.C. That is a very interesting consideration, because I was noticing in reading that one tribe had cities in another tribe.
J.T. Yes, you find that whilst a large portion was given to Judah yet in result Simeon has to get his portion inside. That is a great test and tax on one's love. It seems that the book of Joshua brings out in that way the love of the saints. God delights to bring that out and He gives occasion for it in the irregularity of the boundary lines; it gives occasion for brotherly consideration and grace in one another.
C.A.C. An exclusive principle among the brethren is not to be maintained. Is that the thought?
J.T. Quite. This country is divided up into parishes, and each vicar has his own parish, but that principle does not maintain in the house of God.
C.A.C. I suppose what is local still obtains, but there is not an exclusive principle introduced.
{199}
Brethren from another tribe are welcome. Is that right?
J.T. Yes. You do not in Teignmouth assume that brethren are not to come and have their part in what is there. The more love is active, the more communion there is.
C.A.C. I suppose now that the Lord would give opportunity for fellowship between adjoining cities, and would also provide opportunity for links practically of love between districts? I was thinking of the collection being made in Macedonia and the assemblies in Galatia to minister to the saints in Judaea. Would that not answer to the interlocking of the tribes?
J.T. Quite. The types provided for the males appearing before Jehovah thrice a year to maintain the tribal association, they would never lose that. But in Jerusalem they would be a nation, a centre where all are a community for the interchanging of wealth. Each is there according to his wealth, according to the measure he has developed the portion which God has given him.
C.A.C. Would the place where Jehovah sets His name give us the universal idea? The tribes go up. Would it suggest our entering into the spiritual privilege which is the universal privilege of the assembly? If we touch spiritual privilege we pass outside what is local into what is universal. Would not that answer to going up to Jerusalem?
J.T. I thought so. They would meet there on common ground, but it would soon show which had the richest inheritance, who had the most wealth. The borders of the tribes give occasion for the development of love -- "with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, bearing with one another in love: using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bonds of peace". @Ephesians 4:2,3. They would rather maintain unity and peace than gain a bit of land. Peace among the brethren is more important than the
{200}
inheritance. We are to endeavour to keep the unity of the Spirit, because unless we are on good terms with our neighbour we cannot take in the universal thought.
The general principle would be to have confidence in all matters which arise locally; the general principle that underlies the assembly is confidence; if there is not confidence there is nothing. We must have confidence in the brethren. If they are not worthy of it they are not material for the assembly; if they are, we must leave things with them. Do you not think so?
C.A.C. Yes, I think that must be the only principle on which we can go on.
J.T. "One body and one Spirit ... one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". @Ephesians 4:4,5,6. We must have that; we cannot violate that; and in order to maintain that we must bear with things in love, and endeavour to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace. That is the great end in view. If there are any brethren on the spot in any difficulty, in principle I should say, Why should the Lord pass by them? It is their direct responsibility. Why should the Lord pass by them? He would not do it unless compelled to.
C.A.C. You would regard the challenging of a local judgment as altogether abnormal, and only justified on the most unquestionably moral grounds?
J.T. I am sure it is so.
C.A.C. As a general principle we should count on the Lord to give judgment locally, and it would be abnormal if saints locally did not exercise spiritual judgment in any local case. And it would also be abnormal if saints in a district formed a wrong judgment as to matters which occurred in the district where they lived. In either case it would be a serious matter to call it in question.
{201}
J.T. I do not see how we could get on if we did. One marvels to think of it, broken up as we are, with national prejudices, class feelings, and what not -- it is a miracle that we get on as we do.
C.A.C. I have often considered with profound admiration the way the Lord preserves unity and integrity of heart which values what is of God, and enables the brethren to recognise it.
J.T. Yes, we have no one to appeal to. "The locusts have no king" @Proverbs 30:27; yet there is unity among us. I think the Lord would impress on us the principle of boundaries which are irregular, and that answers to things as they are now. I am called on to give way, and in result the unity of the Spirit is preserved. God would emphasise lowliness and meekness. I do not want to assert myself in any way. I want to have a right judgment, but to have it in all lowliness, meekness and long-suffering, bearing with one another in love. Christ is made prince of the kings of the earth; the princely idea is a universal one. A prince is a man great enough to be little. Barnabas represents the princely idea in the way in which he maintained and promoted unity among the saints of God.
C.A.C. The princely idea is Christ in the saints, so we have the principle of submitting to one another in the fear of Christ. I understand that to mean the recognition of Christ in the brethren.
J.T. Is there not authority too in it? Coming over we were dwelling on the epistle of John: we see love working there because we are born of God, yet the commandment is there. We see love worked out in those begotten of God, but the family feelings and instincts are throughout the epistle emphasised as commandments.
C.A.C. That principle is of the greatest importance in a day where lawlessness abounds and manifests itself in the circle of the saints.
J.T. Yes. You cannot say you love God and not
{202}
keep His commandments. It maintains the authority of God ever among us. Love is spontaneous, but God never leaves anything to itself. He always maintains His own rights. It is so even in the universe; it goes of itself, but He holds it in His hands.
C.A.C. While there is liberty, it is the law of liberty.
I notice that Judah's portion is too great for him, so he has to let in Simeon; but the children of Joseph complain that their portion is not great enough, and they are told to go up and cut down wood: they are exhorted to go in for clearing operations. There is a difference between killing the Canaanite and cutting down wood. I was wondering if the Canaanite would represent positive elements of evil, spiritual wickedness, and the wood might represent what is not evil in itself but what is natural, which obstructs the people of God and renders the inheritance unfertile so that no crops are produced there. Spiritual energy is needed to cut down what is merely the growth of nature, even though it is not evil in itself. Many of us have found that there were things which are natural to us but which obstruct the enjoyment of the inheritance, and militate against spiritual happiness. I suppose the thought of the inheritance would be very much fulness of joy. We have the inheritance family-wise very much in the writings of John -- "your joy may be full". @1 John 1:4. Many of us feel we are not full of joy -- well, if not, something must have obstructed spiritual fruitfulness as far as we are concerned. I suppose the spiritual happiness of the saints would be according to the measure in which the inheritance has been entered upon. We might test our own hearts whether our joy is full. I know experimentally there is a great difference between the knowledge of the doctrine, giving one's assent to the truth, and having fulness of joy. If we are not enjoying the inheritance and reaping the fruits of it
{203}
for our own enrichment, we shall not have any tithes to take up to Jerusalem. One has thought how wonderful it is that the greatness of Christ, the Son of God, which is so infinitely vast in its extent, should be distributed amongst the people of God for their own joy. The assembly, looked at universally, is an adequate vessel to take it up, so that God has the glory, the full result of the activities of His love brought back to Him in the universal praises of His people. It is a very touching expression of divine love that God should make His portion to be dependent on His people having theirs.
J.T. Yes, I have often thought, How much does God get out of our meetings?
C.A.C. I suppose that would be the object of all levitical service. The universal service of the levites would be to keep before the people what was due to God, so that God might get His portion in His people and from His people.
J.T. The whole tribe of the levites was taken over by God; they had no inheritance, indicating that we are enriched spiritually. Our heavenly portion is before God as the firstborn ones.
C.A.C. Yes. Jehovah Himself is their inheritance. In one passage the offering by fire is their inheritance: in another the priesthood is their inheritance; and in another the thought is that the Levite gets his portion peculiarly in the blessed God Himself as ministering to God's pleasure. Such persons serving among the saints would keep before them what is due to God -- that must be the ultimate object of everything.
J.T. Achsah gives a good lead, for she lays stress on the springs of water, and the daughters of Zelophehad make much of the Spirit and the brethren.
C.A.C. Somebody has remarked that the death of Caleb was not recorded. I think Caleb represents an undying principle of affection; he wholly followed
{204}
Jehovah, and that is never going to die out of the assembly. If Joshua goes, Caleb remains; and Achsah does not go either -- that is the intense, urgent desire for springs of water, the feeling the necessity for them. If these things are found the inheritance in principle is held and maintained.
{205}
THE GENTILE WORLD
@Matthew 15: 21 - 39
*(Summary of Reading)*
We see here that the Gentile world has become the field whence material for the assembly was to be drawn. This is the Gentile field; and the woman here qualifies as the right sort of material. The Lord places Himself within her reach; it was not what He was producing but what He finds. The woman qualifies in the way she answers to the light; she says, "Truth Lord". @Matthew 15:27. She answers to the truth, and the test is that He answers her not a word, when she says, "Have pity on me, Lord, Son of David". @Matthew 15:22. His disciples came and said, "Send her away; for she crieth after us", and He answers, "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel". @Matthew 15: 23,24. The Lord was bringing out her position; she had no claim on Him as Son of David; the assembly is not formed of persons calling Him Son of David. There was a good deal of trimming and dressing necessary. Silence is a very searching thing. If you ask a question and a person does not answer, you wonder why; here it is solemn, but very wholesome. We sometimes ask things of the Lord that He does not answer at once. The disciples break in on the divine silence; it is an unhappy thing to interfere with the work of God. They say, "She cries *after us*" @Matthew 15:23 -- they were selfish -- she was crying after the Lord. It was a question between her soul and the Lord. It is well for us to take notice of His silence and not to interfere with Him. It is a great thing to learn from Christ in divine things, to give the Lord a free hand. The Lord would bring her down for her good -- she had a confused thought; she was not an Israelitish woman, but talked as if she were. She had to learn to be quiet and get the mind of God; hence the silence. She
{206}
got down to the bottom when she reached the point of His dealings with her.
His service is not for nothing, it is for our blessing. He had His own joy in His service. He said, "O woman, great is thy faith" @Matthew 15:28; there is *feeling* in that -- we do not want to deny the Lord His own pleasure in the service.
The Lord does not deal in superficialities, He digs deep and goes to the bottom. What comes out is that faith is found. However humiliating the disclosure, faith owns it. How quickly one who is exercised responds to the light! He says, "O woman, great is thy faith". @Matthew 15:28. She ministered pleasure to the Lord, she would never forget that word. The Lord bears long with us, but it is when the full effect of the light is reached that He has joy.
Israel's territory is not sufficient for the work of God. He was certainly the children's bread, but the children did not appreciate the bread. What a wonderful meeting between Christ and this Gentile woman! She was one of those under the curse, but she had light in her soul as to her condition. She says, "Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their master's table". @Matthew 15:27. She had no thought of being a dog before, she responds to the light. Her faith was great. In Matthew the Lord invariably slights Jerusalem. In Luke He makes much of it. In Luke the preaching begins at Jerusalem, but in Matthew He slights it; so instead of any material for Christ coming from Jerusalem we have the opposite. What comes out here is that faith is found in a Gentile woman. She was one of the babes of @Matthew 11. Faith, the acceptance of the light, was there.
In the next chapter He speaks of Himself as the Builder; here He is in the territory of rough material, and His presence -- the shining of the light -- reveals it. We have to recognise that the flesh profits nothing.
{207}
As long as we retain any thought of being something after the flesh it precludes the thought of our being suitable to the assembly. If she had retained the thought of being a Canaanitish woman she would have been prohibited from suitability. All natural thoughts, family pretensions and all that flesh lays claim to, interfere with our qualification for the assembly.
Then we see she is a mother, she has a daughter. A mother's exercised heart feels in regard of her daughter, and she gets the blessing for her daughter too. Many daughters are not affected by the exercises of their mothers, for they do not feel their own condition. The constitution of the assembly greatly depends on mothers. Spiritual mothers know how to teach young women to love their husbands and children. Maternal feeling is of God; a mother who exercises her legitimate feeling will shine in the assembly.
This woman is a subject of mercy, and, to use a figure, entitled to belong to the timber of the house of God; she would not have recognised the Lord at all had she not been a subject of mercy. It is not His work that is in view here, but He placed Himself within her reach. He did not go there by accident, but going forth He went away into the parts of Tyre and Sidon. There were other women there who did not come to Him; she must have had some previous light.
I was thinking this morning -- the Lord did not work for nothing, He had His joy. He says about the Samaritan woman, "I have meat to eat that ye know not of". @John 4:32. While His disciples were in the town He was eating: "My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work". @John 4:34. As life takes full effect in a soul God gets His portion. The Lord would have us know that we belong to the highest family, but before that we have to accept the lowest position -- the humiliating place of dogs.
{208}
All this time the daughter is not with her mother, but the mother is with the Lord about her. Discipline comes in in our families and it is intended to fit us for the house of God. Very often difficulties come in in our houses to teach us to be pillars in the house of God.
If we turn to @1 Kings 5 we shall see how the timber was brought down to the house of God. Timber refers to the dignity of saints, stone is more firmness and solidity. The woman began to qualify when she went to the bottom. It is dignity that enables us to go down. The natural man seeks to go up; flesh always exalts itself. True greatness enables the believer to go down. The timber came down in a raft; there is no architecture in a raft. It was just trees kept together and dragged through the water to the *place Solomon appointed*. These rafts were ungainly things, but they came under the influence of the water, and that is death.
At the end of @Matthew 15 we have the feeding of the four thousand. It teaches us the presence of the Spirit, we get the number seven instead of twelve. The woman would appreciate this; "great" faith brings in the power of the Spirit. The Lord does not look up to heaven here, He is administering, having the presence of the Spirit in view. It is not apostolic days, but sufficiency in the Spirit; every sufficiency is in the Spirit. It is not here the administration of the twelve -- the vessels, that is, the baskets are larger here, it shows abundance. In being emptied we appreciate the fulness -- the Spirit's power is unlimited.
The Lord takes account of those who continued with Him in spite of deprivation and inconvenience. If we are together and seem to be getting nothing, yet those who continue get the blessing.
{209}
SOVEREIGN SELECTION AND THE HOUSE OF GOD
@Psalm 78:65 - 69; @Exodus 15: 1 - 17; @Psalm 114: 1,2
*(Notes of Reading)*
J.T. What I have in my mind is that we might see that in the development of the testimony the house or dwelling-place of God is built on the principle of sovereign rejection and sovereign selection. At the outset in @Exodus 15:2 there was a desire on the part of a redeemed people to glorify God. "This is my God, and I will glorify him", or "make him a dwelling". Then in verse 11 the question is raised, "Who is like unto thee, Jehovah, among the gods ... glorifying thyself in holiness?" @Exodus 15:11. Later, in verse 17, we read, "Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, the place that thou, Jehovah, hast made thy dwelling, the Sanctuary, Lord, that thy hands have prepared". @Exodus 15:17. The song, beginning with a right desire, ends with God glorifying Himself, and all centres round the habitation. In referring to @Psalm 78 the particular thought I had was that of the sovereignty of God in rejecting the tabernacle of Joseph and in choosing the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which He loved. In glorifying Himself in building the house, God tests those in responsibility. Believers, of course, are the house, but there is the desire on the part of the saints to glorify God, and then God glorifies Himself; at the outset they are possessed of this desire. The gospels show this also. At Bethany they make Him a supper; they are beginning to take up the line of preparing for the Lord. So, too, "the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover?" @Matthew 26:17. Later in @John 12 the Lord spoke to the Father: "Father, glorify thy name". @John 12:28 Then came a voice from heaven, "I have
{210}
both glorified it, and will glorify it again". @John 12:28. God sees to the glorifying of Christ, but He values the desire of His people to glorify Him -- to provide for His glory. God appreciates that, but reserves the right to do it Himself, because if it is to be done suitably according to God's greatness, and majesty, and holiness, He must do it Himself. They recognise here, "Who is like unto thee, glorifying thyself in holiness?" @Exodus 15:11. He opens a door to His people, He accepts all we propose, but if He is to have a habitation in keeping with Himself *He* must build it.
A.S.L. In the tabernacle system all the willing-hearted could bring material, but God must give the pattern. "See that thou make all according to the pattern that I showed thee in the mount". @Exodus 25:40.
J.T. @Psalm 78 shows that in the hand of man the idea of the house had gone into decay; so God rejects Shiloh and chooses Judah; but He had that in view at the beginning, for God has no afterthoughts. He reserves His thoughts; He does not necessarily disclose them all at once.
A.S.L. So God's thought comes to light when all is in weakness on man's side.
J.T. Mount Zion preceded Sinai in the thoughts of God; Calvary was before Eden, Adam was a figure of Him that was to come. Mount Zion sets forth God's sovereignty, He loved it. "This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell for I have desired it" @Psalm 132:14. God is not arbitrary.
C.J.R. What is in your mind with regard to rejection?
J.T. @Psalm 78 shows why God rejects, and He is justified when He speaks and clear when He judges; @Psalm 51:4. God never does anything unless He can show He is right in doing it. No one can raise a question. When He rejects He shows why He does it. @Psalm 78 is to set all that out.
{211}
A.S.L. Our privilege is to justify God in all His doings.
J.T. In our own time, too, the principle of rejection has come out. The history of Christendom corresponds to the history of Joseph; it has entirety broken down. It is a solemn thing to be rejected.
Ques. Is not everything for God established on the line of sovereignty?
J.T. Things are established permanently on that line, so in Hebrews it says, "Ye are come unto mount Sion". @Hebrews 12:22. God has brought us hack to the line of sovereignty. God makes the two things run together -- sovereignty in God, and faithfulness in man. In Ezra we get God's sovereignty, while in Nehemiah we get faithfulness in man. Cyrus was selected sovereignly to start the movement in Ezra but Nehemiah begins with his own work. Thus in the Book of Ezra we get sovereignty in God and in Nehemiah faithfulness in man. There has been one Man perfect in faithfulness to God and He is looking for faithful and wise stewards. "Who then is a faithful and wise servant?" @Matthew 24: 45; but underneath it all is His sovereignty. God chooses whom He will, and moves where He will. The sovereignty of God tests us. It was a tremendous test to Christendom years ago when God called attention to what the church really is. The cathedral represents what things have come to, but God calls attention to what is real. But it was no afterthought with God, He always had it in His mind; Scripture clearly shows that and alongside of it we get faithful men.
Rem. Faithful men would have a deep sense of sovereignty.
J.T. In looking at Ezra we see that he rested in what God did. Joseph suggests Israel in responsibility. The tabernacle was set up and connected with Shiloh in Ephraim. In @Psalm 78 all is in ruin, the ark was taken and everything was gone.
{212}
A.S.L. Does not all come to a climax in the crucifixion of that blessed One?
J.T. Ephraim or Joseph is particularly responsible. Sovereignty had put him before Manasseh, and he was doubly responsible for that reason, but God had Judah in His mind all the time. Judah owed his pre-eminence to God's sovereignty, but Judah must not vex Ephraim and Ephraim must not envy Judah. The one who has been replaced is not to envy those whom God has brought forward, and those whom God has called to come forward are to restrain themselves and not to vex them. "Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim", @Isaiah 11:13. If we continue in His goodness we shall not be high-minded but fear. We have to learn that there are those whom God has to pass by and those whom He will use.
C.J.R. What do you mean by some being passed by?
J.T. God has passed by the leaders of Christendom, and if we are not faithful God will pass us by, and use others who are faithful. So when Ephraim had failed and the ark was taken, the glory having departed, God awakes "as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine. And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts ... Moreover he refused the tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim" @Psalm 78: 65 - 67. It is a solemn warning. God will go on with His work, and if we do not work with Him He will take up others.
A.S.L. It is not eternal security we are speaking of but His ways.
J.T. God refuses Joseph because he had proved unfaithful. This is a solemn word to us, because God will go on with His work, and in our own time we see the same thing. God has passed by the accredited Levites and all the hierarchy of Christendom, taken
up an unknown people, and called attention to the
{213}
assembly as the body of Christ and then as the house of God.
Rem. Responsibility is always connected with the house.
J.T. Yes; the people coming out of Egypt say they will glorify Him; they will build Him an habitation; but however much we may desire to, we fall very far short of His standard. There is nothing that will keep us in our proper place like being preserved in a deep sense of God's sovereignty, and we are extremely slow to learn it. God has undertaken in these last days to glorify Himself. We speak of it being a day of small things, but it is a day when God is working in connection with the latter glory of His house. In @Haggai 2:9 the Holy Spirit says, "The latter glory of this house shall be greater than the former". There were only a few restored from the captivity, but God says the latter glory shall be greater than the former. God intends to glorify Himself, and He knows how to do it, and the results will be seen in the heavenly city. The house is where God is known and where His glory dwells, and having undertaken to glorify Himself He has made Christ Son over it. David had to learn the sovereignty of God as to whom He would choose to build the house. David had in his heart to build a house for God, but God says, It is reserved for Me to say who shall build it. He says I shall be Father to the one who builds the house. Solomon is Christ risen. He builds the house and is Son over it. The glory of God in the house necessitates sonship. He brings Christ out of death, places Him in heaven, and as Son He builds the house. We are living in a wonderful time, and we can see what God is doing in building a house for Himself. So Zechariah has it: "Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou dost become a plain". @Zechariah 4:7. God comes in and removes insuperable obstacles in grace, so that His own work is carried
{214}
on. The Lord said to Peter, "On this rock *I* will build" @Matthew 16:18; the Father began the thing, now the Lord says, "I will build". In the early chapters of Acts Peter is not the builder. The Lord had reserved in His mind what He would, do. "He himself knew what he could do". @John 6:6. Peter, James and John worked during a transitional period, and were continually in the temple. The house was there but could not be in evidence while the temple was standing. There could not be the development of the house while the temple stood. We are never fit for the house until other systems are discredited in our eyes. Peter was the instrumentality in the hands of God for three thousand being added, but the time for the house in the character of sonship had not yet come, and they had yet to learn that *they* were the temple. All that came out through Paul. So God converts Saul far away from Jerusalem. He is cut clear from all earthly moorings. The Son builds the house and the connection with the temple is cut; Jerusalem is gone -- all systems of men are discredited. Faithfulness is necessary if we are to be consciously in God's house. Christendom is not the house; we must leave all systems of men, as forming a definite judgment regarding them. In the early chapters of Acts the Builder was there, but the time had not come for the public display of the building.
The assembly as the house of God is not built by any man, but by the Son. The Lord was building and thousands were added. @Acts 19 has the full development of it in view and so Paul separates the disciples; he went no longer to the synagogue; it is approaching the building of the house as seen in Ephesus. In the chapter twelve men are spoken to and afterwards receive the Holy Spirit. God's glory is ensured in that the Son is over the house. "Whose house are we" @Hebrews 3:6 is a provisional thought. The house of God began with Jacob and the thought is carried
{215}
over from him and will be seen again in Jerusalem, but is seen now in the assembly; there is the full answer there to the truth of the house of God. We should not be on the level of the earth as forming part of that house; our ways should be on a more exalted plane. On this earth at the present moment there is nothing for God but the assembly, so that the assembly is the house now. "The tabernacle of God is with men" @Revelation 21:3 is the final thought. In the millennial state of things there will be a more imposing show of things. Solomon built four houses, characterising the millennial state of things -- the house of God, his own house, the house of the forest of Lebanon, and the house of Pharaoh's daughter. In God undertaking to glorify Himself we get something that will abide; the answer to it is seen in Christ and the assembly. The desire to glorify God should ever be present with us, and links on with God glorifying Himself; He has undertaken to do that and is doing it now. Ephesians refers to the former and the latter glory of the house (@Ephesians 2:19 - 22; @Ephesians 3:21); the former glory and the latter glory converge and we are in the light of both now. "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages", @Ephesians 3:21. It is one of the features of the moment in connection with the house of God that it has brought into prominence the holiness of God.
In order to understand the house from the spiritual point of view we must see John's presentation of it. "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us" @John 1:14. John's two disciples who followed Jesus say, "Where abidest thou?" @John 2:38. He says to them, "Come and see". @John 2:39. To understand the spiritual thing we must come and see where the Lord abides. Externally the saints are the house, but we must understand where the Son abides. "They went therefore, and saw where he abode; and they abode with him that day". @John 2:39. The
{216}
Son invites followers to "come and see". John comes in, bringing the light of the internal thing. So John stands by us; if we have to stand alone, we can get the good of the house in a spiritual way.
{217}
CHRIST AS KNOWN IN THE HOUSE
@John 8: 35,36
Verse 35 of this chapter suggests the Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, as He is to be known in the house. He is in it as having built it, and in mentioning His work in building the house, one is minded to refer to Him as building all things. It is said, "He who has built all things is God", @Hebrews 3:4 but God as in the Person of the Son, "by whom also", we read, "he made the worlds". @Hebrews 1:2. That word, "the worlds", as it comes into the mind produces a sense of one's littleness as finite, for if one thinks of the worlds, one has to take refuge in God, and one may find refuge in God, for "he who dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him", @1 John 4:16 so that one is filled and restful in the sense of what God is; otherwise one is lost in the very thought of the worlds. The greatest mind must find itself lost as it thinks of the worlds, for the mind naturally enquires what is beyond, and beyond, and beyond, and you have to stop as being finite. Hence in acknowledging God you take refuge in Him, as He knows, and that suffices. As Paul said, "Whether in the body or out of the body, I cannot tell, *God knoweth*" @2 Corinthians 12:2. The heart rests there; God knows, and as one is humbled in contemplating one's littleness, one's admiration of Christ in His greatness is enhanced. He made the worlds, and without Him was not anything made that was made. The mind and heart are subdued as the greatness of Christ is before one. "All things received being through him, and without him not one thing received being which has received being". @John 1:3. "By faith we apprehend that the worlds were framed by the word of God". @Hebrews 11:3. We apprehend, but we cannot take it in; nevertheless the word of God found its expression in Christ; it was carried out by His Son; *He* by whom all things were made, as
{218}
John presents it, became flesh and dwelt among us. He came within the range of men, and as dwelling here He was known as coming in and going out among them, and there were those sufficiently interested to contemplate His glory. "We have contemplated his glory" @John 1:14. What glory? Not only as the Creator of the worlds, but as dwelling among men. "A glory as of an only-begotten with a father" @John 1:14 -- that is how He was contemplated. It is thus we begin to get an insight into the house with the Son in it, and the Son in all His personal dignity as an only one with a father. We shall never understand it aright unless we see the Son in it; He is in it according to John's presentation of truth in *family relationship* as "an only-begotten with a father" @John 1:14 -- so that it might be intelligible to all of us.
But in that relation He has our need in view. He is said to be "full of grace and truth" @John 1:14; grace to secure our hearts and truth to extricate us from the world; but He is there as an only one, as wearing the glory of an only-begotten with a father. That is what John has in mind. But He is also in the house administratively and for that thought one would refer to Matthew, for Matthew is the great administrative gospel. Each of the evangelists presents the Lord in connection with the house in a sense peculiar to his gospel and understanding that helps us to understand the gospels. The thought in my mind tonight is the house system, God dispensing through His house; that is the dispensation in which we are and in which we have part. So Matthew presents the Lord to us as in the house from the outset. You recall how the wise men from the East were guided by His star. He was the King of the Jews, and the wise men found Him in a house. (See @Matthew 2:11.) We have to understand that the dispensation is house-wise; that is the characterising feature of the moment, the dispensing is house-wise. We must
{219}
first come under the rule of the sceptre, and be instructed by the Lawgiver, but Shiloh involves the house, and the great objective in the house involves the obedience of the peoples @Genesis 49:10. Hence the Lord is in the house and the wise men come into it. What is before me is that every one might be encouraged to come into the house. The Psalmist says, "Let us go into the house"; so the wise men go into the house and did Him homage, and having opened their treasure they offered Him gifts, gold, frankincense and myrrh, the Spirit of God opening Matthew in that way with what is due to the Lord in the house. Men have disregarded the rights of Christ in the house, and hence they have lost the activities of the Spirit. The Lord's rights must come first, and hence the wise men did homage. That is the way to arrive at the house from Matthew's point of view. If He is born King of the Jews He is born to rule and exercise the rights of God, for there is no room in the house for man's disobedience. But the fact is that the very grace of God is taken advantage of to disregard the rights of Christ, but we cannot do it with impunity, the government of God moves on, He comes in governmentally. Matthew opens with homage being rendered by Gentiles, a rebuke at the very outset to the legitimate subjects of the King, who were attempting to kill Him. The Gentiles seize the opportunity and if we are to get the benefit of the house of God we must do as the wise men did, we must begin with humble acknowledgment of the rights of Christ in the rule of the house. If we have not done it, take advantage of it now. If you want to get clear of the troubles of Christendom, be wise and bow and acknowledge the rights of Christ in the house.
We might trace in Matthew other instances connected with the house. The ninth chapter gives us the Lord in the house sitting at meat with publicans and
{220}
sinners. Think of the grace of Christ, sitting at meat in Levi's house, criticised as one might expect, but full of grace in the presence of the criticism. "They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick". @Matthew 9:12. All the spiritual ills we suffer from may be cured by Christ in the house. Is there one here in spiritual need? Perhaps none of us are quite whole. It is the sick who come in for the administrating virtue of Christ in the house. His presence there involves the administration of mercy for the sick. "I will have mercy, and not sacrifice". @Matthew 9:13. Two blind men we read later in chapter 9, come to Him in the house; they need their eyes opened. Blindness comes over even the people of God, otherwise why cannot they see the plainest spiritual things? They are blind. In @Hebrews 12:14 we read, "Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord". Many miss the movements of the Lord because of the lack of holiness. There was faith in these blind men for their eyes to be opened, and they received their sight in the house.
In chapter 13 there is the seed-sowing, suggesting the presentation of the gospel world-wide. That exercise does not *alone* suffice, for souls have to be taught and instructed and the teaching is in the house (@Matthew 13:36). The disciples come to him, and said to Him, "Expound to us the parable of the darnel of the field". @Matthew 13:36. A perfect maze exists in the world today; the wheat and tares bewilder and entangle souls so that one's heart bleeds for them, for the way has become so difficult. The instruction in regard to all this is in the house. If there be obedience to the Lord you will come to Him. The disciples came to Him, and He was available to them in the house and He explained the parable of the wheat and the tares. Note, too, He not only explains the immediate difficulty but goes further. He went on and opened up the precious truth of the assembly; the Lord
{221}
bringing them thus into the light of the treasure and the pearl. To disentangle us from the evil the Lord first adjusts our souls and then brings us into the light of the precious treasure, the truth of the assembly. That is coming to light today and is found as we come to Christ in the house.
The Holy Spirit is working, too, so that there is not only the recognition of Christ in the house, but of what is due to Him personally. So in the end of the gospel a woman comes with ointment and anoints His head -- a becoming tribute to what is due to Him personally. Have we ever been moved in this way to anoint the head of Him through whom all the bounty of God is dispensed day by day? The woman recognises His official place. She would recognise no dignitary in this world; no one who apprehends the gospel of Matthew will recognise religious dignitaries. There is one Man to whom the oil belongs, and only one, and this woman in the intelligence of faith and love draws near and anoints *Him* for His burial. The air was rife with murder against Him, but there was one heart that loved Him and knew that He was the divinely appointed Administrator; so she anointed His head -- a wonderful testimony to the place Christ had acquired in a devoted heart. Do you think this could be forgotten? No one can countenance such a thought for a moment, for the Lord said wherever the gospel is preached this that this woman hath done shall be told for a memorial of her, but everything of man, man's reasonings, man's thoughts, as seen in higher critics and the like, are to be entirely discountenanced. We have to see the dispensation of God is in faith and house-wise. Look at the Lord's words to this woman, to the one who anointed Him officially. Never has there been a person so peculiarly distinguished as this woman set alongside the gospel: "This that she hath done shall be told for a memorial of her". @Matthew 26:13. Such is the Lord's appreciation; He valued
{222}
the act and a memorial of *her* must be preserved. He Himself was about to die to make it effective.
As before stated, Matthew presents the kingly and official side, but in John it is the family side, hence He says, "The servant abideth not in the house for ever, but the Son abideth ever". @John 8:35. Note the word 'abideth', not only an administrative place but a place in which to dwell. "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father)" @John 1:14; it is the Son with the Father. Have we sufficient spiritual understanding to apprehend Christ in this way -- as a Son with the Father? It requires contemplation. I refer you now to two souls who became detached from their teacher. There may be some who are following the leader of a party. John was not that, but he had disciples, those who followed him, but two of these who heard him speak followed Jesus. John spoke feelingly about Jesus; it was a word from the heart, "Behold the Lamb of God". @John 1:36. Perhaps there is nothing we are more lacking in than spiritual *feeling*. The Lord had feeling Himself. *He* rejoiced, *He* sighed, *He* wept. It was as John looked upon Jesus that he said, "Behold the Lamb of God". @John 1:36. A word from the heart goes to the heart, and it went to the heart of those two, so that they followed Jesus. Jesus knew they were following, but He turned to see. Jesus turned and *saw* them following, and said to them, "What seek ye?" @John 1:38. The first chapter of John suggests the last Adam. He loves to hear you tell the desires of your heart. What have we come here for today? These two said, "Rabbi ... where abidest thou?" @John 1:38. They did not wish any abiding place, nor should we where *He* cannot abide. Now if you want that the Lord would say, "Come and see". @John 1:39. It is a spiritual matter. They came and saw where He abode and abode *with Him* that day; they would in that way apprehend the Son, and they dwelt with Him.
{223}
In chapter 8 the Lord introduces the service of God. It had been turned into the service of sin. Many who pretend to serve are only serving their own wills. Sin is lawlessness; men have disregarded the law of God's house and substituted man's will of the worst order. The servant abideth not in the house for ever, but the Son abideth ever. He delighted in the will of God and would abide in the house for ever. This house was to stand out in all its lustre and glory, and be filled with the Son who should serve for ever. We see Him serving in the next chapter. There a man is set free by the Son. "Jesus heard that they had cast him out, and having found him, he said to him, Thou, dost thou believe on the Son of God? ... he that speaks with thee is he". @John 9:35,37. The Lord introduces you into the house in that beautiful way as one who talks with you. In principle the man is brought into it. In chapter 12 a supper is made for Him. That corresponds with the action in Simon's house, but is more exalted as coming in in connection with the glory of the Son of God, following as it does on chapter 11, where the Lord says to Martha, "Said I not unto thee, that if thou wouldest believe thou shouldest see the glory of God?" @John 11:40. So chapter 11 gives us the glorification of God and of the Son of God. He is declared to be the Son of God by resurrection from the dead. He knew in @John 12 the work that had been effected in that group. Mary took a pound of ointment of spikenard -- a measured amount, note, and very costly. She was intelligent in the glory of God and the glory of the Son of God. Thus we own the Lord in the house in family relations and are there in relation to the Father.
{224}
LOCAL CONDITION AND FURNISHING
@Luke 11: 1 - 13; @1 Corinthians 16: 5 - 9
*(Summary of Reading)*
The Lord is more concerned about the number of gatherings than in the increase of their size. The greater the number of gatherings, the more there is for Him. The more gardens there are, the more lilies there are for Him; not only the number of assemblies, but the condition of each is taken account of. The Lord is on a journey even now. @Luke 10 refers in parable to a journey from Jerusalem to Jericho, and in chapter 11 we have reference to a friend on a journey and how he is cared for, so that the setting of this would help to show how a local company is furnished. The Lord is said to have been praying in a certain place. The reference to the place is to be noted, and then the desire on the part of the disciples to be taught how to pray. That is the secret of furnishing. We have to get all the furnishings from the Lord, and dismiss from our minds all human arrangements. The inn leads up to this. Though He was in Martha's house in chapter 11 she was not furnished. Earlier in chapter 10 it says He sent out two and two into every place whither He would come. He is particular as to the furnishings and conditions in the localities.
In reference to the garden of lilies, I was thinking of @Song of Songs 6:1 - 3; that is most suggestive. The greater the number of gatherings, the greater the variety and the wider the domain for the Lord, but *He* must supply the furnishings, and this passage in chapter 11, leading up to the reception of the Spirit through prayer, indicates the fulness of the position, so that we lack nothing. In 1 Corinthians we see the Lord could not come freely to Corinth. Paul had it in mind to go, and he was representative of the Lord,
{225}
but rather than come with a rod, he wrote them, and encouraged them in the thought he would go and even winter with them. He was on a journey, but the hesitancy that marked his coming shows that conditions were not suitable. We speak very often about the Lord being with us, but I think that if He came sometimes He would take up certain things and adjust them, but instead He is patient and enlightens us.
The more companies the more gardens there would be, it is the number of companies the Lord is after. To count up the aggregate of the saints would be a very objectionable procedure, something akin to David's sin, but the number of the gatherings is another matter. After Barnabas and Mark left Paul he secured Timothy, and it says the number of assemblies increased every day. There was greater variety. Every local company has something distinctive, just as every child in a family has something distinctive.
In regard to the furnishings of the local company, I think that Bethany would help us. It is not called Bethany in Luke, but just "a certain village" it was not distinguished yet. John usually gives the name as he speaks of them as distinguished by the Spirit. Here it is a certain village in which He is received into Martha's house, but it is quite evident that Martha was not furnished. She was careful and troubled about many things, but there is one thing needful, and that is to consider Christ. That is the paramount thing in every locality. Other things have to be attended to, but one thing is needful, and Mary had chosen that good part. Hence she becomes a nucleus, but you cannot build an assembly on one person. Wisdom has hewn out her seven pillars. You must have more than one. At Ephesus there were twelve to start with. They had received the Holy Spirit at one time. They would be remarkably
{226}
distinguished in the fact that they received the Holy Spirit by the laying on of Paul's hands at one time -- hence there was a foundation there. If the Lord has one person in a locality who sets out the thought it is all immense advantage, but the building up of a local company needs more than one, for every local company is built up in principle according to the house of God. Wisdom has seven pillars according to God. It is wise not to build too much on one brother in a meeting. Get all the others into accord with him if he is right.
The Lord in the next chapter is praying "in a certain place". It does not say Bethany, but speaks of a locality and the disciples seeing Him pray asked Him to teach them to do so. If there is anybody like Martha, or even worse, in a locality, the remedy is in prayer. Then we see how God takes care of those who are under His shelter. The man says, "My children are with me in bed", @Luke 11:7 and then further the Lord points out how the father would provide for his children, as He says, "Ask, and it shall be given to you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you". @Luke 11:9. Then, "how much rather shall your Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" @Luke 11:13. I think that all shows what is available to us locally -- in every locality you ask of your Father which is *of* heaven; it is the heavenly thing brought in. What you need is out of heaven. It is your Father *of* heaven not *in* heaven; that is Matthew.
Luke refers to the local feature, and though it may be different features mark each company, yet they are all governed by the same principles. When He prays, He says, "Father, thy name be hallowed" @Luke 11:2; it is more intimate. That is the first thing. Intimate relations are suggested with the Father. His name is to be hallowed, you do not discredit it. The Corinthians were doing violence to it, hence Paul hesitated
{227}
to go to them. Provision was made for the flesh there, fleshly distinctions were recognised; however much we may say the Lord is with us, it is questionable. If He comes and finds fleshly conditions instead of our enjoying restful privilege we get the rod, and thank God that He is faithful. Paul's first letter seeks to deal with the fleshly conditions without the rod. He brings in the authority of the Lord in the way of light and leaves them to act. It was for them to decide whether he should come in love or with the rod. He desired to be among them as a father.
They had many instructors, but only one father. He represented the Lord. The conditions did not warrant the presence of the Lord. We must set our house in order if we are to have the Lord in happy freedom with us. He desires to come into His garden and to gather lilies. At Corinth there were other growths than lilies; noxious weeds grew there which had to be dealt with.
It is beautiful by way of contrast to see what Paul found at Ephesus; he embraced the saints there. Then he moves on to Troas, and he found such conditions there that they sat down on the first day of the week to break bread. There were brothers from different localities, Berea, Thessalonica, Derbe and Asia. All these localities were represented on that occasion, and the apostle was free among them. Then he moves on to other places -- Tyre, for instance, where he finds a delightful state of affairs, and where the brethren were affected by his presence and came out with wives and children when he departed. Then he moves on to another place and salutes the brethren. There is no word of reproach. Then he moves on to Caesarea, where he went to the house of Philip the evangelist, who had four daughters who prophesied; and Paul was apparently free there. Agabus too, was there and free to prophesy. All these localities afforded spiritual pleasure to him. The Lord is
{228}
undoubtedly represented in Paul as on a journey, and he drinks of the brook by the way. The apostle was refreshed in other places, but he could not go to Corinth in that way. He hesitates, and the reason is obvious.
The first condition as you speak to the Father is that you wish His name should not in any way be tarnished by anything you do, or by anything that occurs in a locality. At Tyre they embraced one another, it shows they were free for the expression of affection, which is normal church condition. It speaks very loudly to us as to whether we can bring all the children with us, as they did. It indicates a local condition where the wives and children are all in sympathy, and they kneel down on the seashore and pray and embrace one another. What a spectacle for heaven! It is morally what came out of heaven. How refreshing to the apostle on his journey.
@Luke 10 contemplates the Lord on His journey to die; that is over now, but in the Revelation He is seen standing. Finality is not reached and there is still something beyond. The Lord is still moving on. We are in a provisional period, all is pending His return. The purpose of God is still in view as regards the earth, and indeed as regards heaven. Everything is secured on the divine side. All is "Yea and Amen in Christ", @2 Corinthians 1:20 nevertheless, as to the subjective side, on our side nothing is finished. There is Israel and every other thought of God which the Lord has set out to secure. He is on the way to take up things publicly, but He has refreshment now in the local companies of His people. His name is to be praised from the rising of the sun to the going down of it; there is a circuit of praise. Paul preached the gospel and formed many companies to which the Lord could come and did come, but His coming involves conditions. He is on a journey. @Psalm 110:1 says "Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool",
{229}
and on the way to that He drinks of the brook by the way, showing what He has now.
In chapter 10 the Lord had set out on a journey, and He shows who the neighbour is; then in this chapter He is still on a journey, only in another way -- in view of the accomplishing of divine purpose. "A friend of mine is on a journey" -- that should be our language. The question is whether the Lord is my Friend. "Ye are my friends". @John 15:14. The man here says, "A friend of mine on a journey has come" @Luke 11:6; it was late at night, and the man who received him had no food. The passage shows him how to get it. If you desire to entertain the Lord, and to care for His interests, the parable shows you how to make the furnishings -- that is to say, keep on praying. The man from within arises -- that is another suggestion.
The Lord says, "Have ye *here* anything to eat?" @Luke 24:41. What have you got *here*. Every local company is tested as to what they have got, but this passage shows how you may be furnished, so that you may have something. God would have us locally furnished, but it comes in through our desire. We begin on the line of dependence; we ask for the furnishings. Abraham sat in his tent door in the heat of day and he gets a visitation. He was fully furnished, and very simply he makes the proposal to them to refresh themselves, and *they* said unto him, "So do as thou hast said", @Genesis 18:5, the Lord graciously joining in the answer. The first company in @Acts 13 gave themselves to prayer. Local conditions are all led by prayer, and each individual either adds to or detracts from what is of God.
The pattern at Corinth is seen in the house of Stephanas: "They refreshed my spirit", though the company had lacked in that. "What was lacking on your part *they* have supplied", @1 Corinthians 16:17, for the Lord gives due credit to any individual when He cannot perhaps credit the whole company.
{230}
The Lord said that Martha was troubled about many things, but there was need of one, and Mary had chosen that good part that should not be taken away from her. The Lord had one who represented His idea. It is of importance in a locality if there is one right, as the Lord can work from that point. Mary saw there was a wonderful opportunity in the presence of the Lord, the work was there, and she sat and listened to what He was saying. That is the first thing for the furnishing in the local company. The thought of remitting also comes into the furnishings. And then, "Give us day by day our daily bread". @Luke 11:3. Prayer would bring about a state of satisfaction and restfulness, a daily provision. You receive your daily provision from God, and there is a state of remission. It says, "Remit us our sins, for we also remit to every one indebted to us". @Luke 11:4. The Corinthians lacked in the spirit of remission. He had to enjoin them to confirm their love to the brother. The spirit of brokenness is a great thing among the local companies. It enables us to go on together. If we are in the consciousness of forgiveness ourselves, we cannot retain a hard spirit with our brother. There cannot be a free spirit in the company unless there is the spirit of forgiveness. Job's captivity was turned when he prayed for his friends.
The Father, which is of heaven, gives the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him, so that you have conditions which are heavenly. The assembly furnishings are from heaven. They do not appeal to man after the flesh at all, but they are acceptable to God and to the Lord. That is the great end of the epistles to the Corinthians. Not only you have the food, but the table and all the furnishings that are suitable to such a Person. He says in @Malachi 1:14, "I am a great king"; He is not to be trifled with. He looks for conditions such as He has indicated and shows they are available to us on the principle of prayer.
{231}
Paul enlarges on the Holy Spirit so that they might know how to use Him, for this was the provision God had made. The Lord is on a journey, and He stands, for He will take us further, and meanwhile He shall drink of the brook by the way. According to John's presentation He went to Bethany six days before the passover, and Mary knew it. She knew He was on the way to die, hence she anoints His feet because He was on the way. It was refreshment to Him, and this is in principle what the Lord looks for.
{232}
DIVINE FURNISHING
@Luke 24: 49; @John 20: 21,22; @Acts 1: 9 - 14
I have in mind, as God helps me, to show how the people of God were furnished, as seen in Luke and John, to fulfil the great functions designed for them, both provisionally and finally, or eternally. Luke brings in what is external but heavenly, what was to mark the saints outwardly. John runs parallel as bringing in what is to mark them, so to speak, inwardly and eternally. Hence Luke quotes the Lord as saying, "Wait ... till ye be clothed with power from on high" @Luke 24:49, whereas John speaks of the Lord breathing into them and saying, "Receive ye Holy Spirit". @John 20:22. Now these two features convey the mind of God as to those who should represent Him here in the absence of Christ from the earth, and they are to appear in undimmed lustre as we come down out of heaven from God in the future. At the present time the saints who form the assembly occupy a unique position, for Paul said in the epistle to the Corinthians, referring to certain features, that they happened to them as ensamples and were written for our admonition, "upon whom the ends of the ages have come" @1 Corinthians 10:11. That is, the end in view in every previous dispensation has come upon us. The end in view in the dispensation which began with Adam, and the end in view in that dispensation which began with Noah, or that with Abraham, right down to the present -- all these ends have come upon us, and hence the great need that we should be divinely furnished. God has indeed provided us abundantly with the means for this furnishing, as I desire to show. Luke bringing in what is heavenly as it came out in the Lord here, and John also speaking of what is heavenly, but rather of what is divine, for he deals with the Person of the
{233}
Lord Jesus Christ, and speaks of His breathing *into* His disciples, whereas Luke speaks of clothing -- that which is external.
We must have both these things and be marked by them if we are to correspond with the mind of God, for if God has recovered things in Christianity, it is to His primary thoughts. If the ends of the dispensations are still with us, it behoves us to be furnished so as to maintain these ends in a living way. The assembly began, so to speak, with a clean sheet. The governmental results of the previous dispensations all came upon Jerusalem, for in each of them there was the running of man's will in opposition to God, hence the Lord says that "the blood of all the prophets ... from the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias" @Matthew 23:35 should be required of this generation. Every item of the evil of these dispensations came upon Jerusalem in God's government; none of these governmental evils were handed down to the assembly. Now, alas! it has returned to the ways of man in the old dispensation and has assumed its responsibilities, and there is no escape from it. No matter how people try to be in the truth of the gospel, they have conformed themselves to the world, and hence have taken on all its responsibilities. There has been a return of idolatry; historically and in every way the whole Pagan system was taken over by the church,. They clothed it with the garb of Christianity, overlooking the obligations which go with it, so that at the end God raises up two witnesses who prophesy till they have completed their testimony. Then they, too, are slain in the streets of the great city, for, as it says, "in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all the slain upon the earth". @Revelation 18:24. It was the same old Jerusalem, "the great city, which is called spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified". @Revelation 11:8. Christendom has taken on all this fearful responsibility, it has provoked Him to
{234}
jealousy, and the witness to that is borne by the two witnesses of God; @Revelation 11: 3 - 13.
Now in recovery, God intends that His people should he delivered wholly from that. So in 1 Corinthians we are reminded, not that the responsibilities attaching to the dispensations have come upon us, but that the divine ends in them have come upon us. The word to us is, "Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partaker in her sins" @Revelation 18:4, and as come out the Lord would have us to know that He has a place for us in the wonderful testimony He has here, in all that has come out in the Lord. He would have us furnished like a good householder, who brings out of his treasures things new and old; and mark the new things come first, and then the old.
So the Lord says in @Luke 24: 49, "Tarry ye in Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high". The principle in tarrying is that we should not undertake anything without the clothing. The Lord Jesus Himself gives us the pattern of the garment, so to speak. In referring to it we have to recall the corresponding passage in the Old Testament, when God directs Elijah to anoint Elisha in his room. We learn there that Elisha enters into the service begun by another. That is the principle; none of us are inaugurators, we have entered upon the service of others. So Elijah takes his mantle and throws it on Elisha. I can understand the feelings of Elisha. He is a simple ploughman; how can he fill that mantle? I can imagine Elisha saying, as he examined the size and the pattern, How am I to fill this? It is a wholesome exercise for all of us. We have got to enter upon the service of others; their mantle is, so to speak, cast upon us. Elisha might say, But Elijah overthrew four hundred prophets of Baal, and he stands before the king, how can I, who am but a ploughman, fill his mantle? Well, we have to learn that God does not reduce *His* requirements, but that
{235}
He is going to bring us up to His requirements. He has got the means; the power is His. As the Lord says, "Greater works than these shall ye do, because I go unto my Father".
So the Lord says, "Tarry ye here until ye be clothed". @Luke 24:49. But that involves a moral process and Luke brings in the Lord as marked from the outset by prayer. Possibly as many as ten times in his gospel he speaks of the Lord as praying, and when He has finished His service He sets his face to go up to Jerusalem that He may suffer.
When Elisha gets Elijah's mantle he would say, My best course is to get as near Elijah as possible, and see how he does things. He virtually says, Teach me how I may fill this, and he follows him immediately. Then instead of being a rival of Elijah, he pours water on his hands; he serves him, he wants him to be at his best that he may study him. Then as the hour of his receiving up draws nigh, Elisha follows him to Bethel and to Gilgal and to Mizpah, and at each place he says, "I will not leave thee". @2 Kings 2:4. That mantle is too big for me unless you teach me how to wear it; so every position taken and every place visited indicates some feature of the testimony, that he may learn how Elijah behaves in every circumstance. And then they come to Jordan, and he is received up. It is the only way of going up, by way of Jordan. So with the Lord, He set his face stedfastly, for the time had come of His receiving up. In connection with Jerusalem He was going *out*, His exodus took place there, but He knew that He was going *up*. To become popular in any city or village or place in this world is to betray our service. The going out takes place at Jerusalem. You will be rejected there as He was rejected; the heavenly is refused, and we must accept that. John supplies the spirit of service, and thus abides till He come, but Luke deals with external appearance -- the clothing.
{236}-
So Elijah and Elisha go to Jordan. Think of the power of the position with which we are connected; the very same power that wrought in Christ when He was raised is now towards us who believe. So Elijah divides the Jordan; he smote the waters and they scattered hither and thither, and they went over. And as they went they talked. The Lord would have us habituate ourselves to what is heavenly, to walk and to talk with Him. So here Elijah says, as it were, to Elisha, What are you after? And Elisha, true to the size of the mantle, says, "I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit he upon me" @2 Kings 2:9 -- nothing less will fill that. And Elijah says, "If thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee". @2 Kings 2:10. It is all put on moral lines in regard to the Lord: if you see Me. So all the furnishings are there, furnished liberally by the Lord, but we come into them by *desire*, by the sense of the need of them. We pray; we do as He did here, and we secure in that way the furnishings which are requisite for the position.
Elijah says, "If thou see me", @2 Kings 2:10, and Elisha saw him and as he went up the mantle came down; it fell and Elisha took it up. Then he rent his own garment in two, and with the mantle of Elijah he smites the waters of Jordan and they part asunder. In one way there was no pretension to imitate Elijah, but there was dependence on the God of Elijah. God was the same for him as for Elijah, just as we say, "the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ"; we recognise that He will support what is *of Him*. It all indicates an assembly spirit. So Elisha comes hack with divine and heavenly clothing; it answers to what we have in Luke: "clothed with power from on high". @Luke 24:49.
Now Luke proceeds to the actual receiving up, "He led them forth as far as Bethany" @Luke 24:50 -- he indicates there the principle of the dispensation -- leadership. And then He lifts up His
{237}
hands and blesses them; leadership must be accompanied with that spirit of blessing. That spirit ought to mark those who lead, as Peter says, "not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing, but contrariwise, blessing". @1 Peter 3:9. Then as He blessed, He was carried up into heaven, and the disciples are in every way in accord with that, for they are continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. They are patterned after Himself and in great joy, for in principle they had the blessing. That is what follows His being received up according to Luke's gospel; in Acts he gives us the same events, but not in relation to the temple, but to the upper room. There is no contradiction in the narratives, for both are the heavenly company, but Luke would show that God contributes this testimony to Jerusalem, in the temple, in these extraordinary men -- the witnesses of the heavenly Man carried up into heaven. The God who had carried Him up in the same grace, the very same hour, was available in Jerusalem. So if we witness today, it is in the same way and in the same power. We are witnesses to God who carried Jesus up. God will not allow any man on earth to alter His plans. It takes grace to witness to a disobedient and gainsaying people, but He does it in these men "praising and blessing God". @Luke 24:53.
Now the same things, as I said, are connected in the Acts with the upper room. God has wrought wonderfully in our days, bringing out the truth of the assembly in connection with the upper room. There is something unpretentious, and yet something above the level of this present world, suggested in the upper room. The whole tenor of Scripture is to impress the principle of elevation. The Lord Himself goes up into heaven, but if He does so, He will come back from thence, and meanwhile heaven fills their gaze, while their interests here are centred in the upper room where the disciples were together. There
{238}
they gave themselves to continual prayer, with Mary the mother of Jesus -- that is the true Israel of God -- and with His brethren. Whatever the high priests might say outside, the mother of Jesus was *there*. She had been committed to John, and there in that upper chamber you find all that He had cherished; every thought of God is cherished there, and everything that *He* had cherished.
In John, when He sends out the disciples, He says, I send you as *I* was sent -- "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you". @John 20:21. It Is *personal* representation. We are to represent Him here, but for this there must be likeness. There must be likeness before image. So if He sends us forth, He first breathes into us so that we should be like Him. If you are to represent the Lord, you must be *like* Him; it could only be hard and official without moral likeness. Think of one daring to say, I am the vicar of Christ! God has had to say to all that, "I cast her into a bed ... into great tribulation". @Revelation 2:22. He will not own it; He will judge it.
You get the thought of likeness at the very outset: Adam, it says, begat a son in his own likeness. And then when Seth had begotten a son we read, "he called his name Enosh" @Genesis 4:26 -- mortal man -- made of clay -- how could such an one represent God? But "*then* people began to call on the name of the Lord". @Genesis 4:26. God had come in in Christ; it is God Himself brought in. So then it goes on, "These be the histories of Adam". @Genesis 5:1. God began all over again; the moral thing is established. God has come in and Adam begets a son in his own likeness. Now God has come in in Christ, not only as life, but in the Spirit. He breathed *into* them -- it is most intimate -- and because it is so John uses the designation *Holy* Spirit; it is one of the few cases in which he does so. "He breathed into them, and said, Receive ye Holy Spirit". @John 20:22. Luke insists on it and constantly uses the expression Holy
{239}
Spirit, showing that the Spirit received in recovery is Holy Spirit. For if we call our son Enosh, so to speak, how could there be likeness to God save by Holy Spirit? Luke gives the public feature, clothing, but John what is inner, *holiness*. So we are to "flee youthful lusts", @2 Timothy 2:22 and again, "let each possess his vessel in sanctification and honour" @1 Thessalonians 4:4 -- we pursue our way and we end it in the light of holiness. So John says, "Ye have an unction from the Holy One" @1 John 2:20; in seeking to minister the power for it lies in the unction from the Holy One. Peter says, "We have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God". We understand and communicate divine things by the unction of the Holy One we have received.
May we be increasingly furnished for the greatness of our functions.
{240}
FOUR FEATURES OF RECOVERY
@Genesis 4: 26; @Genesis 5: 1 - 3, 21; @Genesis 8: 20 - 22; @Genesis 35: 6,7, 9 - 15; @Genesis 45: 1 - 5
My exercise is to call attention to the results for God in the recovery of His people. He has His own end in view, and He never relinquishes that end, however far we may wander. Whether viewed in a collective or an individual way God never relinquishes His thought in taking us up. In the language of the New Testament He Himself knows under all circumstances what He will do, and He will not in any way be thwarted, for He has got the means by Him of reaching His end. So I would seek to link up these scriptures as presenting four great features which God has reached in recovering His people from Babylon. He *has* reached, I do not merely say that He intended to reach these features, He *has* reached them. He began with the thought of having man as a companion on earth. He came into the garden of Eden with the thought of communing with Adam. There might have been a holy walk on that day for Adam. He walked there, we are told, in the cool of the day, for we shall always find that God considers for us; but Adam was not available to God. But God had His thought, and that was reached in the first great recovery after sin came in, for Enoch came in on the line of Seth, and Enoch walked with God.
Then the next great recovery brought out another feature, showing how God could be on terms with the creation notwithstanding the presence of sin. Evil was in man's heart after the flood as before it, but God could be on favourable terms with the creation. In the recovery after the flood God is known as favourable toward all while the earth remaineth. Whatever man may do, God's attitude remains unchanged.
{241}
Then, thirdly, inasmuch as the great truth of the house of God had come out, and Jacob, to whom the light of it was vouchsafed, had departed from the land of Canaan, in the recovery, not only is the great truth of the house reasserted, but new features are added.
Then, fourthly, in the next great recovery we have brethren beloved. These four features of the truth have been reached by God in the great recovery in which it is our privilege as His people to have part at the present time, but, whilst they have been reached, our exercise should be as to their maintenance, that what we have come into as a heritage may not slip away from us or, we from it.
To begin with the first feature I mentioned: @Genesis 3 and 4 record the incoming of sin and its ravages, but @Genesis 4:25,26 suggests that the light of a new day had begun to dawn. Now whether we speak of the assembly as having departed from divine principles and got into the world, or whether we speak of a believer as having departed through sin from the path of faith and righteousness, the principle remains that there has to be the admission of sin, the acknowledgment of what the flesh is. Seth begat a son, and he called his name Enos, for he had come to recognise that man after the flesh, born under whatever circumstances he may be, is flesh; "That which is born of the flesh *is* flesh" @John 3:6; no one can gainsay it, and there is no possibility of recovery unless it is fully, unreservedly, unqualifiedly admitted, and Seth had come to that. This son of mine, he says, is born to die; weak, frail, mortal man, what can *he* do? And then it says, "Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord" @Genesis 4: 26.
If man can do nothing, God can do much; room is made for God, and a new day has dawned. Hence the Spirit of God begins the history over again in the light of this new day, for God always links on recovery
{242}
with the beginning. God's work is one whole, one piece from start to finish. Whatever *we* may do God holds on to His work, hence, when recovery is effected, He begins over again. He links on with the beginning. "This is the book of the generations [or histories] of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him". @Genesis 5:1. Not now in the image of God, but the "likeness"; Adam had come into the new light that was shining. Man was irretrievably ruined as after the flesh, but God remained in His eternal lustre, the eternal God, and men began to call on His name. "From everlasting to everlasting, *thou art God*" @Psalm 90:2 that is the refuge for faith, there is no change with God. So what He began at Pentecost continues, in spite of all man's failure in responsibility; the work of God is one piece, and we shall see it presently coming out of heaven as the holy city. The foundations of the city have in them the names of the twelve apostles (@Revelation 21: 14) and the city contains in it every item of the work of God from their day to our day, and until the assembly finally is caught up to be with Christ. Each recovery enables God to begin over again with the record, He links it on with the beginning. What we enjoy today began at Pentecost. So in @Genesis 5:1,2 God reverts to the generations of Adam, "In the day that God created man ... male and female created he them and blessed them, and called their name Adam". Not a word about the curse here, nor of Adam earning his bread in the sweat of his brow; he is *blessed*.
Then it goes on to say, "Adam ... begat a son in *his own likeness*" @Genesis 5:3; but not the likeness of a man who slunk away behind the trees afraid to look into the face of God, but of Adam set up again in a new life. Men had begun to call on the name of the Lord; God had regained His place in their hearts and in their minds; there was faith. Seth comes in on the line
{243}
of likeness first, and then of image; in other words the principle is, that whilst God began with the idea of image before likeness, now that sin has come in, you must have likeness before you can have representation. So Seth is born in the likeness of Adam first, for representation must be dependent on likeness. God's intention is that *we* should be here for Him on the principle of representation, but for that we must be like Him -- like *God*. God will never again anoint the flesh. He anointed Saul, but He will never anoint a man of the flesh again: He anoints a Man after His own heart, and that Man is like Him. Seth as begotten in the likeness of Adam is after his image, and he is appointed, his name means that -- he is a type of Christ. God always works on the principle of what came out in Christ, and what came out in Christ was likeness. He was like God, and as like God He is anointed, hence "He is the image of the invisible God".
Seth, then, is the appointed one, and in him is secured in faith, not the death line, but the life line. You may say, They all died, But no, Enoch did not die. He comes in as the great result of the recovery God had secured; He had set His heart upon men to walk with Him, and He secures it in Enoch. What a precious privilege to walk with God as perfectly revealed in Jesus! "The radiancy of the glad tidings of the glory of the Christ, who is the image of God ... has shone in our hearts" @2 Corinthians 4: 4, 6, and it is our privilege to walk with that God. That is what God has reached, He has secured men in the recovery to walk with Him. So it says, "By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death", @Hebrews 11:5. In the gospel of John the Lord brings to light that there were those who should not taste death nor see it. "By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death ... for before his translation he has the testimony that he had pleased God" @Hebrews 11:5; the most precious testimony to have in your soul,
{244}
that you please God, and God walks with those that please Him.
The next great recovery, as I remarked, gives the basis for the gospel. God would have us to pay attention to that. We have here a foreshadowing of the reconciliation of the world. The rejection of the Jew, according to Romans, involves the reconciliation of the world. Notwithstanding the untold guilt that exists in it, it is in reconciliation. Though man's heart is evil, God says, "While the earth remaineth, seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease". @Genesis 8:22. Noah, in the recovery, thought for *God*; he knew what it was to walk with God, no doubt, but he built an altar. We are not told that Enoch built an altar, but Noah set up definitely the public worship of God. That is the next great feature. If I walk with God and God is before me, the next thing is to have my altar both privately and publicly. My house is for God, my business is for God, and I am for God in regard of His public worship. God is before me. I have a universal outlook, and I understand that on the ground of the sweet savour offering He rests and can be complacent towards all men through Christ. It was a provisional situation, for it is "while the earth remaineth", @Genesis 8:22, just as today the position is provisional, but nevertheless it is there. God would arouse us as to the magnitude of the position that God is favourable to all men. It is in the light of the favourableness of God you continue to announce the glad tidings. There is no change with God; "while the earth remaineth" things go on according to His primary thought. Whatever happens, while Jesus is on the Father's throne that throne is favourable, God is favourable. You can announce the glad tidings with the fullest confidence to all on the principle of those marvellous words of Christ, "As they had nothing to pay, he forgave both of them", @Luke 7: 42.
{245}
Now the next great feature is the house, and that also has been reached. The truth of the house of God is seen first in @Genesis 28, and the recovery is in @Genesis 35. The house was brought in in the ministry of the apostle Paul. Many have departed from the truth, much has come in, but we are living, blessed be God! in a day of recovery, but recovery on *God's terms*. In Isaiah God speaks of gathering "the outcasts of Israel", but He adds, "Yet will I gather others ... beside these that are gathered", @Isaiah 56: 8. That is a word for faith. God's hand is not slack; He will gather others, not only our children, but the many who are scattered abroad God is gathering now. So in the history of Jacob we see the principles on which souls are brought back. Jacob had prospered in Padan-aram, you will remember, but as Joseph was born, he began to think of moving out and moving back. As the light of Christ comes into the soul, the thought comes with it, the world is no place for me. There is the land of my fathers, that house where God made Himself known to me at the first. Then God comes in in a vision and says, "Return unto the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred". @Genesis 31:3. The thought of kindred is most precious; we have a spiritual kindred. "I am the God of Beth-el, where thou anointedst the pillar ... return unto the land of thy kindred". @Genesis 31:13. God has His house in view, and as Jacob moves out the angels of God met him. As soon as you begin to move back in this way you find that divine agencies are present to help you. Mahanaim means two camps from God, indicating the interest God has in every returning soul. His thought is that you might have part in the great recovery, part in the blessedness of the house of God; that you might have within the walls of God's house a name and place better than any in the world -- better than of sons and daughters, that you might be made joyful in His house of prayer, that your sacrifices might be acceptable there.
{246}
So Jacob came to Bethel, "he and all the people that were with him" @Genesis 35: 6; you do not wish to leave any one out. One fears sometimes that believers are altogether too individual. "Jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with him, Put away the strange gods that are among you". @Genesis 35:2. If I am moving back to have part in this great result, my affections include all that are linked up with me, particularly my household, and hence the strange gods have to be dealt with. If we bring up our children for the world, we can never expect them to come with us to the house of God, but if we bring them up to judge idols, they will come with us. God is with us in moving back, and a firm stand in our houses brings about the cleansing process; the idols are buried under the oak, the requirements of the world, the ear-rings, are surrendered. That oak would ever stand as a witness of Jacob's shame and the shame of his family, but on the other hand it would ever stand as a witness as to his recovery, and the fact that he had come to judge the evil that had crept into his house.
Well, he came to Bethel, he and all that were with him, and "He built there an altar, and called the place El-beth-el: because there God appeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his brother". @Genesis 35:7. Now he is restored, he has come back to the house of God, he has built an altar, his family is cleansed, and God goes over the history. As in @Genesis 5, God links all up in one piece. The Spirit of God goes on to say, "And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of Padan-aram, and blessed him" @Genesis 35:9; the twenty years of departure are wiped out. God has taken the whole history up over again, and Jacob is set up in the house of God and blessed in it.
We have come to that spiritually today in the wonderful recovery that God has effected in having brought His people back into the recognition of His
{247}
It is the same house as was set up at Ephesus, there is no other -- "where thou anointedst the pillar". Now Jacob definitely names it, and he rears up an altar there, and sets up a pillar and pours a drink offering on it, meaning that not only is the pillar anointed, but there is now refreshment for God. God finds pleasure in His house in those who are there in the light of it responsive to Him, knowing His name, for that, too, is disclosed to Jacob at Peniel. All the disclosures of that name are in the house, as the Lord says, "I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known; that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them", @John 17: 26. There you get the drink offering. The saints are in the house according to God and responsive to Him, blessed in it.
The fourth thought is that of the brethren. It suggests what God has got in His family. The house is a wider thought, involving order and government and public worship, for God is the God of order. But there is the family, there is the circle of the brethren. We see that in what comes out in Joseph in the next great recovery. They had the title of brethren -- they claimed to be brethren, but where is the character of brethren? They could say, "We are twelve brethren", @Genesis 42:13 but they had even attempted the murder of one of themselves. Of what value is the name if the character be absent? Hence when they come to Egypt Joseph spoke roughly to them; there was nothing yet to indicate his brotherly relations to them. He was acting in divine wisdom; he had in view the time when he should kiss them and talk with them. It is necessary often to "speak roughly" when we are acting for the Lord, where the character of brethren is not present. The goats¬ hair suggests this. We have to tell people the truth. Paul says, "I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed", @Galatians 2: 11. Even an elder
{248}
brother like Peter was withstood to the face by a younger brother like Paul, for he was to be blamed. If a brother is to be blamed speak to him to his face in plain language, nevertheless in the language of grace.
Joseph said they were spies, and he put them in prison for three days. There was a prison gate in the days of Nehemiah. I do not know how we should get on without the prison; you could not have a kingdom without a prison. What a time of recrimination they would have during those three days, but finally each comes to blame himself. On the second visit they are brought into Joseph's house, they come now within the warmth of his affection, not yet fully revealed, but within the four walls of Joseph's house. Then when finally convicted they come back to his house, for "he was yet there". @Genesis 44:14. So the true Joseph is still in His house, for He would disclose Himself to His brethren. What wonderful disclosures *we* have had in the ministry the Lord has given us. He has made us to know that we are His brethren.
Joseph says, "Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves". @Genesis 45:5. He did not say that to them when he put them in prison but now they have arrived at a judgment of themselves before God, and I verily believe that that is what the Lord is doing in a peculiar way at the present time. He is adjusting the relationships between the brethren that we should be able to go on together. So "he kissed them" @Genesis 45:15 -- he kissed all his brethren. I believe that is what the Lord is doing. The Lord would enable us to attach true value to every brother and sister. You may say, He is not of much account, but he is of *some* account. In the last chapter of Leviticus you will find that every devoted person has some value; even if he be poorer than Moses¬ estimation the priest is to apprise it. If you inquire into a case you will find there is something there of value, something of Christ, and thus we are enabled, as valuing the
{249}
brethren, to go on together. It saves us from special friendships, for we are *all* of value, every one has his place and estimate. So that you can kiss them. The Lord gives every one to know that He loves them. He would delight to lead you on so that you may be worth more. It is a poor thing to be worth ten or fifteen shekels when you might be worth fifty, but if you are only worth ten, you are worth that, and the Lord would embrace you. I think that is what He is doing -- making us to know that He loves us every one -- and then He talks with us. As we learn in @Acts 20, when Eutychus was restored, when recovery had come in by the embrace of Paul, they broke bread and ate, and then conversed; so the Lord talked with His brethren. We are not told what He said to them when He came to them, but just the simple, blessed fact that He actually speaks to them.
The bride in Canticles could speak about His mouth, it was "most sweet". @Song of Songs 5:16. What precious experiences we may have of the Lord communing with us -- speaking with us. Like Elijah and Elisha as they crossed the Jordan, they walked and talked, they had holy communion together. We have the brethren; we come back to what God found at Thessalonica, "brethren beloved of God" @1 Thessalonians 1:4. That is what God has as the saints are set in relation to one another according to God in brotherly affection. God has got us. The Lord Jesus has brethren, and brethren beloved of God, that is to say, brethren of that kind, "beloved of God".
{250}
THE ENERGY OF LIFE IN ADVERSE CIRCUMSTANCES
@Hosea 14:8; @Psalm 52:8
I have been thinking of the word 'green' in these two scriptures. In Hosea it indicates the result of the ministry of that prophet. His ministry brings out in a striking way the love of Jehovah for His people. God had loved them from their childhood, as He says, "When Israel was a child, then I loved him". @Hosea 11:1. God, as known in Christ, is the same yesterday, today and for ever. He loves us if we turn our backs, as he does while our faces are turned towards Him, and this prophet works out the faithfulness of divine love as it pursues us so as to recover us.
The words in the passage read indicate complete recovery. A truly recovered soul is like a green fir tree. That is, he is so possessed of the energy of life that the effect of it is seen in *all weathers*. The fir retains its greenness in all weathers. It is the change of seasons that brings out the nature of the tree in this respect. Most lose their covering of green, and so it is that the winter tests the tree; and correspondingly with the history of Christians, the adverse blasts of winter test the strength of our spiritual life. From the north cometh the cold; the energy of life within withstands its withering blast. In the presence of adverse circumstances, the truly recovered soul retains his greenness; in the days of adversity as in the days of his prosperity he is marked by the energy of life.
And so it occurred to me to call attention to this saying of Ephraim's. He says, "What have I to do any more with idols?" @Hosea 14:8. Earlier in the chapter Israel is enjoined to take with them words and turn to the Lord. "Say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously so will we render the calves of
{251}
our lips", @Hosea 14:2. These words are becoming in the lips of those whose faces are turned towards Jehovah. As received graciously they would render the calves of their lips; that is, God has His praise from those truly recovered. And then they say, "Asshur shall not save us; we will not ride upon horses" @Hosea 14:3 -- meaning that they will not rely on natural energy in man, something we are all prone to do. But it is only reliance upon the flesh. Horses represent the power of the flesh -- "their horses are flesh and not spirit". @Isaiah 31:3. Anyone riding on a horse is above the level of the ordinary and he knows it. The believer as turned to God renounces the world (the Assyrian) and the flesh.
We are now on the highroad to recovery. No spiritual person can have any doubt as to one whose language corresponds with these words, and so on down the chapter as you will observe. "I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely". @Hosea 14:4. This is *God's* word, as Israel's words are given earlier. Further, Jehovah says, "Mine anger is turned away from him. I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the lily, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon. His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the olive tree". @Hosea 14:4 - 6. These are what I may call the potentialities of a recovered brother. When I speak of a recovered brother I speak of all of us, and one is inclined to measure up to see if these potentialities have become actualities.
You see here how the green is produced: "I will be as the *dew* unto Israel". @Hosea 14:5. Then, he shall grow as a lily. The Lord comes into His garden to gather lilies. The Lord Himself condescends to describe the lily: "Consider the lilies how they grow". @Matthew 6:28. No doubt He had the saints in His mind. The lily was in itself a beautiful feature of divine creation, but how much more beauty marks the believer as adorned by the Holy Spirit! As the dew comes down, the Christian is invigorated and beautified: he grows as the lily.
{252}
How beautiful in the Lord's eye. He says, "I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these". @Matthew 6:29.
"He shall cast forth his roots as Lebanon". @Hosea 14:5. No doubt reference is made here to the stability which marks the truly recovered person. We are to be rooted and grounded in love; @Ephesians 3: 17. Then it goes on to say further, "His branches shall spread", @Hosea 14:6 which means, I suppose, his influence. The influence of a Christian, and the means whereby he may protect others, are suggested in his branches. As it says, "His branches shall spread; and his beauty shall be as the olive tree". @Hosea 14:6. One loves to see in the saints the extension of spiritual influence. The apostle says, "By the grace of God I am what I am". @1 Corinthians 15:10. His measure reached very far. Except the Lord Himself, no one has exerted such heavenly influence as Paul. The Lord looks for this extension of spiritual influence in us. It goes on to say, "His beauty shall be as the olive tree". @Hosea 14:6. Men generally seek to shine in natural beauty, but there is no beauty in this respect; all must be according to Christ, and His beauty is put on us by the Spirit. The olive is universally a type of the Spirit, and it beautifies us according to God's standard.
It says further, "his smell as Lebanon". @Hosea 14:6. You will note the references are very simple, but the word 'smell' is very suggestive. It is used in Scripture widely, and here the smell is of Lebanon. What marks the root comes out in the odour. Jacob smelled as "a field which Jehovah hath blessed", @Genesis 27:27, and Paul was a sweet odour of Christ to God; @2 Corinthians 2:15. Then it goes on to say, "They shall return and sit under his shadow; they shall revive as corn, and blossom as the vine: the renown thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon". @Hosea 14: 7. Wine is said to gladden the heart of God and man, and hence the reference here to the truly
{253}
recovered brother; the truly recovered soul spiritually gladdens the saints. Christ was the embodiment of all that is heavenly and spiritually stimulating to create gladness for our hearts, and also for the heart of God.
Ephraim shall say, "What have I to do any more with idols?" @Hosea 14:8. And God heard him and observed him, and then Ephraim says, "I am like a green fir tree". @Hosea 14:8. I mention that because we all droop so in adversity and misrepresent what is heavenly. The thought with God is that the energy of life is but enhanced by adversity. Take Paul and Silas in the prison; @Acts 16: 26. What a scene of spiritual power! Truly the green fir tree was manifested, giving evidence of life in most terrible physical sufferings. Stephen also maintained the green in the greatest adversity; as stoned he knelt down and said, "Lay not this sin to their charge". @Acts 7:60.
Ephraim says. "I am like a green fir tree", @Hosea 14:8 and then God says, "From me is thy fruit found". @Hosea 14:8. He says, as it were, There is no lack, I am the Source of all fruit. It is just a question of how much he can bear. "From me", He says, "is thy fruit". @Hosea 14:8. The fruit all comes from God; the point is to maintain perpetual greenness. It is easy to *summer* with the brethren, but when things go ill, it is then one is tested; as Paul wintered with the saints you would see the evidence of life in him as at any other time.
I read in the Psalms just to call attention to the olive tree. It says, "I am like a green olive tree in the house of God". @Psalm 52:8. The house of God tests us as to our spiritual growth. Men shine in the council chambers of this world by wit and learning, but in the house of God these things fail you. Let us learn that lesson once for all. "I am like a green olive tree in the house of God". @Psalm 52:8. Here is a man who shines in grace and intelligence among the saints. In the house of God all must be of the Spirit -- the flesh
{254}
profits nothing. Paul said, "In the church I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue". @1 Corinthians 14:19. The greenness of the olive refers to the energy of life in spirited grace and intelligence, which marks those whom God would have to serve Him in His house. The olive tree honours God and man. It refused to abandon this service to become ruler over the trees @Judges 9. In this there is a rebuke for all who aspire to prominence among the people of God. The spiritual man retains his divinely given place, and thinks only of God and the edification of the saints in his service. He is a green olive tree in the house of God.
{255}
THE KING
@Psalm 45: 1 - 7
I have in mind to speak about the King. The King of the Old Testament is the Lord Jesus. The relation of the King to the soul is recognised in Mary's reference, "They have taken away my Lord". @John 20:13. Kingship has reference to rule. It has a very great place in Scripture and it is important that it should be understood in one's soul now in view of the fact that kings and thrones are disappearing from this world. Within the lifetime of most of us here some of the most renowned monarchies have disappeared. The idea of government according to God is fast disappearing from this world, whereas in Revelation we are told that there is a throne in heaven. No convulsions in the affairs of this world can interfere with that throne. In our passage we read "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever". @Psalm 45:6. For the moment it is a throne of grace, presently the Lord Jesus will take up the thrones of this world and will rule in judging the world in righteousness. The believer is to know the Lord Jesus as the One that is made Lord and Christ in heaven; as submitting to Christ we receive the Holy Spirit, and so are in the kingdom of God, and we say, "There is ... one Lord Jesus Christ". As we thus regard Him, He becomes increasingly attractive to us, so that in time we, like the Psalmist, begin to compose something touching the King.
The psalm is the result of an experience of the king. The writer had evidently been acquainted with David. David represents in the Old Testament the divine idea of a king, but the roots of kingship extend far back in Old Testament times. Melchizedek represents kingship in the mind of God. His name signifies peace. He was king of righteousness. God had such
{256}
a king in days in which men like Nimrod ruled. We know nothing of Melchizedek's personal history; we are concerned with the fact that he was king of righteousness; he was king of Salem, which is king of peace, and in addition he was priest of the most high God. We have thus set out at the beginning the divine thought of kingship, a thought which is fully seen in the millennial day when the true Melchizedek, the Lord Jesus, will reign and exercise the priesthood of the most high God. He will exercise sympathy towards the universe in that day. If we compare such a King with the kings of this world, we can readily discern the difference. What God had before Him was that men should be in such a kingdom.
My thought is to show how this was realised in David. God begins a line of thought by setting out what was in His mind, and then we have the way traced out by which God reaches His thought. We have the golden thread of this in Matthew, reaching through forty-two generations from Abraham to the Lord Jesus Christ. The book begins with the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the son of Abraham, and we find when David is reached, he is called the king. Hence we have the full thought of kingship traced to our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the King. That was ever in the mind of God.
In Melchizedek's day there were nine kings at war, five on the one side and four on the other. Melchizedek had nothing to do with that fray; he stood aside. He comes out with blessing, so that we have the divine thought of kingship. Hence God has set out His thought in Melchizedek.
Then He brings in other types of the Lord Jesus to bring out His full thought. Joseph is the next type of kingship. He must be of peculiar interest to the young here as well as to the old. As a lad of seventeen he was occupied in caring for his father's flock. He is a son of Rachel. Indeed, the record of
{257}
the Spirit would indicate that he was in the capacity of a junior, being the youngest but one of Jacob's sons; for the sons of Zilpah and Bilhah were older. It is well that young men and women should understand what it is to be in subjection to older ones. Even our Lord Himself at the age of twelve recognised advantage in eldership, for when in the temple at twelve years old He was *hearing* and asking questions, and He retired in subjection to His parents.
But Joseph discerns the evil discourse of his brothers. We can understand it. The mothers alas, were not such as would produce good discourse, so that their discourses were evil. Zilpah and Bilhah were just handmaids to their mistresses and could not impart the liberty and dignity that belonged to sons. We Christians who are in the light of the assembly recognise our heavenly mother, so that we are children of the free woman, for "Jerusalem which is above is free, which is mother of us all". @Galatians 4:26. Joseph was born of Rachel, and he brought back to his father in the liberty of a son the report of his brothers¬ discourse.
The King of our chapter loved righteousness and hated lawlessness, and so Joseph hated the evil discourse of his brethren. Jacob loved Joseph above all his sons and made him a vest of many colours. We have thus our Lord Jesus Christ beautifully typified; God distinguished Him above all others. As we look at the boy of seventeen invested in this coat he becomes an attraction to us.
The gospels bring the Lord before us in this light, so that as we read them with anointed eyes we see the King in His beauty and we begin to compose something about Him; like the Psalmist we say, "My heart is inditing a good matter; I speak of the things which I have made touching the king" @Psalm 45:1. And so Joseph at this tender age speaks to his brethren, he contemplates himself with them in the field binding
{258}
the sheaves -- corn was primarily the great feature of his service. He says, "My sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf" @Genesis 37:7. And they refused his testimony, like the Jews, who say, "We will *not* have this man to reign over us". @Luke 19:14. They preferred Caesar to Christ, and yet He was the bread from heaven coming down from God.
Then Joseph says, "The sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me". @Genesis 37:9. All creatorial light and rule are to be made subject to Christ. What a wonderful sight in that day in a boy of seventeen! It is written for us that we might recognise the Lord as the true King. It says of Jacob, that while he rebuked his son, yet he observed the saying; in later years he proved to his pleasure the truth of the dream when he was brought to Egypt to his son and saw all his glory.
The next type of kingship is Judah. In Jacob's prophecy in @Genesis 49 we are told that he prevailed above his brethren; he stands not as a type of Christ beloved of the Father, but as prevailing above His brethren. Romans brings out this great feature of Christ. It is the moral greatness of Christ, so that the delivered one in Romans says, "I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord". @Romans 7:25. I bow down to Him and take account of His *moral* greatness.
He is pre-eminent in my heart, and I thus readily accord Him that place, for He is able; hence it says, "The sceptre shall *not* depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be". @Genesis 49:10. Hence we have the sceptre and lawgiver. These are with Judah, so that the people of God are gathered in obedience. As we are thus in submission to the Lord He becomes a gathering centre. If we do not thus gather we are not rightly gathered. As we recognise the sceptre in His hands and accept Him
{259}
as the lawgiver, we are delivered from lawlessness we are in accord with this psalm, "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: the sceptre of thy kingdom is a right sceptre". @Psalm 45:6. We recognise our King as our God, and say to him in the language of the Psalmist, "Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness: therefore, God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows". @Psalm 45:7.
That makes room for the next type, which is seen in Moses. Moses acquired a place in the affections of the people. It says that he was king in Jeshurun, which means I understand, upright people. All such accord the place of king to Christ, they give a reason for according Him that place. They say, "Moses commanded us a law, the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob". @Deuteronomy 33:4. We have thus a code of laws enacted for us.
1 Corinthians represents this code, and every spiritual person, as the epistle says, recognises it as "the commandments of the Lord", @1 Corinthians 14: 37. We do not regard it as an irksome or unjust law. Every intelligent Christian in the world recognises 1 Corinthians as an inheritance, and our love for Christ is proved by our keeping such a law. It is that which governs us as gathered together; it is that which regulates our conduct. They are not laws that lead us into bondage but into liberty; as we love Christ we value this epistle. The apostle says, "If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maranatha". @1 Corinthians 16:22. The epistles are intended for those who love our Lord Jesus Christ. It says of Moses that he was king when the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were gathered together. What answers to this in the New Testament is the saints gathered together acknowledging Christ as Lord. His rights are fully accorded to Him, so that we have the *Lord's* day and the *Lord's* Supper.
David represents the divine thought reached as in
{260}
Matthew; he is the one man called "the king". That intimates to us what a place David held in Matthew's testimony. Indeed, David gives an account of the king himself in @2 Samuel 23: 1. We have in this verse David's own estimate of kingship- This conception of kingship has full expression in Christ, and you can understand the psalm in the light of it. The write had the true King in his mind, but David in a remarkable way typified Him, so that when he was anointed he was in the midst of his brethren. The prophet passed over one after another of the sons of Jesse, and Samuel had to inquire, "Are here all thy children?" @1 Samuel 16:11, and Jesse has to say, "There yet remaineth the youngest and, behold he keepeth the sheep" @1 Samuel 16:11. You see how David qualified for this great office, and so as he comes into the house, Jehovah says, "This is he" @1 Samuel 16:12. It should bow our hearts to Christ.
The Holy Spirit says, "He was ruddy". @1 Samuel 16:12. There was evidence of freshness of life there, as the bride in the Canticles says, "He is ruddy", @Song of Songs 5:10 and the Holy Spirit says further that he was lovely-eyed and of beautiful appearance. We are coming in close touch with Christ. The Holy Spirit calls attention to his peculiar features as God's anointed. There was in Christ the vigour of life and the lovely eye, or countenance, and then the beautiful general appearance of His Person.
The prophet anoints David in the midst of his brethren. Here in @Psalm 45 the Psalmist speaks of the personal beauty of Christ: "Thou art fairer than the sons of men" @Psalm 45:2; he is detained in the presence of the King. In God's King all the features I have outlined appear and they enter into this psalm. God says. "Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion" @Psalm 2:6. Nothing can shake this. We recognise it. "*My* king", God says. The believer may well say, "My King, and my God" @Psalm 84:3.
{261}
THE FAITHFULNESS OF GOD
@Revelation 4
*(Summary of Reading)*
The faithfulness of God is an important feature of the truth. It has reference to His engagements. This chapter brings it out in a striking way as having reference to His covenant made with men in creation. It also comes out in Abraham. God made a covenant with him also. @Romans 9 - 11 teaches us how God's faithfulness is seen in that connection. His name Jehovah signifies His faithfulness with Israel. Taking His new name in Exodus, God intended to convey to His people that He was about to fulfil His promise. His new name Jehovah signified that He was *faithful*.
Then He made a covenant with David, which finds its fulfilment in Matthew, and it enters into the aim of the gospel. Christ is said to be "made of the seed of David according to the flesh; but declared to be the Son of God with power", @Romans 1:3,4, so that the power, love and faithfulness of God enter into the gospel. Romans opens up these features but the chapter we read has reference to God's covenant with regard to creation. We have the expression in the epistle of Peter, "God ... a faithful Creator". @1 Peter 4:19. This works out in this chapter in a striking way; hence we have the rainbow, not so much for its variety of colour, as in the one predominating colour suggested in the emerald -- *green*. This signifies that God's things are never old. A covenant made a thousand years ago is as fresh as if it were made today.
The new covenant referred to in Hebrews has in mind what is fresh; for the old one has grown aged, it says. Many of God's people have gone back to the old covenant, the one that had grown old, overlooking the new which retains its freshness. It is indeed an everlasting covenant, for Christ was brought again
{262}
from the dead in the power of the *everlasting covenant*. Some things are old which do not look old, but the first covenant is old and looks old. The new covenant has made the old look old. All the freshness of the old is developed in the new -- the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given to us. We understand the emerald rainbow round about the throne to indicate *power* to fulfil the covenant. The first evidence of life is the green, as on the third day of creation; @Genesis 1:11.
As born again we begin to show the green. The Lord refers to Himself as the green tree; Judaism had become the dry tree. Nominal Christianity is the dry tree. We may have the outward forms of Christianity and yet be as barren as a desert; *nominal* Christianity yields nothing for God. By the Spirit we yield the green for God. The rainbow speaks of the engagement of God not to destroy the world with a flood, which was based on the sweet savour of the burnt offering (@Genesis 8: 21), as it says, "Jehovah smelled the sweet odour". As seeing this, the believer pursues his way in assurance and restfulness, like Noah when he saw the bow. We are assured in the light of God's faithfulness, so "Be ye stedfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord". @1 Corinthians 15:58.
We have the faithfulness of God in both the epistles to the Corinthians. In the first epistle it is connected with the fellowship of His Son, Jesus Christ our Lord; @1 Corinthians 1:1 - 9: in the second epistle the faithfulness of God is seen in that every promise in Christ is "Yea, and ... amen".
The twenty-four elders round the throne are a further evidence of God's faithfulness, for in them all believers in two dispensations are seen there *secured for God*. The experience acquired in service on earth is now seen round the throne, so in making good His engagements to us He secures what is for
{263}
Himself; hence in the elders God has secured a feature in His government in the future. This shows the importance of learning *now*, so that we may be available for God in His government by-and-by. The elders represent the result of experience They have *golden* crowns, and are *clothed in white*, showing purity and dignity associated with God's government. The living creatures refer to the green, they afford pleasure to God in that they are *living now*. @Psalm 89 speaks of the faithfulness of God to all generations, and earlier in the Psalms we are told that His faithfulness reaches to the clouds. His faithfulness is in the congregation of the saints, and we reckon on it in our meetings, and in all that appertains to the assembly. This is assured by the prominence given to it in 1 and 2 Corinthians.
At the present time we are in the position of learning by experience how to govern, so that we may take the place of elders, and we are to learn what life is, so as to execute our service in the energy of that life. Referring to this chapter, that energy is seen in four ways: first, the lion. In Romans, in recovery God intends strength. In @Romans 8:10 we have, "The Spirit is life because of righteousness". The idea there is power and in chapter 12 we are enjoined to present our bodies a living sacrifice. In this way the lion is seen, for the righteous is as bold as a lion. The epistle to the Romans renders us righteous as God is righteous. The young men are said to be strong, and the word abides in them so that they over come.
Secondly, the calf. The calf refers to steadiness of walk in the Christian, as the ox that treads out the corn, patient in burden-bearing; life is to be in energy, and is accompanied by patient service and burden-bearing. God would develop in our life *carefulness* and *patience* in service. One step after another is the principle; you take care. It involves
{264}
the divided hoof, you choose your company. (See @Psalm 1)
Thirdly, one of the living creatures has the face of a man. This refers to intelligence. These are the features in which life manifests itself. Luke brings out the *man*. It works out in this way in compassion and intelligence; hence at the end the Lord opens their understanding, so that they might understand the Scriptures. This intelligence is to mark the saints of God. Gifts would run with this, so that the saints might arrive at "the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ". @Ephesians 4:13. So the Lord would develop ability for His people to serve, and in every locality life would take the form leading to self-edifying in love. Stephen ably represents this feature of the living creatures. In the council they saw his face as the face of an angel; there is heavenly intelligence there -- the council representing the best that man can produce. In the councils of this world you do not find what answers to the face of a man, there is nothing that answers to Christ, whereas among the people of God you have the face of a man according to God. The beauty of the Lord in the way of intelligence is to be seen in our countenances; the face looks up; God sees all this; He brings this about. We are then available for God in his government.
The fourth creature is the *flying eagle*, signifying the rapidity with which the mind of God is carried out. We are not to be indolent; whatever the hand finds to do, we are to do with our might. In Mark we have the word 'straightway', used so frequently, that is, things are to be done *at once*. We are often neglectful. God in faithfulness secures this feature. Mary comes *early* in the morning to the sepulchre; there is to be no slothfulness with us.
Each of these living creatures has six wings, and
{265}
"round and within they are full of eyes", @Revelation 4:8, that is, they have a power which is more than human. They cry, "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, who was, and who is, and who is to come!" @Revelation 4:8. Creation is secured for God. There is the righteousness of His ways and the holiness of his dwelling. They worship in the *green*, as I may so say there is living freshness in it. What God was when He made the covenant with Noah He is *now*. He does not change, as it is said of the Lord: "Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever". @Hebrews 13:8. The living creatures give praise, and the twenty-four elders do homage. The elders are in intelligent sympathy with God, those watching what is going on in the service; and as God reaches His desired end in His saints they take notice of it, and give a reason for their worship. (See verse 11.) God in reaching His thought secures this for Himself; they say: "For thy will they were and they have been created". @Revelation 4: 11. How simple it all is for young people, as it says, "Remember now thy creator in the days of thy youth". @Ecclesiastes 12:1. If God secures us in redemption, it is that we are to be in abiding freshness for His will. This is reached as we dwell upon His faithfulness in love to all that He has promised.
{266}
ORNAMENTATION
@Proverbs 1: 8,9; @Proverbs 25: 11,12
My thought is to speak about ornamentation. This is a prominent feature in creation, and God has particularly designed that His house in which He dwells should be ornamented. The most casual observer will have noted the ornamentation in the physical creation. As we look up into the heavens we are impressed by the wonderful variety of ornamentation, and we can understand the word which says, "By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens", @Job 26:13. The words of the Psalmist also are very striking, "The heavens declare the glory of God". @Psalm 19:1.
And so, when we take account of the earth, we see this ornamentation in a less degree, but nevertheless in great variety. One may mention mountains, hills, trees, rivers and lakes; they all speak of divine beautification. And again if we think of all that is living, beginning with man, we see also a wonderful variety of ornamentation and beauty. When Adam saw the movements of life in each species, he named what he saw according to the intelligence which God had given him. Hence we find in the Scripture references to a creation representative of strength and beauty.
In @Romans 1:20 we find that we are to learn from all these things, for it says, "For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead".
Further, we see from @1 Corinthians 11:14 that *nature itself* teaches us, and in that way God has surrounded us with instruction. We learn what moral beauty is in the behaviour of the woman in the sight of God, as it says "the hidden man of the heart ... even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit". @1 Peter 3:4.
{267}
Having come to the thought of moral beauty in a sister, a believing woman, we may turn to Proverbs, as it brings out in a particular way the means of this ornamentation. Solomon had through the help of God a great appreciation of it, not exactly that of the celestial, or heavenly, although he even refers to that, but he enlarges specially on what is terrestrial, or earthly. He spoke of trees and herbs; he was a man with great appreciation of trees, he used them for his buildings and knew their value well. It says that "he spake of trees, from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall", @1 Kings 4: 33. Anyone in his day wishing to understand botany had to listen to him.
What would answer to the cedar tree in the New Testament is illustrated in the woman of Sidon; @Matthew 15: 21 - 28. The Lord, the true Solomon, had gone even to the coasts of Tyre and Sidon; He was about to bring out the truth of His assembly and went there to look for materials. When the woman took a dog's place the Lord said to her, "O woman, great is thy faith". @Matthew 15:28. The greatness of the cedar tree began to appear when she accepted the absolute nothingness of what she was.
Proverbs is a book that speaks of the Son of the Father's love, the book begins, "The proverbs of Solomon *the son of David*, king of Israel", @Proverbs 1:1 and in @Proverbs 4: 3 he says, "For I was my father's son, tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother", so that this book is of peculiar interest to those who are sons. It is addressed to sons by one who himself knew this relationship. He was not only son of David, begotten by David, but he was a real son to David and we are therefore free to speak of this book as suggesting to us the Son of the Father's love.
You will remember the passage in @Colossians 1:12,13 "Giving thanks to the Father, who has made us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light, who has
{268}
delivered us from the authority of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of *the Son of his love*". What precious words these are for young believers, as well as for us all! The Father has brought us out from the authority of darkness into the kingdom of the Son of His love. It is not only the kingdom, but it is *the kingdom of the Son of the Father's love*. It is the rule of Him who is in the bosom of the Father, as John says, "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father, *full of grace and truth*". @John 1:14. We are brought into *His* kingdom.
But now what He would do is to beautify us so that we may shine with Him in His kingdom, and in this kingdom we shall be happy and satisfied. When the queen of Sheba came to see all the glory of Solomon, she exclaimed, "Happy are thy men". @1 Kings 10:8. What a great thing it is to be one of Solomon's men, to be amongst those that shine together with him in his kingdom And he indicated at the outset what was in his mind in writing this book, "To know wisdom and instruction; to perceive the words of understanding; to receive the instruction of wisdom, justice, and judgment, and equity; to give subtlety to the simple, to the young man knowledge, and discretion. A wise man will hear, and will increase learning; and a man of understanding shall attain unto wise counsels; to understand a proverb, and the interpretation the words of the wise, and their dark sayings", @Proverbs 1: 2 - 6, and then (@Proverbs 1: 7): "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge". This statements shuts our at once all the men of knowledge in this world, for if they have not submitted themselves to God in Christ, they have not the beginning of knowledge, because the fear of the Lord is the *beginning* of knowledge.
No part of this knowledge can be apprehended without the fear of the Lord. The epistle to the
{269}
Romans has in view to awaken the fear of God in man. The first thing, therefore, is this, that God has a right to our bodies, and so we present them a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable service. In the fear of God we have knowledge, we know that God has a right to us and we present our bodies a living sacrifice to Him.
But we should also be adorned, and the next verse gives us the way in which it is brought about: "My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother: for they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck". @Proverbs 1:8,9. Let us consider this!
It speaks here of the instruction of a father. Solomon knew what the instruction of a father implied; he was brought up tenderly by David. I hardly know of an infant, with the exception of our Lord Jesus, who is so interesting as Solomon. There are infants indeed in Scripture which we can dwell upon with interest and pleasure, such as Isaac, Joseph and Moses, but when we think of Solomon, we have one who has certain features suggestive of our Lord Jesus. The name itself signifies the love of which he was the object. It was said of him that "Jehovah loved him. And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet, and called his name Jedidiah, because of the Lord", @2 Samuel 12: 24,25 which means that the child was of interest to Jehovah. Further on we see that God said, "He shall be my son", and it was as Jehovah's son that Solomon built the temple. It says of Moses that he was fair to God (@Acts 7), but of Solomon as a child, it says that Jehovah loved him.
Our spiritual beginning is of special interest to God. As it is written, "When Israel was a child Jehovah loved him". @Hosea 11:1. When he was a *child*. God never forgets the freshness that marked our early spiritual beginnings. But when we think of Christ as a babe, Solomon was but a figure of Him. Luke and
{270}
Matthew provide us with the details. Luke speaks of the Lord as a Babe, Matthew as a little Child. Luke also gives us the Boy and the Man. And so Christ is the One really that is in view in Proverbs. When Solomon said, "I was son unto my father", @Proverbs 4:3, we think of what Christ was to God, as seen in the gospels.
The prophets speak of Him in His wonderful humiliation, as it is written, "He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed". @Isaiah 50:4. All these scriptures speak to us of what He was to His Father.
Solomon knew a father's affections and a father's instructions and could speak of this to his sons, and therefore it is so important that we should learn through the instruction of our Lord Jesus Christ, as He says, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me". @Matthew 11:29.
Then we have also the teaching of the mother mentioned here, because Solomon also knew a mother's affections. He says that he was tender and only beloved in the sight of his mother; @Proverbs 4:3. We have to understand the tenderness of the mother; it refers typically to the spirit of the saints in the assembly. The father represents the authority of the Lord, because authority is vested with the father. *Fathers* are to bring their children up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. But if there is only authority, the mind of the child is not developed, so it needs the teaching of the mother. We can understand what a son Solomon was to his mother Bathsheba. She had no doubt light in her soul as to God's thought that He intended that he should build Him a house. We can therefore understand what care she would have for such a son. She was anxious that he should have a training that would make him suitable for his high destiny and great service. But there is not a single believer whose destiny and service are not greater than Solomon's. We should
{271}
ever have this in view when we think of our young brothers and sisters.
The believers in Thessalonica were very much like Solomon, because it says that they were beloved of God, and there is no believer that is not loved by God. He could send us a Nathan to tell us that we are beloved, but One greater than Nathan has come, the Holy Spirit, and He has shed abroad the love of God in our hearts. Therefore each one of us is loved by God, and when we think of the young ones in the light of this, how concerned should we be that they may receive the *tender* teaching of the love of a mother amongst us, as Paul said to the Thessalonians that he cared for them, even as a nurse cherishes her children, With him was found the skill of a nurse, and he was waiting with the care allied to the affections of a mother in order that the Thessalonians should be brought up in the light of "the kingdom of the Son of the Father's love". @Colossians 1:13.
I think that you can see the importance of the father's instruction and the mother's teaching, and how they have in view ornamentation. He says, "For they shall be a garland of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck", @Proverbs 1:9. How delightful to look at a company of saints with grace about the head and these chains about each neck, to find these two beautiful things instead of the pride and ugliness and stiffness of the flesh. A garland of grace is something far greater than any garland bestowed on a Roman conqueror. You see how the believer is ornamented with this garland of grace and this chain of love.
Let us now look at chapter 25. The first chapter speaks of what we are as to our appearance, and such are an adornment in the kingdom of the Son of the Father's love, but chapter 25 has reference to His speaking. Observe that this chapter begins with the proverbs of Solomon, which had been transcribed by the men of Hezekiah. These proverbs had hitherto
{272}
been neglected, until it was all brought out again in the light through the faithfulness of certain men.
The first is that it is God's glory to conceal a thing (@Proverbs 25:2). We find that God in His love has wonderful things concealed. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him". @1 Corinthians 2:9. Love finds its joy in surprising with its gifts.
"But the honour of kings is to search out a matter". @Proverbs 25:2. Those who had a place in responsibility as kings did not search out much. If the kings prior to Hezekiah had been faithful, they would have searched out these proverbs. And so it says that "the honour of kings is to search out a matter", that is, it is the obligation of those that have a place of responsibility before the Lord to search out matters, and the Holy Spirit who has come down from an open heaven "searches all things, yea, the deep things of God". @1 Corinthians 2:10.
And we also have to *speak* about all these things, and therefore we have very wise injunctions in the fourth and following verses, "Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a vessel for the refiner". @Proverbs 25:4. The dross must be removed. And then verse 6, "Put not forth thyself in the presence of the king, and stand not in the place of great men". @Proverbs 4:6. To be able to speak one has to begin in great meekness, because it is better that one says to thee, "Come up hither; than that thou shouldest be put lower in the presence of the prince whom thine eyes have seen"; as the Lord says in @Luke 14: 8, when He drew near to the house, "When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not down in the highest room". Further on in our chapter, it says, that we should not go forth hastily to strive and "debate thy cause with thy neighbour himself; and discover not a secret to another", @Proverbs 25:8,9. That is to say, we should walk in a brotherly way with one another and not disclose
{273}
personal things about each other, and so "A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of silver" @Proverbs 25:11.
We have seen how our appearance is described in chapter 1, and then we find that our words are to be spoken at the right time, so that they are like apples of gold in pictures of silver. How attractive it is to find these features in the people of God!
Finally it reads in verse 12, "As an earring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, is a wise reprover unto an obedient ear". @Proverbs 25:12. In all these verses we get instruction that we should not only adorn the house of God, but also our own appearance by the words we speak. Let us therefore covet to speak these words, so that they may not be only on the walls in our houses, but on our tongues. How truly would a word remain in the heart, that has been spoken in season. This book is full of words, that have been spoken in season. When a rebuke is necessary, it needs a wise reprover. An unwise reprover only turns away the one he reproves, but a wise reprover is like an earring of gold. That is to say that the one that receives the reproof will receive it as a token of infinite love. The ear has heard and received the reproof of love, and from that time that ear bears this beautiful ornament.
{274}
THE ANOINTING
@1 Samuel 16: 11 - 13; @1 Chronicles 11: 1 - 3; @1 Kings 19: 15 - 21
*(Summary of Reading)*
The subject of the anointing, is presented in a three-fold way in the Old Testament, namely, in connection with priest, king and prophet. We dwelt mostly on that side of it which is seen in the priest, so we might now consider the features of the anointing as seen in the king and prophet.
It was said of Judah that he "prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief ruler" @2 Chronicles 5: 2, and I think we see the same principle in David, who was anointed in the midst of his brethren. Later, as we read in Chronicles, he was anointed in Hebron by the elders of Israel. "All Israel gathered themselves to David unto Hebron, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh". @1 Chronicles 11:1. They recognised the relationship, so that it can be said he was anointed there by his brethren. They say further: "And moreover in time past, even when Saul was king, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel". @1 Chronicles 11:2. David was anointed of God by Samuel before his ability as king was known, but he was anointed by his brethren after they had discovered his ability as leader. God knew His beloved Son before He anointed Him. He could say to Him before He commenced His path of service "In thee I have found my delight". @Mark 1:11. The word 'found' would show what had come out in His life here in seclusion under the eye of God.
We recognise how suitable it was that Christ should be anointed after we have proved His worth. Romans shows what He has effected for us. He prevails in our hearts so that we not only recognise Him as *the* Lord but as *our* Lord. In @Romans 7:24,25 the believer cries
{275}
out "Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" The answer is: "I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord". In principle that is like @1 Chronicles 11. We see in the first five chapters of Romans how God has wrought through Christ to meet the need of our souls: "That as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord", @Romans 5: 21. It is not now only a question of making God's *thoughts* known, but of the *power* that is needed to work out our salvation. God's power has been demonstrated in the resurrection of Christ, so that the gospel in Romans is the gospel of God concerning His Son Jesus Christ our Lord. In order that we may understand the lordship of Christ we must see that He has prevailed among His brethren. He has secured all things for God, but I am afraid the difficulty with us is that He has not fully prevailed in our hearts. David had prevailed in the hearts of those who became his mighty men and they anointed him king in their hearts. @Romans 16 gives us the names of some in whose hearts God had prevailed.
@Psalm 24 shows us how Christ has prevailed in heaven. He has gone into heaven not only because of who He is, but on the ground of His exploits. "Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle. Lift up your heads, O ye gates; even lift them up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory? The Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory. Selah". @Psalm 24: 7 - 10. How heaven recognises the exploits of Christ! "The Lord mighty in battle". The question for us is then, Is He recognised in our hearts in this way? When David brought the head of the giant he had the evidence in his hand of
{276}
his kingly power. He prevailed in the heart of Jonathan. "The soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul", @1 Samuel 18: 1. We read further, "And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and gave it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle" @1 Samuel 18: 4.
We see thus how David captivated the heart of Jonathan; and we read further that women came out of all cities of Israel celebrating David's exploits. They said: "Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands" @1 Samuel 18:7.
In @Revelation 5: 5,6 the Lord Jesus is seen in the midst of the throne as a Lamb that had been slain. He was "the Lion of the tribe of Juda, the Root of David", who had prevailed to open the book, but He prevails over our hearts now through His suffering love. In @Acts 19: 17 we read: "The name of the Lord Jesus was magnified". The testimony prevailed through His name and dispelled the moral darkness at Ephesus. "Thus with might the word of the Lord increased and prevailed" @Acts 19: 20.
All Israel recognised their relationship with David, and that he had already been their leader. They anointed him themselves, thereby proving they had accepted God's choice. I wonder if the Lord has prevailed in our hearts in this way. It would show itself in a practical manner in the degree we have yielded ourselves to Him. "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved", @Romans 10: 9.
It is a great moment in our soul's history when we anoint Him, acknowledging Him as the One who has led us out and brought us in. In @1 Chronicles 11 David is recognised as king by his brethren, Moses also was acknowledged as such in the affections of the people. "He was king in Jeshurun when the heads
{277}
of the people and the tribes of Israel were gathered together". @Deuteronomy 33:5. All this has reference to Christ. Jeshurun signifies "upright", and Romans brings about uprightness in our hearts. Every upright person will afford Christ His place as Lord in their hearts.
In the anointing of the king there is dignity according to God. All true Christians say that Christ alone is worthy to rule. The woman in Simon the leper's house anointed Him as King. The wise men from the East came to the house where the young child was. They were governed by the light they had received from the star. They had no personal knowledge of Him, but recognised, nevertheless, that He was the King of the Jews. They worshipped the Child, and presented unto Him gold, and frankincense, and myrrh. They had been moved by light from heaven.
The woman in Simon's house had proved His worth by what He had done, and she virtually said by her action that God's choice was her choice. She would acknowledge no other king but Jesus; He was supreme in her heart. How full the Scriptures are of Christ! The position of every true-hearted Christian is that he has given himself to Christ as the only King. Alas! the Jews said they had no king but Caesar.
His full royal rights will be seen at His public appearing. "And the armies in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean. And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, King of kings, and Lord of lords", @Revelation 19: 14 - 16. Here we see Him coming out as supreme in a day to come. The truth of the anointing will then be demonstrated to the universe.
{278}
We come now to @1 Kings 19, where we have the anointing of a prophet. This has particular reference to a period, in which those in responsibility have failed. Elijah, wonderful servant as he was, is seen as having failed and God would emphasise at this juncture that He had abundance in reserve. God is in no sense reduced because of limitations on our side. He shows what resources He has at His disposal. He tells Elijah to anoint three persons (verse 15, 16). If Elijah was now about to give up his position God would carry on His service according to His original thought. Hence He instructs Elijah to anoint three. What I want to emphasise is that God pursues His testimony according to the original dignity and power of the anointing. We need to apprehend this in our day, for we live in a time of failure. In anointing these three God would show His servants His principle, that if one fails He will take up another. We have an example of this in Saul and David; Saul is set aside and David is taken up.
Elijah had had great opportunities of seeing God's resources. In the house of the widow he and she and her son had been fed a full year, and the barrel of meal did not waste, neither did the cruse of oil fail. He had there daily proved God's resources during a whole year of three hundred and sixty-five days. In partaking of food thus provided, every day there was a continuous evidence of God's resources. Surely Elijah should never have concluded that all was hopeless. In @Luke 4 Jesus refers to this incident, and God would remind us in it that the Holy Spirit is here. God would give us to prove the reality of the presence of the Spirit and He expects us to rely on the Spirit. If we do we shall not leave the land, like Elijah, and go to Horeb. What made his action more serious was that he left his servant at Beer-sheba. He went away from the place of testimony. Beersheba speaks of the faithfulness of God. He left his
{279}
servant there and went a day's journey into the wilderness. Beer-sheba belonged to Judah, the one who prevailed above his brethren. It should have belonged to Simeon (@Joshua 19: 2), but it had passed into the possession of Judah. It was after Isaac had been offered up and received back again that the promises were confirmed to Abraham, and we read in the same chapter (@Genesis 22) that he went and dwelt at Beer-sheba. That is to say, he lived in the light of the faithfulness of God. Elijah left his servant there, fleeing for his life. He did experience mercy in the wilderness, for God had His eye on His servant and fed him, but it is well to note there was no oil there. The oil is not available as one flees for one's life. Oil is for the anointing of priest, king and prophet. We are to stand for God in the dignity of the anointing. To flee for one's life is to despise the anointing; by acting thus we deny the truth as to the presence of the Spirit.
What comes to light at this juncture is that God carries on His thought, and Elijah is instructed to anoint three. God's resources come to light in a day of breakdown and failure, for He is determined to carry on His own work in power. We see in Elijah's movements that he, instead of endeavouring to prolong his own forfeited service, goes and finds Elisha first. He is not said to have anointed the other two; he casts his mantle on Elisha, thereby relinquishing his own position and recognising God's choice. Elijah had failed in not finding the seven thousand in Israel, all those who had not bowed to Baal, but Elisha was to be found amongst his brethren. The sons of the prophets sought enlargement, and he went with them to Jordan; @2 Kings 6.
Elisha makes much of oil. He told the widow of the prophet (@2 Kings 4) how to use it and prove God's resources. She was to pay her debt and live, she and her children, of the rest. His ministry brings
{280}
in the truth of the Spirit, and enlarges on it. Instead of being in bondage, as many of God's dear people are, we are enabled by the Spirit to discharge all our moral obligations. We read thereafter of a "great woman" who built a dwelling-place for the prophet. The thought is that God's people become great by recognising the oil, for it is thereby that room is made for Christ. Elisha represents the ministry of the Spirit. He had observed how Elijah did things and he saw him go up into heaven. Thus he had the testimony of the ascension. He received a double portion of Elijah's spirit because he saw him go up, and his ministry stands in relation to the ascended one. He rent his own clothes in two pieces and took up the mantle of Elijah that fell from him. He smote the waters of Jordan and said: "Where is the Lord God of Elijah?" @2 Kings 2:14. Elisha had received his education by following Elijah. He was led by the older prophet and they went together to the different places where Israel had failed. He took his mantle, and although as yet too big for him, as we may say, he would in taking it up keep before him the way his master had carried out his service.
It is well for a young servant, in taking up the work, that he should recognise the way God has wrought by those who have gone before. Paul says to Timothy: "Thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, charity, patience, persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I endured: but out of them all the Lord delivered me" @2 Timothy 3: 10,11. He also speaks to him of his cloke; @2 Timothy 4:13.
We should take account of those whom God has used in His service. Elisha did not assume to be a rival of Elijah. We read that he poured water on the hands of Elijah, indicating that he identified himself with him. The exhortation in @Hebrews 13:7,8 is to
{281}
"Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever". Onesiphorus had sought the apostle out very diligently and found him. How Paul valued a man in such sympathy with him, but let us consider the other side, how many Paul had sought and found! What must it have been to him to be forsaken by so many of the saints! Still, there were those who thought of him, and he delights in mentioning them in writing to Timothy. Our sympathy with the Lord in His testimony is shown by the measure in which we sympathise with those whom He takes up in His service. Elisha was an apt learner, and did not occupy himself with the failure of his brother Elijah, but cherished what was spiritual. These two were like Paul and Timothy. Elisha says, "My father, my father", @2 Kings 2:12. There are not many fathers, and we should esteem such very highly in love for their work's sake. Paul speaks of Onesimus as his son begotten in his bonds.
Elisha is a fine model for young servants, he wished to be great before God, and valued that which was spiritual, his desire being for a double portion of Elijah's spirit. He did not ask for greatness in connection with this world.
I would recommend all to read @1 Kings 19, @2 Kings 2: 1 - 14 and @1 Chronicles 11, comparing these scriptures with 2 Timothy. The apostle urges on Timothy that "God has not given us a spirit of cowardice but of power, and of love, and of wise discretion", @2 Timothy 1:7 also that the entrusted deposit was to be kept "by the Holy Spirit which dwells in us". @2 Timothy 1:14. Thus we see that in a day of general failure the testimony is to be carried on in the power of the anointing, as at the beginning.
{282}
SPIRITUAL DIGNITY
@2 Corinthians 1: 21,22
*(Summary of Reading)*
Our thought is to consider the spiritual dignity in which God would have us appear here in the power of the anointing. The verses we have read suggest spiritual stability and dignity, and these two things are essential to our being here in any way as representative of God.
Anointing has a great place in Scripture. We find the first reference to it in @Genesis 28: 18, where it is stated that Jacob poured oil upon the top of the pillar. Thus it is evident that the house of God was to he characterised by the anointing. It is first presented from the divine side, Aaron himself being anointed without blood, and the tabernacle was also anointed with him; @Leviticus 8: 10 - 12. This anointing of the priest, also of the king and prophet, of which we read later, presents Christ in three official positions. Thus we see in type how Christ was anointed according to the thoughts of God. In becoming Man He was anointed with the Spirit and came out here in holy dignity. God has also, in the unfolding of His thoughts, shown us that He would have a people here clothed with the dignity suggested in the anointing.
What an immense field is opened up for our consideration in connection with Christ as anointed of God and occupying these three official positions in divine dignity! The personal dignity of Christ is presented in @Hebrews 1, and then we read in @Hebrews 2: 3, "How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him?" The Lord Himself is the Speaker, and the anointing shows his personal dignity: "God, even
{283}
thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows". @Hebrews 1:9.
The divine thought in anointing the tabernacle and all that was in it, also the altar and all its utensils, and the laver and its stand, is unfolded to us in Christ. Moses sprinkled of the anointing oil on the altar seven times. The altar typifies Christ as the One who should suffer. It indicates the moral power and dignity that marked Him in suffering. God's thoughts of Christ personally are unfolded before that which typifies His death and God's drawing near to us in Him is spoken of. It is well for us to cherish the divine thoughts of His moral dignity. It is said of the olive tree that by it they honour God and man; @Judges 9:9. It was due to God that He should have the first place, and the Lord Jesus took the place of dependence here for the glory of God. When Jesus was baptised and was praying, the heaven was opened and the Holy Spirit descended on Him. He stood up in the synagogue in Nazareth as the anointed Man and at once referred to the prophecy of Isaiah, thus clearly showing that He would not speak in His own name but as anointed of God and taking the position of man in dependence on God. Thus God is honoured by the Lord Jesus from the outset of His ministry but man is also honoured as being found in his right place of subjection to God. The words which proceeded out of His mouth were, therefore, in keeping with the anointing; they wondered at the gracious words though their hearts were not affected. They were not prepared to hear the truth from His lips but led Him unto the brow of the hill where on their city was built, that they might cast Him down headlong. Here we see what is involved in the thought of the altar being anointed seven times. The altar being thus anointed was to call attention to the moral greatness of the Person of Jesus as the suffering One here upon earth.
{284}
God Himself has been revealed in Christ, not only as meeting our need, but in His own greatness; Christ was the effulgence of "his glory, and the expression of his substance". @Hebrews 1:3. Observe the dignity of the movements of Jesus as He passed through the midst of those enraged because of His telling them the truth. We read that He went His way and descended to Capernaum. He continued His service of grace in holy dignity in the power of the anointing and was equal to all the opposition. He is seen in His path of service here as answering to the altar being anointed seven times. What awful opposition was brought against Him at the close of His life in this world! But that only shows us more clearly how He passed through it all in the majesty of His own Person. Truly He was time Antitype of the altar anointed seven times.
It is our privilege to follow Him. Look at Paul and Silas in the prison at Philippi! They were there in the power of the anointing. It is one thing to meet together and speak of the things of God, but let us remember there is the other side, namely, our path through this world, full of opposition to Christ. We are His witnesses here and that involves suffering. The question is, Are we willing to follow Christ thus? If we are, God will maintain us in the dignity of the anointing.
In the synagogue of Nazareth they had to bear witness and wonder at His gracious words, but to those who are His the dignity of the anointing shines out far more in His suffering. It was His testimony of grace *and* truth that brought out the opposition of men against Him. True dignity, therefore, is seen more in the way we accept suffering, in whatever way it may come.
The holy anointing oil (@Exodus 30) was composed of the "best spices", myrrh being mentioned first, and there was a careful balance maintained in the
{285}
compound. Suffering was in view; indeed, it points to the spirit of Christ as suffering in this world. This spirit is to mark us as following in His steps.
In the Old Testament the order of the anointing is priest, king and prophet, seen in Aaron, David and Elisha. All these features are seen perfectly in Christ. The anointing oil was poured on Aaron's head without blood, thus showing that Christ was anointed above His companions. Leviticus shows that Christ was anointed on the ground of what He is personally. The tabernacle, the altar and all connected with it were anointed, and then Aaron, without blood. Christ is thus anointed in relation to the universal order of things before He died. His ministry was the unfolding of what the tabernacle represented, The anointing of Aaron brings in the thought of the whole universe, so that the universe is dignified by the anointing. We can see from these types what an important thing we are brought into.
In looking at the history of the world we see a continual effort to maintain outward dignity. This is generally seen in connection with kings and royalty. Where royalty is set aside people must have something else instead, such as money, learning, etc., which ends in Babylon, because all is connected with the wrong man. God calls our attention to a universe where He will have His own dignity. For the present moment it is a moral dignity, but soon it will all be manifested in glory, for if we suffer, we shall also reign with Him. The eyes of the thief on the cross were opened to see Jesus as typified in the altar anointed seven times; He was then enduring extreme suffering, The thief discerned in this His royalty. He said, "Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom", @Luke 23:42. The purple, the royal colour, was seen in the suffering Man, Jesus. What moral glory shone forth in Him here below! He is said to be "Lord of
{286}
glory". God is the "Father of glory". We should trace glory to its source. Stephen was in correspondence with the glory. "They were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spake". @Acts 6:10. He came out in the power and dignity of the anointing. This was seen in his wonderful address to the Jews and it shone out from him when "he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge". @Acts 7:60. He acted in the same spirit as the Lord Jesus Himself. In His prayer on the cross, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do", @Luke 23:34 we see the glory of the grace of God, The correspondence with this in Stephen is most striking.
When we come to the king we see that David is anointed in the midst of his brethren. What comes out in regard of him is that he was ruddy and of a beautiful countenance. The prophet retires to his house and David is now to come forward to do God's work. Paul says to the Corinthians that he came not with excellency of speech or wisdom to them; his dignity among them had been more evident in the way he had suffered in faithfulness to God. What a wonderful thing to see a poor saint suffering for the name of Christ. Peter says, "If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you". @1 Peter 4:14. It is in suffering that God's Spirit rests on us. Even the sight of the angel rolling back the stone and sitting upon it is not as great morally as seeing a saint suffering here for the name of Christ. We should be prepared to suffer. The Spirit of glory and of God rested upon Paul and Silas in the Philippian prison. If we are not a suffering people we do not represent God. "For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake". @Philippians 1:29. We are not now being persecuted as saints in past ages, but nevertheless we get as much suffering as we are prepared for. We may pass through real
{287}
suffering in our spirits on account of the state of the people of God.
Timothy was encouraged to be a partaker of the afflictions of the gospel and we should likewise take our share in the suffering. "All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution". @2 Timothy 3:12. Such may even suffer at the hands of their brethren; and then, being here identified with the testimony involves that we come under the notice of men, who are sure to persecute us in some way. Peter helps us much in connection with the various ways sufferings come upon Christians. Speaking of Jesus he says, "Who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously". @1 Peter 2:23. Think of the dignity of Jesus standing before Pilate! He answered not again. God has anointed us so that we may appear here in dignity even in suffering. Paul says, "For thy sake we are killed all the day long; and we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter", @Romans 8:36. And then he could add, "Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us". @Romans 8:37.
{288}
THE WAY OF GLORY
@John 1: 9 - 14; @Romans 9: 23,24; @Revelation 21: 9 - 11
I wish to dwell on the thought of the way of glory, and to show, by the Lord's help, how the final residence of glory is to be the assembly, of which we, as believers on the Lord Jesus Christ, form a part. The glory of the holy city in @Revelation 21 is like the latter glory of the house spoken of by the prophets. (See @Isaiah 60:1, 2, etc.) it is a glory that, as it were, reflects backwards, and the understanding of it encourages the people of God at the present time. We see that whatever failure has occurred in the public body, God will unfailingly reach the end He has in view in the assembly. The latter glory of the house is secured infallibly, for John sees the holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven *having* the glory of God. In @Ephesians 3: 21 we are told there will he glory to God in the assembly to all generations, world without end. This latter is the nearest approach to any term conveying the thought of eternity. God will be glorified in this wonderful vessel "unto all generations of the age of ages". @Ephesians 3:21. In Ephesians it is the assembly in Christ Jesus; but in Revelation it is the holy city, Jerusalem, *coming down*. It is God, as it were, in service, for coming down has that in view.
As we who form the assembly have learnt by experience to maintain the service of love to men in this world, so we shall come down from God out of heaven as *the city*. We shall come down out of heaven from God. She is not said to be *sent* down, she *comes* down, in keeping within her Lord, of whom it is said, "Jesus, knowing that he came out from God", @John 13: 3. He came out from God in all the
{289}
consciousness of His sonship and brought all that God is with Him. "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us", @John 1: 14. He dwelt amongst men. This was prefigured in the ark. In the tabernacle God graciously came near and dwelt amongst men; so the city, being formed after the pattern of Christ, comes down. She has the glory of God. What glory shines forth in this wonderful service!
Those who form the city have learned the way of love -- what is called in @1 Corinthians 12: 31 the way of "more surpassing excellence" -- but in order that we should learn that way, the Son had to come out as a Man and go before. He has shown us the way of love, and the way of love is the way of glory, and not one item of that love will be lost. John says, "Many other things which Jesus did, the which if they were written ... I suppose that not even the world itself would contain the books written", @John 21: 25. Not one iota will be lost; all will be gathered up in that wonderful city and will shine forth from it, as it shone from Him in His path of suffering here.
I will endeavour now to trace the movements of the Ark in the wonderful gospel of John, but in approaching such a subject, we do well to remember the injunctions in @Joshua 3, which typifies what we are about to speak of. As the people came to Jordan they were told to remain three days in camp. They were about to cross over Jordan, and they had not gone that way before. They had become accustomed to seeing the ark go before them to find a resting-place, but they had never before been told in all the wilderness journey to remain two thousand cubits behind. The ark went three days¬ journey before them to find a resting-place when they departed from the mount of the Lord; @Numbers 10: 33 - 36. In each occasion of the ark going before them there was a witness of the love of Christ. The ark was the glory; as it moved, it was the movement of God. In every
{290}
movement they had the opportunity of learning something of the surpassing glory of God. During the years of their wilderness journey they had this wonderful way of glory; for the ark was the glory of God. Christ became Man in order to carry out the will of God.
Now as they approached Jordan there was to be a three days¬ exercise before God. They had not gone that way heretofore, so there must be the space of two thousand cubits between the ark and them. You can see what an opportunity they had for spiritual carefulness. The ark was to lead the way, and the steps of those who followed must be steady; they had to be taken with care and deliberation.
In Matthew, Mark and Luke we have the historical side, and the way of love begins with the mount of Transfiguration. The Lord's way was in two parts. The first part is up to the mount of Transfiguration, and the second part is as He goes to the cross; we see His face set as a flint to go to Jerusalem. John does not record this but what I wish to show is the wonderful way of love that we see in John's gospel.
In chapter 11, Lazarus, the friend of Jesus, was sick. Lazarus was the brother of Mary and Martha, and Jesus loved him. But death was in view, so the Lord remained two days where He was. John's narrative is a picture; everything is prearranged. @John 10:17,18 says, "I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again". Neither Satan nor man had anything to do with His death from this point of view nevertheless, death was real to Him. If John emphasises anything, he emphasises the humanity of Christ, He was a real Man, Jesus Christ come in flesh; @2 John 7. Hearing that Lazarus was sick, the Lord remained two days where He was, for Lazarus was to die, and his sickness and
{291}
death should be for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby. The Lord said, "Our friend Lazarus sleepeth but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep". @John 11:11. Then He said plainly, "Lazarus is *dead*" @John 11:14.
Jesus is now moving on to the cross; He begins now, as it were, to approach Jordan, but at the same time as He had this before Him, there was one whom He loved that He had in His heart; therefore He says, "Let us go to him". @John 11:15. What a comfort for us who may have loved ones asleep! Lazarus was in the grave, but the Lord says, "Let us go to him". He does not say, Let us go to Martha and to Mary, but to *him*. Thomas said, "Let us also go, that we may die with him". @John 11:16. One may almost say, Thomas, steady, be careful; take care what you say. We do well to measure our words when we speak of dying with Jesus; our hearts may go further than our feet. Thomas was a twin; Didymus means 'a twin'. He was intimately connected with what was natural. At the first great church-meeting in @John 20: 24, when the Lord appeared to His disciples after His resurrection, Thomas was not there; perhaps he was with the other twin. If the Spirit of God uses a word, it has a significant meaning. If we make a profession, God expects us to answer to the profession. Thomas has to learn that there must be two thousand cubits between us and the Ark, when it is a question of going into death. He missed the first great meeting with Christ in resurrection, but we must thank God that he was at the second; we find then that he worshipped Him.
The Ark moves on, and Peter says, "*I* will lay down my life for *thee*". Peter also made a profession (@John 13: 37), but he did not think of the two thousand cubits. Thomas says, "that we may die with him". He was ready, as far as his desires went, to die for Christ; his desires went faster than his
{292}
feet; he had followed the Lord, but not this way. Jordan must be crossed. We must consider our steps well in following on this line. God looks for a steady, constant step, and as we maintain the distance between us and the Ark we shall take on the glory; as we read in @Romans 9: 23, we are "vessels of mercy ... prepared for glory"; so we see we are formed for the purpose of being clothed for the glory of Christ. Every stone in the holy city reflects Christ in glory; each one is a vessel of mercy fitted for glory; hence the aggregate constitutes a city for God's glory.
But Jesus moves on; He says, "Let us go to him", @John 11:15 and He arrives at the grave. Lazarus had been dead four days. There was no question about the actuality of his death. What comes out here is not only the glory of God in His power, but the glory of God in the affections and sympathies of Jesus. It was the "way of more surpassing excellence". @1 Corinthians 12:31. Jesus had come to the tomb; He wept at the tomb. From the depth of His being He resented the power of Satan over a loved one. It was no weak resentment; He would deal with it in its stronghold. He was about to annul death and him who had the power of death, that is, the devil.
We are in the presence of a serious situation. The Ark is moving on. The affections of Jesus go out to His loved ones. He said to Martha, "Said I not unto thee, that, if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?" @John 11:40. Look at the glory that shines in the affections and sympathy of the Lord before He raises Lazarus. From the grave He moves on to Bethany. Here we have a date given, "six days before the passover". @John 12:1. He is now to "drink of the brook in the way", @Psalm 110: 7. He is a real Man in His affections, capable, not only of loving, but of being loved in return. There they made Him a supper, and there He was anointed by Mary. What a
{293}
precious stopping-place on the way to the cross! But He moves on. God witnesses to His majesty as King before He comes to Jerusalem. The Greeks come too, and say, "Sir, we would see Jesus". @John 12:21. Jesus says, "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit", @John 12: 24. It was to be *real death*, to go into the ground; and then He says, "Now is my soul troubled". @John 12:27. Everything was infinitely real to Him; hence He looks up and says, "Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name". @John 12:27,28. What a scene for our souls to contemplate! "Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again". @John 12:28. Jesus says, "This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes". @John 12:30. As we follow the Lord we learn things. What an experience to hear heaven speak to Jesus! He goes on to say, "And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all unto me. This he said, signifying what death he should die". @John 12:32. Had Thomas or Peter thought of this in their profession of loyalty? We have all to learn that a distance of two thousand cubits behind the Ark is the way by which we must go.
Now we come to @John 13. Again we have a date, "before the feast of the passover". @John 13:1. He is now arriving at the moment when He has to meet the awful enemy. Satan had already put it into Judas's heart to deliver Him up; but in the presence of all this He lays aside His garments and took a towel and girded Himself. What shining forth of moral glory we see in the Lord stooping down to wash the disciples¬ feet! To emphasise this the beloved disciple enlarges on it. On this last occasion when He met with His own, John records much more than the other evangelists do. He wishes to bring into prominence the love which moved the heart of Christ; how He thought of others. Having said these things (@John 14, 15, 16, 17),
{294}
the Lord went forth over the brook Cedron. He is now confronted with His enemies. "He went forth and said to them, Whom seek ye? They answered him, Jesus the Nazaraean". @John 18:5. Here the ark is seen *fully*, for His enemies went backwards and fell to the ground. It was as of old when the ark moved forward; Moses said, "Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered and let them that hate thee flee before thee", @Numbers 10: 35.
The Ark was moving, but the Lord was not destroying His enemies, but showing His power. He says to them, "If therefore ye seek me, let these go away". @John 18:8. The way of love is to think of others, not of ourselves. As He laid down His life, so should we lay down our lives for the brethren. Paul says, "Yet show I unto you a more excellent way", @1 Corinthians 12: 31. You think for others, not for yourself, and so, as we learn from Christ, we become like Him and reflect His glory. We are, as I read in @Romans 9: 23, "vessels of mercy ... prepared unto glory". This is what God has in His mind for us, but we must learn that the way of it is in following Christ in *death*. Peter followed; John followed. We can admire them as we see them following Him, but Peter denied Him in the palace of the High Priest. The Lord said to him, "Thou shalt follow me afterwards". @John 13:36. Their profession went beyond their ability, but it is encouraging to think of them. They had their desire granted. The Lord said to Peter, "When thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not". @John 21:18. That means that Peter should suffer for Christ. He was truly a vessel of mercy fitted for glory. His name is on the foundation of the holy city, a wonderful witness of God's mercy, which should encourage us all; but we should be warned that whilst in purpose of heart we would follow the Lord and bear about in our body the dying of Jesus, yet we must maintain
{295}
the two thousand cubits behind the Ark. I believe dear brethren, that we can see from what has been said that God intends that we should be practically vessels of glory, so that as the city comes down we may shine as having the glory of God.
{296}
GATHERING AND ATTRACTING
@John 21
*(Summary of Reading)*
This chapter teaches us the way of love in restoring souls to communion, and seeing we have part in the great recovery, it becomes very interesting to us. We should certainly have before us the recovery of souls. The Lord would have us to be on the look-out for souls to gather in; indeed, the great feature in John's gospel is gathering. He said, "He should *gather together* in one the children of God that were scattered abroad" (@John 11: 52), and also, "And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me", @John 12: 32. Gathering and attracting go together. Christ is the attractive centre for all, as being lifted up from the earth. We get that principle in Hosea, "I drew them ... with cords of love", @Hosea 11: 4. The fact of Christ, as being lifted up from the earth, being the gathering centre, exposes the flesh. As working miracles and feeding the multitudes they would make Him a king. John's gospel shows that men would accept Christ because of the outward gain; they believed because of the miracles which He did; @John 6:14,15. Christendom is largely on that ground; they recognise the Lord in so far as He benefits civilisation. It is respectable to follow a man who can work miracles and feed the hungry, but it is another thing to follow a man lifted up on a gibbet; but as such He draws all to Him. He says, "No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him", @John 6: 44. So that we have a gathering principle in John to govern us as to gathering together.
The children of God do not wish for anything except that which is of God; hence the gospel is a sort of sieve by which what is real is preserved, and
{297}
what is not real is refused. The wheat is gathered into His garner, and the chaff is burned with unquenchable fire; @Matthew 3:12. The Lord says in @John 6: 63, "the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life". Then He tests the others, He says, "Will ye also go away?" @John 6: 67. The genuine ones are seen in Peter's answer, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God", @John 6: 65, 69. This chapter shows Peter as being the leader; although afterwards they got out of communion, yet they are all gathered. There are many genuine ones about us, and the Lord would have us think of them. He says, "I will gather others also". The lifting up of the Son of man, the gathering centre, was between heaven and earth, and although the gathering is literally on the earth, yet it is not for the earth; it is outside. In @Colossians 3: 5 we have the reference to "your members which are upon the earth". I think the court of the tabernacle is a sort of type of the gathering centre. In the brazen altar we get the thought of reproach.
John in a special way is different from the other three gospels. We see in John the principles which should guide us in connection with gathering. There are two principles. The one may be said to be the power of attraction which we see in connection with the astronomical sphere, but there is also service in *activity*. When it is a question of gathering, He is lifted up to be seen by all. Paul says, "I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were appointed to death; for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men". (See @1 Corinthians 4: 9, etc.) The apostles in this way were in accord with the lifting up above the earth. The apostle emphasises that fact in writing to the Corinthians, because they were cultivating the flesh, and making
{298}
much of man. He preaches the cross of Christ there, the scandal of the cross. The flesh will not be drawn to that which scandalises it.
The company who have been misled represent genuine disciples who have not been gathered, of which there are many. There were seven of them here: Simon Peter, Thomas called Didymus, Nathanael of Galilee and the sons of Zebedee and two others with them. These had, as we have already noticed, in a special way been the leading ones in the followers of the Lord. It represents a general departure. At midnight the virgins all slumbered and slept; the real as well as unreal. This chapter becomes very interesting and instructive to us, because we stand in connection with the great recovery at this present time. John, in this chapter, would prove that everything must be bottomed. It is the Jewish element in the church that has a wrong influence. Here it is noticeable that the names of the disciples are not yet spiritual; they are the natural names. Simon Peter is the natural name. Thomas called Didymus is another natural name, he is called Didymus where he purposes they should die with the Lord, about this time; he is called by his natural name three times. Didymus means a twin, and undoubtedly he would be influenced by his natural brother. Nathanael of Cana of Galilee shows he was connected with what was natural, Zebedee's sons, and two others of His disciples. This leaves room for us to put our names there. It would indicate that the defection was connected with natural things. These disciples are led by Simon Peter. He says, "I go a-fishing"; they say, "We also go with thee". @John 21:3. The root of the defection lies behind all this. John in this chapter would prove that everything must be bottomed.
In chapter 20 it says Thomas called Didymus, one of the twelve, was not with them when Jesus came. He was absent from the first great meeting after the
{299}
resurrection of Jesus. It would rather suggest that those who make a profession and who fail to lay hold of privilege are sure to find themselves in any defective movement which may arise. When we neglect communion and privilege, defection will be seen in diverting to what is natural. Natural things may be quite legitimate, but we have no business to be together in such a way. We should not have special friends.
Peter proposing to go a-fishing reverts to his old occupation, and the others say, We will go with thee. Special friends, social or otherwise, in meetings, are sure to become dangerous to the saints, especially natural relations. There are many things which are legitimate which Satan uses; legitimate things are not always spiritual. Paul says, "All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any", @1 Corinthians 6: 12. We see how an influential brother may lead the saints astray. There were seven out of eleven, meaning that this defective influence of one man led to a general defection.
The test is at once: it says, "After these things". @John 21:1. It is like a sorrowful picture after some delightful ones; it is as if John said, I have been telling you about the first and second meeting with the Lord after His resurrection, but now I must show what is really there -- a most painful picture! John brings in that which reflects on the *official* thing, so that those of us who appear somewhat prominent shall find ourselves exposed if we are not true to the Lord. It is a serious thing to be prominent amongst God's people. The more influential we are, the more disastrous it will be if I influence the brethren beyond my spiritual stature. I have no means of saving them.
It is God's intention that His people should be governed by influence. Influence is a great principle
{300}
with God. The holy city will be governed by influence. The foundations and the walls of the heavenly city and the measurements all are in correspondence with Christ. The "king" according to God comes in after the "he-goat" (@Proverbs 30:31), so that in the way in which we are influenced so we can influence the saints for good; if not it will be disastrous. When Peter went into the palace of the high priest the "he-goat" principle was missing so that he fell. He had not gone to the bottom yet, therefore he says, "I go a-fishing". @John 21: 3. He retained his old activities and he had a wrong influence on his brethren. The "he-goat" is with God and his influence is for God. John influences us in his gospel from the place he had on the bosom of Jesus. In prayer we have power with God and consequently we have power with men. If we pray for the brethren regularly, we shall have power over them -- power for good. Here is a man Peter, who has power for evil. He says, I go a-fishing; and they say, "We also go with thee". @John 21:3. They are off on an expedition and the Lord is not with them, so it ends in night, nothing, and nakedness.
The recovery is very beautiful. The disciple whom Jesus loved -- not now one of the sons of Zebedee -- says, "It is the Lord", @John 21: 7. The special feature of John comes into evidence at once. This underlying principle we must rely on in helping souls. Now Peter is heading in the right direction. In dealing with souls this is what we should rely on -- what is in them. It is a question of dealing with the children of God, and they love God, they have the Spirit. However much it is covered up, it is there. They are born of God, they have the Spirit, and when Christ is presented they recognise Him. "That disciple whom Jesus loved saith unto Peter, It is the Lord. Now when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his fisher's coat unto him (for he was naked), and did cast himself into the sea. And the
{301}
other disciples came in a little ship (for they were not far from land, but as it were two hundred cubits), dragging the net with fishes". @John 21: 7,8. Simon Peter went up and drew the net to land full of great fishes, an hundred and fifty and three. That was quite a big exploit (verse 11). The Lord did not tell Peter to do that. Peter does not lose his place as the leader although he fell; the Lord would preserve him the leadership. Another thing is there is power in the soul for recovery. It used to be remarked, It is not how a horse falls, but how it gets up again. Peter had the power in his soul for recovery, so he drew the net to land. The Lord had made him a fisher of men, so he shows he had not lost his power.
This chapter brings before us in a striking manner the resources of God. Then it says, "Although the fishes were so many, yet the net was not broken". @John 21:11. John records no breakdown of the net. We may see in this that in the great recovery in which through grace we have part it goes on to the end. In the history of the great recovery there have been many defections and so we might say, What is the use of recovery? But spiritually it is not so. The heavenly city is the result of what we are going on with now, so that gives us great encouragement and confidence in the service of the Lord.
In the last part of the chapter the Lord has something Himself to give the disciples. He invited them to come and dine. He had resources in Himself -- other than what they had caught -- He had there already prepared a fire of coals, and fish laid thereon, and bread. He feeds them first and then after they had dined the Lord goes in for their recovery. Peter must be recovered, so that he might care for the lambs and the sheep, so that where he failed in leading astray he must now be marked by care for others. The lambs and sheep of Christ are now put into his care. He does care for them until he puts off his
{302}
tabernacle. He put it off in such a way as to glorify God thereby. He is a vessel of glory. He glorifies God in his death. The Lord gave him his desire, that he should die for Him, not in his own strength. The Lord takes account of our desires. God always goes back to the *root* of failure. The Lord says, "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me *more than these*?" @John 21:15. Peter had said, "Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee", also "Though *all men* shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended", @Matthew 26: 33. The Lord uses the word 'love' in speaking to Peter, but Peter does not use the word 'love' in his reply to the Lord, he says, "Yea, Lord thou knowest that I am attached to thee". @John 21:16. He, as it were, feels it would be unbecoming to use the word 'love'. 'Love' means more than 'attached'. The Lord the second time uses the word 'love', but Peter uses the word 'attached' again. Then the third time the Lord uses Peter's words. Then Peter says, "Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I am attached to thee". @John 21:17. Peter was grieved because the Lord asked him three times, "Lovest thou me?" The Lord would go to the bottom of the failure, so to speak, so that there would be nothing left. Peter would now understand his folly in professing to love the Lord more than the others.
We have now Peter and John in a way associated in service. Peter feeds the lambs and the sheep and John shows the reserve. The thought may arise in our minds as to what would happen if such and such a brother were removed, but the Lord always has something in reserve. Peter's work is not to interfere with John's work. The Lord Himself knew what He would do. Nehemiah had his specific work, but Ezra -- John was his reserve.
Peter said to the Lord, "What shall this man do?" @John 21: 21. The Lord answered and said, "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow
{303}
thou me. Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?" @John 21: 22, 23.
The point to be learnt from this is, Keep to what is said. John's position was totally falsified by the report which went out. No one who loves the Lord would wish to spread a false report. They may have understood it wrongly. "This is the disciple which testifieth of these things ... and we know that his testimony is true". @John 21:24. We see the necessity of an accurate witness. He supports his witness with his own comment, saying, "*I suppose*". "There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, *I suppose* that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written". @John 21:25.
We have in Revelation a warning not to add to the things which are written.
{304}
THE FOOD QUESTION
@John 21: 19 - 25: @Luke 24: 41 - 43
We are to consider the question of food. What marks John's record in regard to food is that the Lord gave it directly to those who needed it. In the other gospels, when feeding the multitude at different times He used His disciples to hand the food to those who needed it, but according to the New Translation by J. N. Darby, John omits the disciples¬ service in this respect. The Lord having given thanks (@John 6), He distributed the food, and in this passage in chapter 21 we see how He had the coals of fire and fish and bread all ready, and He invites the disciples to dine, as if to indicate in the recovery of His people in these last days that we not only have food, but we have it as prepared by the Lord, who in a formal way issues an invitation to *dine*.
Now in the gospel of Luke we have another picture. The Lord would Himself partake of food, and in asking the gathered company if they had any, He asked them to bring out what they had. In @John 21 it is what *He* had, and, dear brethren, there is no limit with Him; His resources are unlimited. The sea is a kind of type of the resources He has, He could command a hundred and fifty-three great fishes, but without these He had already a dinner prepared.
He would have us who have part with Him prove these resources. This chapter shows how great they are with Him, and the people of God are proving what these resources are, and that not only is there the means of sustenance in the way of food, but there is a formal meal prepared by the Lord Himself. Many of us have enjoyed being invited to dine. There is something peculiarly dignified in an invitation to dine.
In the instance we have earlier in the Lord's service, we have multitudes fed, five thousand at one
{305}
time, but in no instance have we an invitation to come and dine. In Luke, as I remarked, it is that *He* would partake of food, and the question should be raised with us, in each locality in some way or other, as to what we have. In John it is what He has, but in this passage in Luke it is, "Have ye *here* any meat?" The Lord would inquire thus in *this* city.
We may be able to give an account of how many there are nominally in fellowship, we may be able to answer easily many such questions, but if the question is asked: Have ye here anything to eat, what shall be the answer? What is there the Lord could partake of? Those addressed here (@Luke 24: 41) knew Him; they had been in His company and at meals with Him on many occasions, they knew what He was accustomed to eat, hence they would understand His inquiry. He does not say: how much? but, have you *any*? "They gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb. And he *took* it, and did eat before them". Now I need riot enlarge on this. What I mean is obvious to all, that the Lord would have in each company of His own something to eat. God said in @Malachi 3:10: "Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house". You see the idea of old was that the people were to bring tithes, and *full* tithes, and God said if they brought *full* tithes, "I will ... pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it" @Malachi 3:10.
You see, if we accept the obligation and each brings his tithe, God will add to it. God abhors *poverty*, and He would lay it upon us that each should be prospered. If I am not prospered, why not? If I have nothing, why not? If others are prospered, *why am I not*? God would have us to *prosper*. What we have in 1 Corinthians is that each shall lay by in store on the first day of the week as he is *prospered*, so that as I prosper I bring my part, my tithe, and God adds
{306}
to the aggregate of the tithes, so that in His house there is food, for if there is no food there, it loses its character and is of no moral value. If there be no food in it, it loses its character as God's house. Even the prodigal knew there was food in his father's house. As he went there, he found it, for the fatted calf was there.
Now I want to refer to a few scriptures in the Old Testament to show that from the outset God's thought was that man should be sustained by proper food. Unless we have suitable food we shall not be sustained in the sphere of the responsibility in which we are set, nor shall we have sufficient strength of constitution to enter upon our privileges.
As the people of Israel were about to cross the Jordan they were to provide victuals. In Egypt there was the Passover lamb and the unleavened bread. That is the food which the believer needs to sustain him in his exit out of the world. That the young believer should move on out of the world is perfectly obvious, but we need to be fed for that, and so, as I said, there is the Passover lamb, and the bitter herbs, and unleavened bread.
Then, as having once passed outside the world, it has become a wilderness to me and I need food to sustain me there, hence the manna, the food that *came down*, for it is now a question of carrying out the will of God; then His will should be done on earth as it is in heaven, and for this I have to eat angels¬ food. As it is said, "*Man* did eat angels¬ food". @Psalm 78:25. Angels eat that food as *subject* to the will of God. The manna refers to the life of Jesus in this world. As I appropriate Him in His death and feed upon the Lamb, so I accept His path here. I have to walk as He walked, hence I need the food that came down from heaven.
But if I am to cross the Jordan and live in Canaan, I must have a constitution suitable for that great position; hence the manna ceased on the morrow
{307}
after the passover as the people entered the land. A new food appears, the old or *store* corn of the land becomes the food. There is plenty there, but it is Christ as He is in heaven, and if I am to be in communion with Him, then I have to feed on that food. But this question appears strikingly in the book of Genesis. The position was to be of a man set up as representative of God and sustained by the fruit of the ground the evidence of spontaneous life. Man was to eat of every herb producing seed and every tree in which there is the fruit of a tree producing seed.
The principle is producing seed. Every time man ate it, he was reminded of the principle of trees producing seed, as earlier it was said the seed of which is *in* itself; @Genesis 1:11. Therefore in partaking of food man would be reminded of the seed-producing principle, and it was to be of its kind. If we bring this principle into our houses, dear brethren, it will be to maintain us in the proper thought of God, that seed is to be of its kind.
How easy to bring something wild into the house. We read in @2 Kings 4: 38, "Set on the great pot", and someone went out and gathered wild gourds, and cast them into the pot and death was there. Worldly principles brought into the house bring in death. Adam was to know the tree he was eating, which had seed in itself and bearing fruit after its kind. If I bring into my house something wild, there will be death in the pot.
We have to be on our guard as to what we admit. The Lord as He raised up Jairus¬ daughter said *something* should be given her to eat. He did not say what. It was the parents¬ responsibility. It was for them to know what to give a girl like that to eat. The principle is laid down here in regard to food, and God would have us take notice of it.
Now in @Genesis 9:3 we have another food. Man has now new responsibilities, for the sword of government
{308}
is put into his hand, and he is to be sustained by suitable food; hence he has the animals for food, but the blood belongs to God. The principle that comes out here is that life belongs to God; this is another feature that has to be noticed. God has rights over us. If death occurs so that man should have food, the life taken was God's. Further, according to @Psalm 104, man should have wine to make his heart glad, and oil to make his face shine. These two things were also available to Noah, but he failed and disgraced himself; God never intended wine to make a man drunk. Typically the oil and wine refer to the Spirit.
In @Genesis 27: 37 you see a man made lord over his brethren, and he is sustained with corn and *new* wine. This is a remarkable passage as bearing on what is before us, how God in placing a man in supremacy supports him with corn and new wine. We may easily transfer the thought to our own portion, for the reference is no doubt to Christ, who is made Lord and sustained in that position of supremacy with corn and *new* wine. But what He has we have, and so in the New Testament He speaks of new wine. There was the corn there, He Himself indeed was that; His disciples, you remember, plucked the corn. He was the Bread of God which came down from heaven, but then there is the new wine. @Genesis 27 fits in here with what we are enjoying. The Lord says (@Luke 5: 39), "No man also having drunk old wine straightway desireth new: for he saith, The old is better".
Those who have drunk it do not desire it *straightway*. Old wine refers to what the world has, and if we admit worldly things in our houses we need not he surprised if our offspring do not straightway desire new wine. You see the position is sustained by corn and *new* wine, so if we admit the old, we must not be surprised if there is no taste for the new. How often we have seen this -- the old is better.
{309}
But to return to what I was saying: the Lord has got His meal prepared, and He invites us to it. He says, "Come and dine". @John 21: 12. I wonder if this invitation is understood.
The point is that in the position the Lord has brought us into we are to be sustained. We shall quickly fail in our responsibility unless we understand what it is to live on the food the Lord provides. The Lord is dealing out food to us all, and He will satisfy His poor with bread; but this is not quite the same as the invitation to come and dine. It is not feeding five thousand at one time, but a small company -- seven restored disciples -- that we get in this chapter; it is quality rather than quantity. The Lord has a portion for five thousand as well as for seven, but the invitation to come and dine is to seven. You say, A poor lot, but they were a very great company. Think of Peter, see what a nobleman you have there! He had a shady history, but he is now dining at the Lord's invitation.
One would not disparage any effort to feed numbers, but there is the thought of *dining*. There is the thought of dignity. When they made the Lord a supper, Lazarus was one of them that sat at table with Him; the Spirit in this reference indicates what we are speaking of. At the Lord's supper one has to examine oneself and so eat. The king came in to *see* the guests; when you have a special occasion, you look for suitability in the guests. As we understand this passage, we shall understand the passage in Luke -- what the Lord can partake of, broiled fish, and an honeycomb. They had this, thus indicating they had learnt something of divine resourcefulness and mutual relationships. The honeycomb is what He can partake of, and refers to mutual spiritual relationships which should mark the people of God walking in the light of Christ as Head of the assembly.
{310}
THE FAMILY OF ABRAHAM
@Luke 13: 11 - 17; @Luke 19: 1 - 10
I wish to connect what I have to say firstly with this woman, who is called a *daughter* of Abraham and, secondly, with Zacchaeus, who is called a *son* of Abraham. They represent the delivering and the adjusting grace of the Lord Jesus Christ. The evangelist Luke, alone, brings forward these two subjects of the grace manifested in the Lord Jesus Christ when He was here upon earth, having in view that the great principle of faith, which is represented in Abraham, should become prevalent among the nations. The promise to Abraham was that in him all the nations of the earth should be blessed; that he should be the father of many nations. And, as that promise was made to Abraham on the principle of *faith*, it is extended to all *believers*. For, as the apostle tells us in his epistle to the Roman Christians, Abraham is the father of us all: that is, all believers are reckoned to Abraham, *the* great believer. It is said of him that "he believed God" at a time when the great mass of mankind had decided not to retain God in their knowledge, and had eliminated Him from their knowledge.
Whatever means of education existed in those days, no element of the knowledge of God was part of it; as, indeed, in our own days, alas! the means whereby men and women should know God are being eliminated from the schools, colleges, and universities. An enemy is doing this. Just as Satan set out to eliminate (and he succeeded in this), the knowledge of God from the minds of the people in the days of Abraham, so he is endeavouring at the present time to shut out the knowledge of God from all the great centres of education. But we find that Abraham in those days believed God, and God intimated to him
{311}
that he was to be the father of many nations: in other words, that God was to have *believing* nations. The time is fast approaching when there shall be believing nations -- *saved* nations. God has in view a system of nations in salvation. There are those who are said to go away into everlasting life: they are invited to come into the kingdom prepared for them. For if God intimated to Abraham that the nations should be blessed in him, He has not forgotten this, and so we may confidently look forward to a system of saved nations on this earth -- a bright prospect for us, as we look abroad today and see what marks the nations of the world.
The gospel, as it has come to us, is rather to *take out* of the nations a people. And so the apostle Paul spoke of having fully preached the gospel in a circuit, from Jerusalem and round about unto Illyricum; @Romans 15:19. He had before him the taking-out of the nations of a people for God, who should be representative of Him now. So Luke, having this great service of the apostle Paul in mind, brings in these two remarkable instances of the *delivering* and *saving* grace of Christ. In this intervention of God among the nations, the initial results are seen in a daughter of Abraham, and in a son of Abraham. I do not suggest that they were Gentiles. I doubt not that they were both descended from Abraham after the flesh; but the manner in which Luke introduces them indicates plainly that he has a *spiritual* thought in his mind.
I wish, first, to speak of the daughter, for it is God's intent to save not only the men, but the women. It is remarkable that, as the gospel reached the European shores, the first person who received it in Philippi was a woman, and a woman who had a house; and as the Lord opened her heart to attend to the things spoken by Paul, she invited him into her house. This woman, who in @Luke 13 is called
{312}
a daughter of Abraham becomes peculiarly interesting from this point of view. She had been bound by Satan for eighteen years; that is, from *about* the time in which the Lord Jesus was speaking to the doctors in the temple; at which time He was applying His entire devotion to His Father's business. Think of the Boy of twelve asserting that He was here in relation to His Father's business. A Boy appeared in the temple, hearing and asking questions of the doctors, and as His mother says, "Behold thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing". He says, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" @Luke 2: 48,49.
The Son of God had become a Man, and was taking up all the liabilities that lay upon man. But He has to wait in privacy for eighteen years, in blessed obedience to His Father, and in acceptance of His Father's appointment while the enemy is free; and so Satan bound this poor woman, as he doubtless bound many others. The Lord mentions the number of years, as if to suggest that He had not yet bound the strong man. When He became thirty years of age, and was anointed by the Spirit of God, He met the strong man, took away the armour in which he trusted, and commenced to spoil his goods. This woman was among the chattels of the strong man. She had had a spirit of infirmity for eighteen years, and was bent together, bound by Satan.
I wonder if there is one here tonight in a like case. There are many such in the world. "For of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage", @2 Peter 2: 19. Satan uses the world to lure young people and overcomes them through their lusts and desires. In overcoming you, he has led you into bondage. This woman was bound *even* in the synagogue. "Jesus was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath". @Luke 13:10. The synagogues of this world afford no means of deliverance from satanic power. Many of them, indeed, are just the means by
{313}
which Satan binds precious souls. The Lord Himself speaks about the synagogue of Satan. The presence of this woman in the synagogue did not effect her deliverance. There is no power in the current religions of this world to release a woman in this case. Her only hope was in Jesus, who had bound the strong man, and was then spoiling, or plundering, his goods. This is what He is doing at the present time. The Lord has established a complete victory over the strong man, and is now administering deliverance. The Lord called her, and said, "Woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity". @Luke 13:12. He, the Deliverer, *called* her.
The Lord would thus appeal to you. His call is the principle of the gospel. Think of the Lord Jesus Christ calling you now! He called her, and said, "Thou art loosed from thine infirmity". @Luke 13:12. What precious light for her. Daughters of Abraham are not to be bound, but to be free to look up to God. God is looking for their countenance. Satan would keep you looking down on the earth; whereas the administration of Christ is to release you, so that you should look up to God. The Spirit of God tells us, that "immediately she was made straight". @Luke 13:13. The Lord not only spoke to her, but laid His hands upon her. There was identification. The Lord identifies Himself with us in announcing deliverance, but He lays His hands only on those who have faith, thus identifying Himself with them. So His people who represent Him, and act in consonance with His mind identify themselves with you in your faith. This is how the assembly on earth is formed. Publicly it is composed of daughters of Abraham and sons of Abraham.
We get the principle of identification here. If He identifies Himself with you, is it that He intends you to carry that identification into the activities of this world? No, beloved friends! The Lord will not
{314}
identify Himself with you in the theatre. If He lays His hands upon you, He has in mind that you will get into relation with that which *He* approves, and with which *He* is connected, in this world. He has better things for you than this world can afford, and He is not going to allow you to drag Him into the world's things. He intends to bring you into *His* sphere of things, and He brings you there in the dignity of a daughter of Abraham. The sons of Abraham and the daughters of Abraham meet together, brought together by the ministration of Christ. So He lays His hands upon her and she becomes straight.
Now, I want to dwell upon that, because I have in mind, if there is anyone here unconverted, that if such a one receives the truth, he should have become part of God's assembly. We have mentioned in the Old Testament, the Book of Jasher, which contains the names of all upright people. The first great feature of this book is the record that the sun and moon stood still in the heavens at the command of a man upon the earth. This is in the Book of Jasher. It refers, I doubt not, to the Lord Jesus Christ. He alone had power to command the sun to stand still. So that Joshua was in the spirit of Christ. We are told that he went "up from Gilgal all night", @Joshua 10: 9. Gilgal speaks of the death of Christ. Twelve stones had been taken out of Jordan and set up *there*; that was the permanent testimony to the fact that Jesus, typically, had gone into death. So that Joshua went up all that night, and he commands the sun to stand still. Think of the wonderful fact that a man here upon earth could do that. Who but Jesus could command the sun to stand still? Jesus has settled in death every question of crookedness and wickedness, He has established righteousness. Such was Jesus -- the righteous One. He went down into death in order to maintain all that was due to God,
{315}
and hence you can understand that remarkable record in the Book of Jasher. We read elsewhere that "Moses was king in Jeshurun". @Deuteronomy 33:5. That is a similar word.
You will understand that my thought is, that souls who have been bound by the devil should be released and come into the light of the death of Christ, and that as coming into the knowledge of redemption and the righteousness of God they are qualified to have their names recorded in the Book of Jasher. As thus recorded, you belong to those who, as the *upright*, have affection for Jesus. You love Christ, not only on account of His personal beauty, but because of His righteousness, and you love Him in sincerity. It says, "The upright love thee", @Song of Song 4: 4. If there is one here who does not love Christ, I would cite you the solemn words of Paul, "If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maran-atha", @1 Corinthians 16: 22. You say those are strong words. Yes, they are. It is better that they should ring in your ears now, than that they should come to your ears when it is too late. Paul did not call down the curse then. That is not the mark of the dispensation. Blessing is the mark of the present dispensation, but he did intimate plainly, that these should be Anathema when the Lord comes. I warn you, tonight, that if you are not among the *upright*, that that is what is ahead of you. Think of that peerless One in heaven, the Man of the gospels, the Man of Gethsemane, the Man of Calvary, now in glory crowned with every crown, and you a non-lover of Jesus. There is no place in heaven for non-lovers of Jesus. There is no place among the people of God on earth for non-lovers of Jesus. The very thought of a non-lover of Jesus to Paul is Anathema Maran-atha.
So that, as written in the Book of Jasher, you are made straight, *upright*, you are with those who love
{316}
Jesus. "The upright love thee". Why should they not love Him? He has done everything for them. One might say, He has taken up my cause from the very outset, and He will see me through, so why should I not love Jesus -- there is every possible incentive that I should love Him, and so among the upright I love Jesus, for "the upright love thee". It was said of Moses, as I have remarked, that he was king in Jeshurun; @Deuteronomy 33: 5. He is a type of Jesus as king. Every upright person in the world recognises His rights. Even the Gentiles, according to Matthew, recognise His rights, and they come to Him. The *wise* people also come to him. It is their wisdom to come. "Where is he that is born King of the Jews?" they say @Matthew 2:2. They are willing to recognise that He is King of the Jews. They are wise men, and I say to you that if you are wise, you will recognise Jesus as your Lord. It says, they came from the east, enquiring in Jerusalem for him who was born King of the Jews, and when they found Him with His mother, they worshipped Him, and presented gifts unto Him; @Matthew 2:11. He was King in the hearts of these Gentiles from the east. It does not appear that they had ever read the Bible, but they believed the testimony that God gave them. They were believers, and they came seeking the King.
As I have said, Moses was king in Jeshurun -- every upright person in Israel recognised Moses. So, today, every upright person in the world recognises the royal rights of Christ. Have you bowed to Him? You say -- I would very much like to become a Christian. Well then, I say the way is simple. The Lord is calling you. He is administering deliverance to you; He proclaims to you that you are loosed from your infirmity. And He is prepared to lay His hands on you, so that you should become straight. You say, "What have I to do?" That is a good question. When Peter preached on the day of
{317}
Pentecost, that question was put to him, and he said, "Repent, and be baptised, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit", @Acts 2: 38. Paul, again, says, "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved", @Romans 10: 9.
I say to you young people here, who have heard these things, the word is nigh you, and in your heart. It is "the word of faith which we preach". It may be there for weeks, or months, or years, but you have never confessed the Lord. I urge you now, if you are exercised about salvation, to confess the Lord. "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth". Remember, that it is with your mouth. You say, 'I confess Him in my ways'. Well, and good. But I doubt very much if salvation is seen through your ways; rather is it through a confession with your mouth, and the belief in your heart that God has raised Him from the dead. The one who confesses with his mouth Jesus as Lord, and who believes in his heart that God has raised Him from the dead, is in the company of the upright. And you will soon become a lover of Jesus yea, you are a lover of Him already, for the upright love Him -- they regard Him as King. "For he is thy Lord, and worship thou him", @Psalm 45:11.
Well, now, you see what a woman this one would be afterwards. How dignified she would be. She glorified God. Of what moral value am I in this world, unless I glorify God? Supposing I became the greatest statesman, the greatest scientist, the most conspicuous man in the world -- of what moral value is that? None at all; absolutely valueless, morally. Unless I glorify God, I am of no moral value in this world. The scripture says, she glorified God. I can conceive no more blessed way to glorify
{318}
God, if one has been bound by Satan, than that, being free, one should move about in the energy of righteousness. Righteousness is one of the greatest features of the moment. The Holy Spirit is given to us that we should fulfil the righteous requirement of the law. God will have righteous people, beloved friends, and it is in a righteous people that a righteous God is glorified. And so, again, God will have a loving people, because it is in a loving people that a loving God is glorified. She glorified God as an upright woman.
Think of the amount of crookedness there is among women. I cite to you Lot's wife. She became a pillar of salt, we are told; she is a standing monument of judgment for every woman in the world. Why was she made a pillar of salt? She looked back, behind her husband, we are told. Upright women are in the light with their husbands; they are transparent with their husbands. Lot's wife looked back into Sodom. How many turn their eyes towards the world for themselves and their children. Daughters of Abraham have right parental instincts. Abraham looked on to his generations, and thought of a righteous people. And so each daughter of Abraham is concerned about her children, that they should be brought up righteously, and in faith. Hence, God says, "Remember Lot's wife", @Luke 17:32 because she is a standing monument for each daughter of Abraham, lest she should be found looking back behind her husband. That is to say, looking back into the world that she knows is doomed. How can we, who talk about the judgment that is coming, look into the world for ourselves and our children! Let us remember Lot's wife.
Then I come on to the son of Abraham. You will observe the Lord had passed through Jericho. It is not now a question of the synagogue. For this publican, Zacchaeus, would not be admitted into the
{319}
synagogue He represents another class. Jericho is the world, I suppose, in its power, under the influence of Satan. Jericho was Satan's great stronghold, as the people came into the land. But the Lord has passed through it. Jericho was the city of the curse. What feelings would be in the Lord as He passed through that city -- a city that never should have existed. But He did pass through it. Therefore, He says, "Now is the judgment of this world, now shall the prince of this world be cast out". @John 12:31. Zacchaeus was a tax-gatherer, a man well known to all, one who would have a place in Jericho. But he is a son of Abraham. He is not now concerned about his tax-gathering; he was rich. He is concerned about one thing, and that is to see Jesus, "who he was". Is there a Zacchaeus here tonight? You may not be an irreligionist; it may be you have figured somewhat in this world, and, maybe, you have made money. Nothing will give you pleasure in the world quicker than will money. Zacchaeus was rich, but he was thinking of Jesus. I say, 'That is well for you, Zacchaeus'. I have no objection to one's riches; I am not speaking against them. What I wish to know is, are you interested in Jesus? Zacchaeus was interested in Jesus, "who he was".
I would love to have seen Zacchaeus that day. He would not have talked to me about the markets, about the stock exchanges of the world, or about the taxes to be levied. What an interesting man he was! And the Lord knew it. And the Lord knows now if there is one here, who like Zacchaeus, is interested in Him. Zacchaeus sought to see Jesus, who He was, and he places himself in the sycamore. I have a certain amount of sympathy with him, for, as the narrative shows, he went up the tree to see Jesus but he was in an awkward position spiritually. One is in a very awkward position spiritually if the Lord Jesus has to look up to him. I must never assume
{320}
to be above the Lord Jesus. Ananias pretended to know better than Jesus when the Lord introduced Saul to him. We must always recognise that Jesus is above -- morally, as well as officially. Zacchaeus puts himself above Jesus here, and the Lord says to him, "Make haste and *come down*". @Luke 19:5. If you have riches, you are likely to be on stilts -- up some sycamore. With your riches you may look down on Jesus. Well, Jesus says to Zacchaeus, "Come down, for today I must abide at thy house". @Luke 19:5.
Zacchaeus answers to the invitation. Perchance I may be speaking to some backslider, who once loved Jesus, and the world has attracted him. He has become rich, and his goods are increased. But the Lord would save such an one. He says, 'Come down; I know that down in your heart there is love for Me, because I have placed it there; but you have to come down to ME', Jesus is on the ground; that is, where men are, and you have to come down to the ordinary level of men. Zacchaeus was equal to it, and he made haste, and came down, and received the Lord Jesus joyfully into his house. It was a wonderful day for Zacchaeus. I say to you, never mind your past history, never mind if you have built a big house and furnished it well, the Lord will come into it. Such is His grace. He says, "I will come to where you are, and I will abide there". He knows what is in your heart, and He wants you.
It says that Zacchaeus received the Lord joyfully. The passage goes on to say, "They all murmured". @Luke 19:7. Why did they murmur? Because Zacchaeus was a publican, he was a man of ill repute in the community. Never mind: Zacchaeus did not turn to dispute the matter with them. No, you never do if you are exercised before God; you never quarrel with your fellow men -- you accept the reproach. What he did was to turn to the Lord, and say "Lord". What a moment it was! He did not quarrel with the men
{321}
that were maligning him. He was too sensible of the greatness of the moment, and it *was* a great moment. He says, "Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor". @Luke 19:8. Is there a Christian here who can say that? If Zacchaeus had defrauded anyone, he restored him fourfold; that is to say, if he had defrauded a man of one pound, he would give him four pounds. And the Lord says, "He is a son of Abraham". @Luke 19:9.
We have now *the daughter of Abraham, and the son of Abraham*. We have the composition of the assembly of God; we have an upright woman -- a transparent woman -- a woman who had recognised the order of God -- who would not look back behind her husband. We have, also, a man with a house, who is rich, and who gives half his goods to the poor. Think what would mark a company of believers formed of such men and such women in this world! The Lord honours them both, saying of the one that she is a daughter of Abraham, and of the other that he is a son of Abraham.
Now, I present the matter to you, men and women, asking where we all stand in regard to this great family, the family of Abraham. Paul says, he is the father of us all. That is to say, he is typical of the Father of the faithful. Every believing person is accredited to him. It means, of course, that we are children of God -- we are sons and daughters of the Lord Almighty. You see how the truth is worked out, first in the daughter of Abraham, and then in the son of Abraham; so that you have, in the son of Abraham, one who is liberal, who gives half his goods to the poor. Such is the effect of grace in believers on the Lord Jesus Christ.
{322}
NAZARITESHIP
@Judges 13: 17 - 20; @Judges 14: 5,7 - 9; @Judges 15: 14 - 20; @Judges 15: 1 - 3; @Judges 17: 22
I have before me the subject of Nazariteship, particularly its results as worked out dispensationally, that is in the history of the assembly: and what may be remarked at the outset is that as ever, this great subject -- or the principle of it -- has to be learned from Christ. For, indeed, in no other is any principle of God worked out perfectly, and it may be well, in order that our minds should be clear as to this section of Scripture, to see that it has *to be understood* dispensationally. For we should be greatly deceived if we were to assume that any one now could be guilty of Samson's indiscretions and, indeed, sins, and yet be a vessel of divine power. It were an entire mistake to assume that anyone today could enter into the evil associations of Samson, and yet be a vessel *personally* of divine power and grace. So that it has to be taken account of dispensationally. But, in using that word, beloved, it is with no thought of occupying you with mere dispensational truth. I have before me, by the Lord's help, to bring out certain features of Nazariteship which should appear in a practical way among the people of God. But, in order that the great principle should be clearly before us, the Spirit of God gives it in its abstract perfection in chapter 13, before He comes to the history of Samson, affording, as it does, such sorrowful events, for we must not conclude that God in any way overlooked or justified these occurrences to which I have referred -- far otherwise. But He gives us in chapter 13, as I said, an outline of Nazariteship in its abstract perfection, and, in order to understand the working of it in a poor failing man like Samson, we have to have clearly in our souls the abstract idea -- we have to see, dear brethren, that Nazariteship involves the
{323}
negation of all that in which nature lives -- even legitimate things. And so the angel appears, as you will know, on two occasions: first, to Samson's mother, Manoah's wife; and, secondly, to her and her husband. And, on each occasion, He insists on the principle of Nazariteship, so that they, at least should have it clearly in their minds, and, as you will observe, we have *not only* His words, but His wondrous actions. His name, as He says, is Wonderful, and you can understand that the working out of Nazariteship should be wonderful. And so He announced His name, which was indeed a secret (for Nazariteship itself is a secret). No one can be here for God unless he understands the secret of Nazariteship, and not only that he should understand it, but *keep* it. It is a great thing to learn how to keep secrets. God has shown us the way, beloved friends, for He kept secret, things from the foundation of the world. He kept secret the great thought of the Mystery. As we read in the Book of Proverbs: "The glory of God is to conceal a matter", @Proverbs 25:2 and a principle that runs through Nazariteship is that of secrecy. But the angel did wondrously. Who can he represent, beloved brethren, save our Lord, Jesus Christ? whose Name, as we read elsewhere, is called Wonderful. How wondrously the Lord in His pathway in this world maintains the great principle of Nazariteship! He was, indeed, a Nazarite unto God, from His birth in a most absolute way, and, yet, He came, as we are told, "eating and drinking", as it says: "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us". @John 1:14. He went in and out among the people as one of them and yet in the secret of His mind, and in every detail of His life, He was "holy, harmless, undefiled, and separated from sinners" @Hebrews 7:26. How such a life, beloved, should be maintained in this world, and, yet, all that was due to God and to man, and to His parents, and to His relatives, should be fully recognised is the secret.
{324}
And, so the angel, as we are told, did wondrously. What the wonderful things were are not stated. It is left for us, as having the Spirit of God, to trace out the wonders in the life of Jesus. It is after we have our need met through His death, and after we get the Spirit, that we may go to the gospels, and trace out these wonders. His Name is Wonderful. And so the gospels abound with illustrations of the wonders of His life of Nazariteship in this world. And in order to show that the end corresponds with the beginning, see how He went out. He who did wondrously in this world in maintaining in its absoluteness the idea of Nazariteship to God. The angel, as we read here, went up in the flame of the sacrifice. How infinitely pure and holy, beloved, was the life of that Man as portrayed for us in the gospels, particularly in Luke. He went out, as I may say, in the fire of a sacrifice. How infinitely delightful to God was such a life. Having maintained Nazariteship, He went out of this world, as one might say, in the fire of His own sacrifice. Oh, beloved, what a life the gospels present to us. And so we can understand the insistence in the Acts on the part of God that Peter and John should go and stand in the temple, and speak all the words of that life. So, the Angel goes up in the flame. He ascends up to Heaven in the flame of the sacrifice -- in the flame of the Altar. You see, therefore, in the wondrous actings of the angel, the suggestion for us of this great principle of which I am speaking. So, when we take up the history of Samson, we have to face, alas, a history of failure -- a history, indeed, in which dispensationally every one of us has had his part. It is well to identify ourselves, dear brethren, although we may be in the secret of Nazariteship, and although we may be reaping the fruits of it, as I hope to show, it is well for us, humbly and soberly, to take account of the history of the assembly in all its features. For we cannot be with God without
{325}
taking account of things just as they are: and so the addresses to the assemblies have in view that the overcomer in each should have the mind of the Lord as to the occurrences -- the sins -- of the responsible body. And so I proceed to dwell for a moment on the features of Nazariteship that work out, notwithstanding the failure and these events of which I have read. And, dear, brethren, one point of great importance is that we should keep clearly in view the features of Nazariteship as outlined in chapter 13. For God never -- He has never diverted one iota from these principles. If the results of Nazariteship come to us notwithstanding the failure of the vessel, this is only to magnify divine grace. How He can work out and recognise the features of the Nazarite and bring about the results therefrom, notwithstanding the failure is a subject of the deepest interest and the more we understand it, the more we shall magnify the grace of God that bears with us. For surely no one can read these chapters without being impressed with the forbearance of God in regard of Samson's conduct. The consideration of it, as I said, viewed dispensationally, impresses you with the magnitude of divine grace, and it encourages you to rely on the infinite resources of grace which are with God. Well, now I want to dwell for a moment on the first scripture I read in chapter 14. I want to show, dear brethren, how Nazariteship results in life. You see Samson is met by the lion. Here, we may speak of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the outset of the dispensation corresponded, as we may say, with Him. The Philistine woman in the distance surely does not correspond. But there is here what does suggest to us the power of Christ. For, who but He, beloved, could rend the lion as one rends a kid, without a weapon? But, we are concerned with Nazariteship, and if we are to be among the bees, as one might say, we have to understand this secret. You see, secrecy
{326}
is one of the features of these passages. The exploit was done unknown to others, but the presence of the bees in the carcase brings to our attention, dear brethren, a point of the deepest interest, for they represent unquestionably *the energy of life* -- the energy of life in mutuality -- in the most active co-operation with a definite end. And so I would point out, dear brethren, this great feature of Nazariteship -- how the secret of it is known in our souls, the secret of the overthrow of death, for we are to have part in this. How very really these bees had to do with death. There can be no life according to God save as we maintain direct relation with the death of Christ. Any mutual relations -- any active co-operation aside from direct relation with the death of Christ cannot issue in what is of God. There may be results, but they are not such as are according to the revelation of God in Christ. We know, it says: "we have passed from death unto life *because we love the brethren*" @1 John 3:14. We *know*, beloved, we have passed from death unto life. It is not simply that we have passed out of the world into life. We have passed from *death* to life. If we touch life according to God at all it is life out of death. It is not simply that Jesus has been in death, and has annulled him that had the power of death. We pass out of death into life There is the *definite acceptance of death*. It is in the definite acceptance of death that we touch life. How very really these bees represent the activity of life in co-operation. How very vividly they were in death. They were in the carcase of the lion and so there was honey. You see, we want the pure product. Any active co-operation, with whatever good intentions, aside from rigid relation with the death of Christ, cannot result in the pure honey. This result is not a public matter -- it is a riddle -- it is a secret matter. As I said, we cannot be here for God, there cannot be results for
{327}
God, aside from the secret. We have to understand in the secret of our souls, we have to do with the death of Christ, to be in direct relation to the death of Christ, and, hence, as the result of such active and mutual co-operation -- the result is pure -- we have got the honey. As the Lord says, in Canticles, speaking in Spirit: "I have eaten *my* honey with *my* honeycomb". @Song of Songs 5:1. He would not regard any impure products as His. He hates adulteration. He hates mixture as the type shows us. If He calls it *My* honey, it must be the pure product -- it must be unmixed by the flesh. Well, now, I want to go on to the next chapter -- chapter 15. I think I have shown that life with pure results for God is the direct outcome of Nazariteship, and I have no doubt that this answers to the early history of the assembly. There was hearty co-operation -- baptism and the Lord's supper were maintained, and in this way the death of Christ was in view, and the flesh shut out, so that there were pure results for God and for the saints. But now that we come to chapter 15 we have another feature of the death of Christ. For these conditions of which I have spoken have to be maintained, and chapter 15, I believe, sets before us the means of the maintenance of these mutual relations *in life*. I do not know anything, dear brethren, so practical as the thought of a circle of life, and every one of us here can prove satisfactorily to his own soul as to whether he is in it or otherwise, for it says: "We *know* we have passed from death unto life *because we love the brethren*". @1 John 3:14. The epistle of John insists on conscious knowledge. The gospel is more objective as we can readily understand. As the Lord says: "He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me hath everlasting life". @John 5:24. But the epistle says: "*We know we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren"*.
Did you ever look, dear brethren, for that evidence?
{328}
"*Because we love the brethren*". It is an encouragement to all those of whom it is true, but it shuts out *mere* profession. We must have that subjective evidence if we are to enjoy this holy circle of life. And as I said, it is the product -- the secret of Nazariteship. But how is this to be maintained? I think you will see, as I proceed, that these passages are what I may call *constructive*. If the conditions of life are to be maintained, there has to be what corresponds with the jawbone of the ass, and I would remark, for those who may not have the better translation, that the word 'new' is better rendered 'moist', 'fresh' -- as we see in the margin. And I have no doubt that word 'fresh' or 'moist' is the key to this Scripture. For the constant tendency is that we should become stale or dried up. We all know how even the reception of precious truth or ministry into our souls, which, for the moment causes gladness or freshness, how quickly it fades, and how it loses its power, and so God has provided for continual *freshness*. And I have no doubt, dear brethren, that the Lord's supper, in a striking way, corresponds with this section. One may speak reverently of our Lord Jesus Christ as having Himself been in death. The idea of death is surely in the carcase of the lion. But death has been overthrown through Jesus going into death. But look, beloved, He went into death, and the emblems of the Lord's supper speak to our hearts of the fact that He Himself has lain in death. We can readily see the distinction that has to be made between an ass and a lion, the former representing a creature of great usefulness to men -- indeed, in the east one of the most useful of creatures, and one may reverently regard our Lord Jesus Christ as become man. How available He was to man. The gospel opens up instance after instance in which the Lord is seen as serviceable. He came here to serve. "I am amongst you as he that serves". @Luke 22:27.
{329}
He was here on account of man. He was here to serve man, and that service, that devotion, to man by the Mediator led Him into death. The precious blood of Christ was separated from His body, and this solemn fact is before us Lord's day after Lord's day, as we contemplate the emblems of the Lord's supper. How it comes home to our hearts that He has been in death! The Lord of glory lay in death! Is that a matter of history? No, beloved. It is a matter of *today*. If you regard it as a matter of history it will not be a moist jawbone. It will be a dried up one, as it is, alas, to many. How dry the so-called sacrament is as taken all around us! Is that the divine intent in it? The very opposite. The idea is that things should be maintained in freshness. We are brought back through the jawbone. How much enters into it I have not time to go into now. But we all know that part of the face has to do with communications and how precious are the communications of Christ. What volumes His death speaks to us! And so Samson finds it says, a moist or fresh jawbone of an ass. I wonder if we have all found it. I speak to young ones here who may recently have come into fellowship, so to speak, and I would urge upon you the importance of finding this fresh jawbone. The Lord's supper, of which you partake, is no mere historical incident. The death of Christ is as fresh in significance as it was when it happened. It is brought to us in the Supper. It is the power of that entering into the soul that gives it vigour and freshness and hence the great victory of Samson -- and so may I not say, beloved, the victories of modern times. We are truly living in wonderful times. We are living in times, I believe, marked by this very thing, that the recognition of the love of Christ in His death, the acceptance of it in the souls of His people, have led to freshness and vigour and power, so that the Philistine hosts, that is to say,
{330}
those big men who stood between us and the truth of God, have been overcome, and we have the truth in our hands. We have it living in us as the Lord intends we should have it. So we are free from Philistine domination. The Philistines were big men, and as you all know, inhabited the land of Canaan. They got into that land without going through death, and Israel was dominated by them. So the great victory of Samson. I believe we are enjoying the great fruits of this victory at the present time. It all lies *in the secret of the death of Christ* -- that He Himself has been into death, He has been there in His love for us, He has been down to make known the heart of God to us -- so Samson's triumphant words: "Heaps upon heaps by the jawbone of an ass I have slain a thousand men". @Judges 15:16. But, then, that is not all, beloved. The Lord's supper in itself will not do -- wonderful as it is when rightly understood. You see, Samson thirsted. The Lord supper is *meat and drink*. And so Samson cries. I believe that, in connection with the revival of the truth of the Lord's supper amongst the saints, and its effects upon them that we have had, brought into evidence the great importance of prayer, and I would urge the importance of it at this present time. I would urge it. This Enhakkore¦ is the well of him that cried. Do you know anything about it, you Christian, here? That you can have refreshment, that you can be sustained in the power of the Spirit by prayer, by living in *dependence upon God* -- calling upon Him. You see many of us live on the meetings. Precious, indeed, as the Lord's supper is, precious as its effects upon our souls, it is not all. The meetings afford a wonderful income, but we must have private incomes. I would speak to young ones particularly. You must learn to have private means, as we say, for it is not at all according to God that you should live merely upon
¦Meaning "the Caller's Spring."
{331}
the meetings. You will become thirsty. For you have not the meetings *always* with you. You have the six days of the week in which you have to tread the wilderness, and you have to learn to call upon God; you have to learn to maintain secret relations with God -- to call upon God. If you begin definitely to pray in regard of every difficulty, every thirst, every want, you will find that you are beginning to accumulate a private income, and you will be able to contribute to the meeting -- to the assembly -- instead of being a tax. I proceed to the next passage, that is, the great exploit at Gaza, because I want to show you how the truth has come to light as a consequence of Nazariteship and when I speak of it in this way, I speak of it as having been worked out in certain ones. I am not prepared to undertake that all the saints have been in the good of it. Certainly, the public body has been marked by these sins which appear here, and I speak thus so that we may measure ourselves up and see how much we have been in Nazariteship -- how much we have contributed to the recovery of these wonderful things which we are enjoying. So, what I find, what I understand, in the great exploit at Gaza, is the great truth of resurrection. So far, we have had the principle of life in the circle here, and the power that accrues from the Lord's supper, and from the recognition of prayer, and from the power of the Spirit and now, when we come to the exploit of Gaza, we have the truth of the Son of God; in other words, dear brethren, we have the truth of the epistle to the Colossians. The Lord has graciously recovered for us that great truth that we are risen with Christ, and what comes into view now is that there is something that is before this world. It is a wonderful moment when it dawns upon the soul that God has a world. The Son of God has a world of His own. He was disdained in this world. He came into it. It did not know Him.
{332}
He came into the world -- the world was made by Him and the world did not know Him. But, now, in resurrection, He takes up another world. He inaugurates a world of His own, and Hebron stands for that. We are told it was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt. It is something that precedes this present world. How delightful to have the suggestion brought to us of the Son of God -- and the world that He builds. As I ascend to the hill that is before Hebron, I get a view of it. As in the company of Him who takes the doors and gates of Gaza, bar and all, and carries them up to a hill that is before Hebron, see the power I have in my soul. I have a sense that I am with One who has power to overthrow this world, and I look across from the eminence on which I am now by faith as risen with Christ, and I see Hebron in all its spiritual significance. Would that every young person here could get a look at it! It would mean deliverance from this world. You would see what was in the mind of God before the foundation of the world. He had a world of His own there -- the world established by His Son -- by the power of which He was raised from the dead. You see the exceeding greatness of the power of God.
In closing, I just say a word on the re-growth of Samson's hair. I have no doubt that the exploit at Gaza is the end of one chapter. Indeed, we read at the end of chapter 15 that Samson judged Israel twenty years in the days of the Philistines. I have no doubt that that refers to the peculiar dominance which the truth of the Lord's supper and the Spirit has given to the saints. But, although the Philistines exist and stalk about in Christendom in their fancied greatness, there is something much greater and, indeed, I may say that we are not in victory unless we understand there is that which is greater -- that, in the recognition of the anointing, there is that which is greater than what these great men have. But, then,
{333}
you see, Hebron is another step. Hebron takes us beyond their range. They may speak of the sacraments and the Spirit, but who among them knows anything about Hebron? I do not believe that there is a single person in any system of this world who understands Hebron. You *cannot* understand it as you remain in any system of this world. It is outside of this world. It is in resurrection. It is beyond the range of men to understand Hebron. Hence, beloved, the wonderful triumph of God -- the victory He has given us through Nazariteship in whomsoever it has been seen. We have come into the light of the great fact that we are risen with Christ, and of the exceeding greatness of the power of God, which God wrought in him in raising Him from the dead. But, then, we go back, and we find that the sorrowful history of shame, leading up to the Nazarite being the sport of the world -- being in the world's prison. We cannot evade the shame of this. We cannot evade what the assembly has come to in this world, arid so I take the re-growth of Samson's hair to be a collateral suggestion in connection with chapter 15 and the exploit of Gaza. What does the re-growth of hair mean, *but the energy of life*? There can be no growth of hair aside from the energy of life. We all know how the loss of hair in nature signifies the wane of life. But, thank God, there is, in the history of the assembly, what corresponds to the re-growth of Samson's hair. One would be very practical -- one would urge to make inquiry as to whether our hair has begun to grow. It is a very simple thought, but it is the evidence of life, and it spells the overthrow of this world. You may think there is very little development of life in your soul, but that principle that is working in your soul spells the overthrow of this world. The Lord says: "Woe to the world because of offences". @Matthew 18:7. The world is guilty of captivating and corrupting the assembly, and the world has to pay the penalty.
{334}
In the government of God, this world has got to come down. Because of its offences it has to come down. I look to myself, and I see in myself the development of divine life, and I say there is the principle by which this world has to come down. Is it not a great principle? But it says "Samson's hair began to grow after it was shaven". @Judges 16:22. Can we not see at the present time the evidence of that hair growing? I can see it. Thank God! I can see it, and, as I see it, I see the world about to be overthrown. It is imminent. We have within ourselves, I believe, the means of discovering as to the end of things. Samson's hair has begun to grow: as the Lord says to Philadelphia; "Thou hast a little power". @Revelation 3:8. *There was life there -- there was love there*. Love is the evidence of life and the Lord credits what there is to the whole assembly -- the nearer you get to the heart of the Lord, the more you shall find every member of His body in His mind when He is speaking to Philadelphia. Samson's hair has begun to grow. There is the evidence of life, and, presently, the world is coining down by that same power. Think, dear brethren, of what a principle is working in us as the hair begins to grow -- as the evidence of recovery is apparent. "After he was shaven ..". after he had lost his Nazariteship, his hair is now beginning to grow, and there is, therefore, the unmistakable intimation that the world and all its glory has to come down. The Philistine house of mirth, with its three thousand nobility is undoubtedly a type of the world in its glory, and it comes down. I speak of it, because of its bearing upon us. How great is the principle that is working in us -- no less than that by which the Lord will subdue all things to Himself -- for the power that works in us is the power by which He was raised from the dead. It is God's power that is in us, and it is about to apply to this world. It is coming down. I have no doubt the exit of the angel
{335}
in that wonderful way into Heaven speaks of our exit out of this world. The Lord will see to it that we shall go up in all the purity and holiness that is according to heaven. There shall not be the least discrepancy between us and heaven as we enter into it. That is the prospect that is before us. And so one would urge this great principle of Nazariteship. We are living in days of material prosperity, and material prosperity induces natural enjoyment. It induces natural enjoyment. We tend to go in for legitimate things to the full, whereas, if we look into Nazariteship, it saves us in such circumstances. God withholds no good thing from those that love Him and walk uprightly. But we must be on our guard that our blessings do not become our curse. And the only escape from the danger of material prosperity lies in Nazariteship -- in keeping in close touch with the death of Christ.
{336}
VICTORY
@1 Corinthians 15: 57; @1 John 5: 4,5; @Habakkuk 3: 17 - 19; @Judges 4: 4 - 6
I have before me, dear brethren, to speak about victory, and you will observe in the first passage read that God gives it to *us*, the "us" obviously having reference to those having faith, for spiritual things are given only to such. God is bountiful in material things and provides for all, even although there may not be faith, for He has never left Himself without witness among men, giving rain, as we are told, and fruitful seasons, filling men's hearts with food and gladness. Indeed, as the passage goes on to say: "In him, we (meaning all mankind) live, and move, and have our being", @Acts 17: 28. But when it comes to spiritual things the dispensation of God is said to be in faith. The gospel is addressed to those who have faith, and it is said, on the principle of faith to faith; it is an administration. The Lord Jesus Christ, ere going up to heaven, after He rose from the dead, moved in and out amongst His people for forty days, and in that way would impress them with what is spiritual, so that on going on high, being made both Lord and Christ, He administered what was spiritual. And so Peter says, referring to the gift of the Spirit which was there to be observed: "Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, He hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear", @Acts 2: 33. But He shed Him forth upon those who had faith. He, as shed forth thus, was available to man, but only on the principle of faith. So that what God gives spiritually, as I said, has reference to those who have faith, and when the apostle here says: "Thanks be to God who giveth us the victory", @1 Corinthians 15:57, the "us" refers to those who have
{337}
faith. As having faith we believe what is presented to us on the principle of faith. And so, in this chapter, the apostle says at the outset that the gospel which he preached to the Corinthians was that "Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures and that He was buried, and that He rose again the third day according to the Scriptures". @1 Corinthians 15:4. These facts were presented to them on the principle of faith, and having received them (if they did, indeed) they came within the "us", to whom God is pleased to give the victory. And, I may add, so that there may be no misunderstanding as to what this victory implies, that it does not refer to any material success or prosperity in this world. It refers to what the chapter speaks of; it refers to resurrection, and you will observe that he does not say: 'He *shall* give it to us', but He "*giveth* us the victory". @1 Corinthians 15:57. In other words it is a present thing, which God intends should be by faith in the possession of our souls; He *gives* it to us, and He gives it to us through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Now, the Lord, as risen, remained with His own forty days before He ascended, and, as you will remember, He appeared, according to this chapter, on six different occasions; and I submit to you that on each of these occasions there would be conveyed the sense of victory. First, He appeared to Cephas. In the gospel of Luke we are told He appeared to Simon, doubtless to reassure the heart of His erring disciple, but the Spirit of God has not that in view in this passage, and so He mentions Simon's spiritual name. We have to understand what it is, beloved, to have spiritual names, because it is first that which is natural and afterwards that which is spiritual. We have to understand how we come under the eye of the Lord, the last Adam who is a quickening Spirit. If He has to do with us He quickens us; He quickens us in relation to His own perfect wisdom as to the place we are to occupy in that spiritual
{338}
world which He came to effectuate. So that Simon is referred to here according to his spiritual name. The last quickening involves certain traits which no one else has. Each one differs, as this passage tells us: "star differs from star in glory". @1 Corinthians 15:41. Each one has his own living characteristics, spiritual characteristics, and, as all come under the eye of the last Adam, He sees these and names the person accordingly. We shall all appear, therefore, in the spiritual realm according to the names which the last Adam confers. And so, as He appears to Cephas, there would be in the heart of Cephas a sense of victory. He would be stimulated in the sense of victory as to what he was and the place he was to occupy in the divine structure for his name signifies "a stone".
And then He appears to the twelve, for they were to administer. There was to be here an administrative company appointed by the Lord, and they had been appointed, and as appointed He appears to them. The appearance would convey to them a sense of victory, for the One whom they were to represent in their administration was Himself supremely victorious; He was out of death. Their administration should be not of material things, but spiritual things, and they would be impressed by the appearance of Christ to them as the twelve, with the sense of victory that they had to do with a spiritual Person, One who had been into death, and was now out of it. They would be impressed with victory, and would carry on the administration in the sense of victory; they would be above the least taint of corruption. We know how administrators after the flesh are exposed to corruption, but these would be set up in their souls in complete superiority in the sense of victory that the Lord Jesus Christ would accord to them as appearing to them.
Then it is said that He appeared to the five hundred brethren at once and here again there would be
{339}
the conveyance to their souls of victory, for how should we maintain the truth involved in the term "brethren", except as in victory? We should soon drop to the level of current religion around us unless we are in the sense of victory. It was as risen from the dead that the Lord Jesus Christ sent the message to His brethren. He says: "Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God", @John 20:17. "I ascend" He says, and how that would elevate their hearts far above this world, and the earth, and even the garden in which Magdalene had met Him. They were to be linked up with Him as ascended into heaven. He came in afterwards -- on what particular date I cannot tell -- but there were five hundred of them together at the one time -- a remarkable occasion -- and He appeared to them. Some of them, says the apostle, remained until that day. How those who remained, as moving about among the later converts would convey to those converts the dignity of "brethren"! The term has been dragged down in our own times to the current religions in the world, brethren being classified among all the religions of town or country; but it was never so intended. The Lord's thought was that it should be elevated -- that we should remain in obscurity outside the range of man's cognisance. And so, these five hundred, as they moved about among the later converts, would impress upon them the spiritual dignity involved in the term "brethren".
And then He appeared to James, it says. We have in one instance His appearing to five hundred at once, and then again to one man. He would convey to James the sense of victory. Like some of David's mighty men of old, he, doubtless, had to confront many at one time, but God would give him the victory. I have no doubt that we should read the history of David's men in the light of this, for, as the
{340}
Lord would appear to an individual, He would convey to him that one man could chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight as Samson says: "With the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps, with the jaw of an ass have I slain a thousand men", @Judges 15:16. A man who has had an appearing from the Lord is fortified in his soul with a sense of victory. It was not for Himself alone that He won the victory; that victory is to pervade every one of us! We are to be set up here in the sense of it.
Then He appeared to "all the apostles", as if to suggest to us that, if the authority of the Lord be called to question -- as alas, it is -- the sense of victory which He conveys to those who represent Him in the world enables them to maintain it. To put it in simple language: "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them he it is that loveth me", @John 14: 21. You maintain the will of God in your own path, and, as far as you can, in the meeting in which you are, at all costs. Not one iota of divine authority must be surrendered. His appearing to all the apostles has relation to His authority. They represented Him. His presence would impress them in this connection. They would be reminded of the spirit in which His authority should he maintained
Paul said He appeared unto all these; then he adds: "And last of all he was seen of me", @1 Corinthians 15:8, as one, we may say, who was intended to be a personal representative of His in this world; one who loved the Lord in a peculiar way. He says: "He loved me, and gave himself for me". @Galatians 2:20. Paul loved the assembly, too, as he says: "I will fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake, which is the assembly", @Colossians 1: 24. How the beloved apostle Paul would be impressed with the victory of Christ as He appeared to him!
Well now, having said so much, I turn to the passage in John's epistle, because it shows you how
{341}
we come into this. First he says: "All that has been begotten of God gets the victory over the world" @1 John 5:4 -- nothing else! You may study the Scriptures, and the writings that bear on the Scriptures, and acquire knowledge and ability to speak, but all these suffice not for the victory over the world. It is all that is begotten of God that gets the victory. And then again, he says: "This is the victory which has gotten the victory over the world, even our faith". @1 John 5:4. This is not only faith in your soul; it includes, I think, the system of truth unfolded in the Lord Jesus Christ -- the *whole* of it -- our faith. On every hand the truth is being given up and abandoned; who are abandoning it? Those who are not born of God, for those who are born of God get the victory, and they *hold* the truth. Later on we are told "the Spirit is the truth". Christ is the truth -- "I am the way, the truth, and the life". @John 14:6. That is objective. He presents the whole truth of God objectively, but in the epistle the Spirit is the truth, suggesting that the Holy Spirit down here, in the believers, maintains the truth in complete correspondence with Christ in heaven; an immense thought! Can it ever fall to the ground? Never! "This is the victory which has gotten the victory over the world, our faith". @1 John 5:4. It was held in the souls of believers. The truth was never intended to be maintained by catechism or "articles of religion". That cannot be called faith. The word suggests that things were held livingly in men's souls, and by the Spirit the truth was held in all its parts, as John wrote. And it was supremely above the world; it brought down the world, as at Ephesus the books were burned.
I wish to convey to the young ones here what an immense thing we have, as we lay hold of the truth by the Spirit. "Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God". @1 John 5:5. I have already anticipated this: "Our
{342}
faith" involves every Christian -- the unity of the faith -- and wherever it is held in faith -- that is, livingly, in a man's soul -- there is victory. But then there is the individual thought: "Who is *he* that overcometh the world, but *he* that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God". @1 John 5:5. The word, "overcometh" here is victory: "he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God" has it.
I commend, dear brethren, the importance of believing that Jesus is the Son of God. John presents Him in his gospel, and Paul preached Him as the Son of God. According to the Scriptures Paul was the first to preach that Jesus was the Son of God; you can understand it, for he had already the appearing. "Last of all he appeared to me", @1 Corinthians 15:8, Paul said. "God", he says, "was pleased to reveal his Son in me, that I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations", @Galatians 1:16. And so the preaching that has come to us Gentiles is that: the preaching of the Son of God.
As it is individual here one would raise the question with everyone present -- the question the Lord raised with the man that had been blind: "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" @John 9:35. You see, John contemplates in his gospel that there are believers, *and* believers. He contemplates that many should come under the head of believers, or disciples, and yet not be believers in the Son of God. Indeed, the man in the 9th chapter of John had already been a believer. He had witnessed for Christ, and, on account of his witness, had been cast out of the synagogue, and yet the Lord raises the question: "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" @John 9:35. You see there is a point we have to reach experimentally, when we believe on the Son of God. And so the man says to the Lord: "Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him?" @John 9:36. The Lord replies: "Thou hast both seen him and it is he that talketh with thee", @John 9:37, and he says: "Lord, I believe". @John 9:38. He is already outside the world, cast out; but I
{343}
doubt that he had yet overcome it. The religious world had taken the initiative, and cast him out, but he would meet the world in other forms later, and he needed preparation for this. So the Lord finds him, and he believes on the Son of God. What does that mean? -- another world; the light of the Son of God in another world gives me the victory over the present one. So, I would say to the young ones here, to consider what you have come into as having believed on Christ. It means another world: a world the Son of God has set up, and you have part in it; it is all before you. He says: "Me and thee", and He would convey to your soul that it is just Himself and yourself; that is, He links you up with Himself, and you are His for ever. And the world? You disdain it! What has it got for you? Nothing! Paul said the world was crucified unto him, and he unto the world. He says: "God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world", @Galatians 6:14.
Now, I just wanted to point out in the two passages I read in the Old Testament how that the Old Testament confirms, and, indeed, enlarges on the New. It gives us illustrations, and so, in Habakkuk, you have a victor. If you go through his prophecy, you will see, at one time he was very despondent; things were not going well, and he is an example of most of us. We all have our despondent tines, up to a point. I often think that the journey of young Christians is, so to speak, undulating -- up and down -- and so it was with Habakkuk, until he arrived at the apprehension of what he speaks of: *high places*. He begins with variable notes, but he ends with a stringed instrument; I think it is the 15th of 1st Corinthians. The choir, I think, is in view of these chapters, beginning with the 10th, and when you come to the great truth of resurrection the strings
{344}
are tightened up, the flesh is disallowed, and you apprehend the Man out of death; you are in victory. And so Habakkuk says: "To the chief musician on my stringed instruments". @Habakkuk 3:19. Whatever happened to the vines or to the figs, or to the herds, or to the flocks, affected him not now. His business affairs might go against him, his family affairs, or what not, but now he would rejoice -- "I will rejoice in the Lord; I will joy in the God of my salvation". @Habakkuk 3:18. What is proposed in the gospel is outside of all these material things, and, as apprehended, makes you independent of them. Not that you do not feel things, but you are not dragged down by them; you walk in your high places. You see it is when God gives you the victory, and you are in it consciously, that the high places are yours. The Lord Jesus walked on the high places for forty days before He ascended so that His own might see what victory He had gained. The world saw Him not -- it was outside of this world -- but His disciples saw Him; He showed Himself unto them alive. He walked on His high places, but now the believer walks on his. He walks independently of adverse circumstances, as in the light of victory, in the light of Christ risen from the dead. God gives you "hind's feet"; you are above the pressure of this world, and you walk on the high places, and God gets His portion from you. I would that every one of us could use this possessive case, as indicating that we have entered on the high places trodden by the Lord Jesus Christ during those forty days. As the Lord took Peter by the hand, so He would take every one of us, so that we might walk with him on our high places.
In Deborah there is an instance of one who has the victory in its bearing on the testimony here, because, after all, that is what God has in view in leaving us down here. He could easily take us to heaven, but His thought is to set us up in complete independence of this world on our high places, so that we might be
{345}
here in superiority to the world, and to present the gospel, the testimony, to it. It is only as in the good of the thing that I can commend it to others; it is not a system of doctrines or articles; it is a thing I have got. I am walking on my high places, and can impress others that the thing is worth having.
Well, now, Deborah judged Israel in those days, and they were dark days. She says: "The roads were unused, and the travellers on highways went by crooked paths. The villages ceased in Israel, ceased until that I, Deborah, arose", @Judges 5: 6,7. But how did she arise? "She dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah, between Ramah and Beth-el, in Mount Ephraim". @Judges 4:5. You see, she had a palm tree -- "the palm tree of Deborah" -- it was hers, the token of personal victory. How can I be a judge of any, unless I am personally victorious? How can I influence others aright, unless I am spiritually victorious? Deborah was victorious, as she dwelt under her own palm tree. As the Israelites came to her for judgment, they would be impressed with that well-known symbol of victory. They did not need to carry a bribe with them to obtain her favour, as she needed no bribe; you could not corrupt her, for she was beyond it. She dwelt under her own palm tree, between Ramah and Beth-el. You see, she is in good surroundings, with her own palm tree over her. And so any one of us, who is in these circumstances, can influence the people of God aright.
They come up to Deborah for judgment. And so one who is personally victorious is sure to have a place among the people of God. They respect you, and come to you. What an advantage to come to one who is personally victorious What an advantage to the saints to have one who lives near to God, and to whom they can come for advice! It is on this ground that eldership stands. How can one rule in the house of God unless he rules himself and his own
{346}
house? As he rules himself and his own house, he is sitting under the palm tree of spiritual victory; he is beyond personal considerations, and is thinking of the welfare of the saints -- only that -- and the saints know it, and they come to him.
So they come to Deborah, and she sends for Barak, and says: "Hath not Jehovah commanded?" @Judges 4:6. I only want to say that you see that one who is personally victorious is now concerned about the will of God, It is not a question of my will, or my judgment, although the saints respect it, as they did Deborah's, but her word to Barak was this: "Hath not Jehovah commanded?" @Judges 4:6. Victory in this sense is always marked by respect for the Lord's commandments, and that is what an elder would insist on, and what is of most importance to be insisted upon; for, everywhere, men are asserting their own wills, whereas, one that is victorious spiritually considers for God. As the Lord said: "He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me", @John 14: 21. And again: "Hereby know we that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep his commandments", @1 John 5: 2. The truly victorious person insists on the Lord's commandments.
Well, dear brethren, that is what I had on my mind tonight, and I hope the Lord will bring the thought home to each of us. He intends that we should each be in victory, as otherwise we shall not be available in the testimony.
I believe He is giving victory; I believe that God is graciously giving victory to the assembly, maybe in a small way outwardly, but, nevertheless, really, as in the case of Samson. There was not very much to honour Samson in his death, but he slew more in his death than in his life. He had his greatest victory in the end; what was the secret of it? His hair had begun to grow; it had been shaven, but now there was evidence of life -- thus the victory at the end.
{347}
"THIS TEMPLE"
@John 2: 13 - 25
A.F.M. What is your thought in suggesting this scripture?
J.T. It affords a sample of the character of John's gospel as treating of things without formally naming them. It is necessary in our day that while we have the things of Christ essentially, we should avoid formally naming them. We have here, for example, the idea of the temple; it is not called the temple of God, and yet it was the temple. (See verse 14.) Jesus refers to the temple as "my Father's house", but that is past; then again in @John 14: 2 He alludes to it as it will be known in heaven; these are formal references to it, but they do not belong strictly to the present time. One is past and the other future. What is present is really "this temple" (see verse 19 and what follows), but it is not formally called the temple of God.
Ques. What do you mean when you speak of naming things?
J.T. Calling a company an assembly, for example. John assumes that these things exist in a very real way, but he avoids naming them. He says, "The servant abideth not in the house for ever, but the Son abideth ever", @John 8:35, without any formal reference to what the house was.
P.L. Would the assumption you speak of be seen in the blind guides who swore by the temple but refused Christ as the temple?
J.T. Yes; so you find in our day that terms are applied as they were in the beginning. This is deceiving and damaging. John would show that the things exist, but are only to be known by those who enjoy them in a spiritual way.
Rem. The essentials remain.
{348}
J.T. John's gospel is the door by which we enter now. When you have the thing you profit by the name and can use it intelligently. The Lord here made no effort to explain what He meant. The Jews asked for a sign, and the Lord said, "Destroy this temple" @John 2:19 -- not the temple of God, but *this* temple. An exercised soul would ask what this meant. This temple, not "that"; something existing in their midst and known by those who had light. An exercised soul would understand.
P.L. "They believed the scripture and the *word* which Jesus had said" @John 2:22. Would that cover what is vital? sufficiency in the scripture but infinitude in what is beyond?
J.T. Yes, quite; that was after He had risen. The enemy was endeavouring to set aside scripture and the word of Jesus, but apprehension of "this temple" and resurrection beyond is the key to what Jesus said. There could be no greater folly than to set aside the word of Jesus, and a believer knows that.
Ques. What is the thought of the temple in relation to us?
J.T. It is where light is. Nicodemus had an inkling of it when he said, "We know that thou art a teacher come from God" @John 3:2. He began to catch the thought that the antitype of the temple was in His Person. One who has light always seeks to get to the source whence it comes. "He that doeth truth cometh to the light". @John 3:21. So in @John 4:29, "Come, see a man". And the Samaritans say later, "We have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world". @John 4:42. Chapter 1 enlarges on the fact that light had come, but the darkness apprehended it not. John begins with everything gathered up in the Person of Christ, so man is shut out entirely. Peter says, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life". @John 6:68. Not, Thou hast *spoken* the words, but, "Thou *hast* the
{349}
words". So the light is in His Person, then He goes on high and things are worked out by the Spirit, which is the same thing really -- as the light that was here in Christ is now found by the Spirit among the saints. You want to find out where the Spirit is active.
Rem. The Lord would preserve us from assumption, as you say. He says, "I go not up yet to this feast". @John 7:8.
J.T. Yes, I go not up, and yet He does go up. "This temple" is something within our range.
A.F.M. The apostle would impress on the Corinthians that they are temple of God. Was he seeking to clear away what is extraneous, as here?
J.T. Yes, you have a tremendous sweep here. What do the Jews know about anything that John treats of? The Spirit is with us, so as light is found among the saints the idea of the temple becomes simple. This would save us from much in the way of metropolitanism; going a long way to enquire about things is very dangerous. The means of solution of everything is near you.
Ques. If we came together in temple character, should we not be answered by divine light?
J.T. Yes, even "two of you".
A.N. In Solomon's prayer at the dedication of the temple what comes out is that light was there; so that if there were mildew, or pestilence, or war; they were to pray towards the house, in the sense that light was there. So in @John 2 the light of God centred in Christ, hence all movement should be in relation to Him.
J.T. "If two of you" -- that is the key, two of the assembly. In @Matthew 18 the assembly is first viewed as existing as an official body, then the Lord contemplates a change and possible reduction on account of failure, so He says, "*Again* I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree". @Matthew 18:19.
{350}
Rem. It is like the Urim and Thummim.
J.T. That is the thought. They were on the breastplate where love is. There light comes in. If we come together in that spirit, as surely light will come in, and the matter will be solved. There is no need of long-range activities. There is in the temple the means for the solution of everything.
Rem. We have in Revelation, "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches". @Revelation 2:7.
J.T. The matter stands very simply. The Lord speaks in authority. The Son of God is seen in @Revelation 2 with His eyes as a flame of fire, and His feet like unto fine brass. He speaks. But the Spirit *also* speaks. It is the Spirit who gives amplification and application to what the Son of God says. The word is capable of immense expansion according to the exigencies of the moment. The call is to hear what the Spirit says; it is the Spirit who gives application to the addresses; according to His sovereign will He enlarges on things.
Ques. In connection with the difficulty as to circumcision, the matter was referred to Jerusalem. How do you account for that?
J.T. Jerusalem was borne with. God gave it opportunity in this way. The prolonged recognition of Jerusalem was due to the long-suffering of God with the Jew, so during that period it had a metropolitan position which no assembly ever had, or will have. In the house, the Spirit speaks expressly, but of course through a vessel; He is not incarnate, so that what the Spirit says implies the temple. We are not told what the Spirit says, so it leaves the door open, and He may use people we would look down upon. Room is given for great expansion in this way.
A.N. A local company might be in such a condition that it might lose its temple character; I mean the
{351}
conditions might be lacking in which the light could be found.
J.T. Well, an overcomer would always revert to the thought of the temple, and the temple involves the saints; so one wants to refer to them. An overcomer, or an exercised person, would say, We must wait and see what the Spirit says, and presently someone speaks, and light is given.
A.F.M. Would you turn to the Scriptures for light as to the Lord's mind?
J.T. The Spirit would use the Scriptures. What the Lord says is expressly stated; what the Spirit says is not, so it leaves room for what is infinite. One using the Scriptures would have light by the Spirit, as to how they would be employed to meet the case.
F.S. Has the truth of the temple a local setting? Can you speak of *the* temple in a locality?
J.T. No, only "temple". You cannot speak of it in an *absolute* way, but characteristically. "Ye are temple of God", @1 Corinthians 3:16.
In the beginning of this chapter in John you have conditions in which the work of God may be carried on, but in the latter part conditions in which it may not be carried on. You read (verse 2), Jesus was invited, *and His disciples*, to the marriage, showing a sympathetic spirit. His mother was there; it does not say she was invited, but she learns; she says to the servants, "Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it". @John 2:5. There was readiness on her part to submit to Christ. Then there were six water-pots, you do not find these where man's will is active; so conditions are there in which the Lord can operate, and operate effectively. Hence the first sign is given here. "This beginning of signs", @John 2:11 it says, and the result of it is, there is genuine belief on the part of the disciples; His disciples believed on him.
In the second part of the chapter we have no sign;
{352}
the Lord does not commit Himself; it is a soil in which He can do nothing; but the first part of the chapter is descriptive of a fertile soil.
Ques. Should we not be exercised, each of us, as to having light from God?
J.T. Yes, and to see that things are here essentially. The temple of God exists, but we do not talk of it by name. You enjoy it and you know you have it, but you leave the naming of it till a future day.
P.L. There is no formal allusion to the Supper in John, but the atmosphere in which it is partaken of is found in chapter 13.
Rem. The promise to the overcomer in Philadelphia is, "Him ... will I make a pillar in the temple of my God". @Revelation 3:12. You get the thought of the temple there.
J.T. What you get in that day corresponds with what you are now, if you stand up courageously now, you will be a pillar in that day.
Rem. The point you are emphasising is not to claim things but to verify them.
J.T. That is it. You get the expression in John, "Verily, verily"; it is used in that gospel about twenty-five times. It is the only gospel, I believe, where the word 'verily' is used in this way. This gospel was written when things were very uncertain and the point is, What does the *Lord* say? "Verily, verily, I say unto you". If He speaks it is true. Scientists assume a thing, and then argue that it is true, but it is not always true. Some of these men talk approvingly of the Lord, and then contradict what He says in the most barefaced way. And so many of the people of God are uncertain, and the enemy is aiming at producing a state of uncertainty. So "Verily, verily", would assure you that the things stated are really so.
{353}
FORMATION OF ASSEMBLIES
@Matthew 18: 19,20; @Acts 9: 32 - 43
R.B. We had in mind rather the formation of assemblies locally. In @Acts 16 we read that not only were the assemblies confirmed in the faith, but also that the number of them increased every day.
J.T. It seems to be a general thought that the Lord should get the most possible out of the saints. We see in Rebekah that she was to be a comfort to Isaac. We look for the greatest possible yield, so that it is a question of our being intelligent as to how that yield is to be increased. To that end, it would appear that the increase of meetings -- companies of saints walking in the light of the assembly -- means increase for Christ, not exactly increase in the size of the meetings, but rather in the number of them. This supposes that the material is such as may be formed into that which answers to the assembly, for we have, of course, to consider the material - The Lord appeared to different ones after He rose. In @Luke 24:34 it says He appeared to Simon, and in @1 Corinthians 15 He appeared to Cephas. If we have such material as "Cephas" indicates, I think the Lord would look for increase in the *number* of the meetings.
Matthew calls attention to the material that forms the assembly. It is, "If two *of you*" @Matthew 18:19. The formation of assemblies (meetings) necessarily hinges on the existence, not simply of believers, but of church material. This would involve Paul's ministry, so that in suggesting the passage in Acts, I wanted to show how Peter's service anticipated the economy set up by Paul's ministry, that is, he anticipated that the time was coming when the saints would learn how to do things for themselves. "Make thy couch for thyself". @Acts 9:34. That underlies Paul's system. We have to look for this feature whether in local meetings or
{354}
otherwise. There are those who can do things spiritually for themselves without having to seek for help elsewhere. In the case of Tabitha, of course, there is the principle of seeking help, because they besought Peter to come to them. In the first instance it says, "As Peter passed throughout all quarters, he came down also to the saints which dwelt at Lydda". @Acts 9: 32. It then relates that there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, and she having died, the disciples hearing that Peter was there sent two men beseeching him "that he would not delay to come to them". @Acts 9: 38. So that there is the principle of asking for help from a near-by meeting, or from any person who is available and can help. But the principle of doing things for yourselves precedes that, otherwise you would simply build up a metropolitan system.
W.C.G. Would the "two of you" @Matthew 18:19 refer to the "little children" in verse 3?
J.T. It refers back to chapter 13, where you have the truth of the assembly introduced. The assembly is specially in view from chapter 13, and I think that "two *of you*" refers back to the whole course of instruction, particularly the revelation of Peter in chapter 16.
E.J.McB. You look upon "two of you" as assembly material.
J.T. Yes.
R.B. You make a distinction between persons who are merely believers and church material.
J.T. In @Luke 24 you have the Lord's ministry as effecting recovery of two insignificant ones to the public company. They were going away from Jerusalem and the Lord goes a distance of sixty furlongs after them. They were not "two of you" characteristically; they were believers, but their backs were on the assembly. In that chapter we read also, "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon" @Luke 24:34 -- he was an erring one. He is not material
{355}
for the assembly, but he is an object of grace and he is restored. "The Lord appearing to Simon" was grace.
Rem. You need more than grace for the assembly.
J.T. Yes. So that in @1 Corinthians 15 the apostle gives six different appearings of the Lord, beginning not with Simon, but with Cephas. If He appears to Simon, He means to emphasise grace; but if He appears to Cephas, He means to emphasise the assembly, because the word 'Cephas' signifies material -- a stone.
R.B. Then "two of you" would be persons who have the light of the assembly in their soul.
J.T. Quite. That is the thing we should get hold of first of all; we begin with the minimum of two: "If two of you shall agree ... as touching anything", etc. @Matthew 18:19.
E.J.McB. Was it in your mind that Aeneas set forth one of the features of the "two of you" in that he could make his own bed?
J.T. That is what I thought.
J.J. So that the "two or three" @Matthew 18:20 of the next verse would be those acting together.
J.T. Yes; there you have the Lord supporting them.
R.B. What is in your mind in being able to do things for yourself?
J.T. Well, Jerusalem had hitherto been the centre. The saints in the different meetings would look to Jerusalem, the twelve were there; but it seems as if, under the Lord, Peter in chapter 9 discerned that what was coming was a new movement of the Spirit, and instead of saints looking to Jerusalem they were to learn to do things for themselves. But they were not to be independent; so that Peter did not go to Joppa of his own accord, he was besought to go there. The two things balance each other, the first thing is there was a local company that had the means within
{356}
itself for maintaining for God in the locality, and the second is that there may be special need, or there may be a special vessel available for help and it were folly to ignore an opportunity like that, especially when the need was there. There was a woman having a great reputation who was dead, and Peter was near by and they besought him to come, and he went, and the result was that there was there what had not been there before -- a living woman.
E.J.McB. Do you look upon the woman as representing a moral feature that had been lost to the company, and Peter as restoring this in greater power than before?
J.T. That is so. How far Peter may have been intelligent in what he was doing one cannot say; but God was going to work on these lines; it was not to be a metropolitan system. There is a metropolitan system in the sense that heaven is its centre, but there is no earthly centre. Each company has to learn to make its bed for itself otherwise it is dependent on some outside support.
E.J.McB. Do you look upon Paul's ministry as changing the situation from Jerusalem to this?
J.T. Yes; and the churches in Judaea, I apprehend, began to understand this, so that when Paul went to Thessalonica and the assembly was formed there, he wrote to them, "Ye ... became followers of the churches of God which in Judaea are in Christ Jesus" @1 Thessalonians 2: 14, without any reference to Jerusalem. That is an important point.
E.J.McB. Yes, I quite agree with that. Paul's ministry brought that about.
J.T. Some of us have been remarking as to the great disadvantage in travelling of having to change your train. In Australia you have to change four times from Brisbane to Perth, because the lines are of different gauges. I was in a meeting not long since and a brother whispered to me, 'We are accustomed
{357}
to do a certain thing here'. They had a local custom. And that is more prevalent than we are ready to believe. There are local customs; that is to say, you have to change your train. Now I think that Peter's move here involved that he was laying tracks for Paul's train; there was to be an express train, so to speak, right through even to Babylon. When Peter writes his letter to the Jews of the dispersion from Babylon, which is a big stretch, he refers to our beloved brother Paul and he says to them, "To whom coming, a living stone ... yourselves also, as living stones". He is linking everything up; they "are being built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ", @1 Peter 2: 4,5. Jerusalem is not in view.
Rem. He was writing to saints in a territory in which Paul had laboured.
J.T. Quite so. In speaking of assemblies -- we may use the word 'assemblies' for convenience -- the first thing you think of is the material.
H.H. That is, believers who have church exercises to some extent.
J.T. Yes.
Ques. What is set forth in Aeneas making his own bed?
J.T. If anything occurs to disturb the comfort of the saints you seek to right it locally. I do not think it is wise to call in outside help, but if you do, be sure the help you call in is in accord with Peter -- a man who unifies things and who has a universal outlook; Peter is the material that stands for that.
E.J.McB. That is why you emphasise the thought of Cephas -- a stone.
J.J. Why is it that Paul is brought in immediately before these two things in chapter 9?
J.T. Paul is on the horizon now, and Peter, whether or not he understood it fully, is under divine guidance; he made way for this elect vessel, as the
{358}
Lord says. It is a serious thing to be out of accord with Paul.
R.B. If there is heavenly light, you want to be in accord with it.
J.T. Quite.
J.J. You must take up Peter's ministry in the light of Paul.
J.T. Quite so. Paul says, "I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision". @Acts 26:19. If there is movement from heaven, you want to be in accord with it. There was evidently going to be a move, and Peter was in accord with it.
E.J.McB. Do you attach any importance to the fact that Peter put the widows all out before raising this woman?
J.T. I think Peter had learned; he had been with the Lord in Jairus's house; he knew that these widows were under natural influences.
Ques. Why did you say just now, in speaking of the assembly, that you must go back to @Matthew 13? We have been accustomed to go back to chapter 18.
J.T. At the beginning of chapter 13 the Lord left the house; that is a definite movement. I suppose the house there would have reference to the Jewish system, and He sat by the sea and spake many things to them in parables, and the parables lead up to the assembly.
Rem. There is that seen in the soil that was not there before.
J.T. Exactly, it is the principle of the wheat and the tares growing up together. Those who compose the assembly would have to contend with a situation like that, so the disciples ask the Lord in the house to explain that parable to them, and what He gives out in the house in that chapter is most instructive in regard to the assembly. Then He goes on to speak about the leaven, and about the treasure, and the pearl, and about the fish -- all these involve discrimination,
{359}
and then He says, "Have ye understood all these things?" @Matthew 13:51 and upon their answering in the affirmative, He says, "Therefore every scribe which is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and old" (@Matthew 13: 52). I think all that is most important for instruction in regard to the assembly.
Chapter 14 is to show that the Lord can feed the multitude. You learn there how you can rely on Him in an emergency. Then He walks on the water, which is a further thing, and in chapter 15 He says, "Every plant which my heavenly Father hath not planted shall be rooted up". @Matthew 15:13. Then He goes away into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon and finds a woman there who, I think, represents the kind of material that is required for the assembly. It is the same territory as that out of which Solomon got his material for the temple. It is cedar wood and had to be brought down; she qualifies as a cedar, for He says, "O woman, great is thy faith" @Matthew 15:28 -- a very unusual thing. All that leads up to the revelation that is made to Peter.
Rem. So that in this chapter we have certain characteristic features of the material you are speaking of.
J.T. Yes, that is what I thought.
E.P. Would you say how Paul presents living stones?
J.T. I think they are members of Christ's body. He speaks of the house also, but the Pauline terms corresponding with the stones, I should say, would be the members of Christ's body.
R.B. With regard to the woman you referred to as a cedar, "O woman, great is thy faith", @Matthew 15:28, would that answer in a way to being gathered together in His name in the sense of His power and authority being available?
{360}
J.T. She recognised the Lord; she said, "Lord, help me". @Matthew 15:25. I think @Romans 5 brings in the Lord and corresponds with @Acts 9, because in that chapter we have the Lord throughout; in any movement of God we must begin with the authority of the Lord. You find throughout that chapter that the Lord is in view.
J.J. She says too, "Truth, Lord". @Matthew 15:27.
J.T. In @Romans 5 everything is "through our Lord Jesus Christ". It is the principle of administration; it is not simply that you have supplies, but that supplies are brought in through our Lord Jesus Christ, and they are all available for faith. That really leads up to the point where it is not a question of the Lord, but of the Spirit, who sheds abroad in our hearts the love of God. I learn to use the Spirit, and that underlies the principle of making your bed for yourselves.
Ques. Would the Lord expect us all to be intelligent?
J.T. Yes, surely. Intelligence depends on subjection. "After two days he will revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight"; then it says, "Then *shall we know*, if we follow on to know the Lord: his going forth is prepared as the morning"; and it further says, "and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter and former rain unto the earth", @Hosea 6: 2,3. There you see His activities; He is moving in relation to all that is in the mind of God, bringing in the day. Your intelligence enables you to rely on what He does as the latter rain upon the earth. I think @Romans 5 corresponds in that way, it shows the resources that come to us through our Lord Jesus Christ, and then in @Romans 8 we learn to use the Spirit.
That chapter underlies the principle of doing things for yourselves. In @Romans 12 your body is presented to God as a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable, which is
{361}
your *intelligent* service. It is a most dignified thing to present your body to God as an intelligent act, a priestly act. Then you get the principle of unity, that is, you see you are "one body in Christ". Now you can have all brought in; it is not yet "of Christ" but "in Christ". It is the principle of unity governed by the thought of "in Christ"; not in the flesh.
R.B. That person is a living stone.
J.T. That is how it works in chapter 8. I have learned to use the Spirit by myself, but others have learned it too, and we use Him generally. I think Luke refers to the Spirit received in a collective way, "How much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" (@Luke 11:13). All that refers to the local furnishing, because the Lord is there seen as praying in a certain place. (See verse 1.) The subject begins in chapter 9. How is the Lord going to be received up in heaven? He is going to be received up according to heaven, in the heavenly way. And so in chapter 10 the Lord sends out seventy by twos into every city and place where He Himself was about to come, so that He should be rightly received, because previous to that He had come to a city of the Samaritans and they received Him not. Now He is going to be received, and in order that He should be received, He sends out seventy and says, Seek out the son of peace, because heaven is marked by peace. You cannot have local conditions according to heaven unless you have the son of peace: "And if the son of peace he there, your peace shall rest upon it ... and in the same house remain". @Luke 10: 6,7. Then later it says, "Now it came to pass that ... he entered into a certain village" @Luke 10:38; you are not told the name of it, but we know it is Bethany, but He is not occupied with any particular locality. Then we read, "And a certain woman named Martha received him into her house" @Luke 10:38; but Martha had not the gain of the Lord's ministry as Mary had. How
{362}
could you think of having the Lord happily in a locality if you are complaining about someone else? Even a spiritual brother does not want to hear complaints. The Lord does not want to hear that; not that He did not hear it, for He did, and He rebuked it.
Rem. The difficulty is that in some parts there is the desire to come together, without being sure of the material.
J.T. I think we should see that the material is there; it is more important to get "two of you" than to think of two elders. The assembly is not made up of elders. The elders were appointed after the assembly was formed, not before. Paul and Barnabas formed the assemblies, and then they came back and ordained them elders in every church. Their ministry brought in the saints, and then they came back and appointed the elders. Later Paul enjoins Titus to ordain elders in every city (@Titus 1: 5), and to Timothy Paul writes "If any one aspires to exercise oversight". @1 Timothy 3:1. In Titus it is the word 'ordain'. I believe there is an angelic service in the locality where an assembly is formed. Things happen governmentally to the saints. A local assembly is a counterpart of heaven; it is a place for Christ, and heaven is interested in it; all the resources of heaven are available for it. The assembly is of immense importance to heaven, and the government of God is in its favour. There is immediate divine protection and support for "two of you".
Rem. Some of us feel here there might be material for a new assembly, as we were saying, but we are concerned as to what would be left in the old assembly.
J.T. Well, what would apply to the new would apply to the old; you want to see that there is enough church material left. But if there are two left that is enough; it would make room for fresh plants. There are many in the shade that do not
{363}
develop. If there were a greater number of meetings there would be more opportunity for development.
Ques. Would you say a word as to why the widows were put out?
J.T. I think they were governed by natural feelings. They are distinguished from those who believed, natural feelings would only hinder the acting of the Spirit.
P.L. Would you attach any importance to "the upper chamber"? @Acts 9:37.
J.T. I think Luke uses that expression, meaning that he lifts us up above the level of what is natural.
SPIRITUAL CONTEMPLATION
*J. Taylor*
@Exodus 3: 1 - 6; @John 1: 14; @1 John 1: 1 - 3
I wish to speak at this time, dear brethren, about spiritual contemplation, believing that it is a real need among us; especially among young believers, the ability to sit down as illustrated in Mary of Bethany, is comparatively rare. In the Canticles the female speaker says, "In his shadow have I rapture and sit down". @Song of Songs 2:3. Sitting down from this point of view, is a posture in which we can contemplate to advantage. Unless we acquire the habit we shall not shine for Christ, for we shall not take in nor absorb the glory that is presented objectively in Christ. We all know the influence of atmosphere, how it affects us and how particularly in inanimate things, the influence of environment gives character to them, as for instance, a flower. "Consider the lilies how they grow", says the Lord. They grow in an environment provided -- "they toil not, they spin not, and yet Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one
{364}
of these". @Matthew 6:29. Yet they have to be nourished from the earth, and so it is, dear brethren, that we receive from earth, for we are to take root downward and bear fruit upward. "The king himself is dependent upon the field", @Ecclesiastes 5: 9. That emphasises that we eat, for in that wonderful description of creation in @Psalm 104, one of the many wonderful things we eat is bread to strengthen man's heart and drink wine to gladden it. These have to be assimilated so that in taking in the word, as Jeremiah did, he said, "Thy words were found and I did eat them", @Jeremiah 15: 16. Ezekiel, too, ate the roll. In eating the word thus, it becomes, as it were, ourselves. When the Lord was challenged by the Jews saying, "Who art thou?" He answered, "altogether that which I also say to you", @John 8: 25. There is that which we take in by our own act, and also the effect of the external environment which is prepared of God resulting from Christ being in heaven.
Now for these things we require to sit down; we require, too, the habit of sitting down in a special sense, and so I refer to the passage in Exodus, not that Moses sat down there, for the Old Testament was not the time of sitting down, but rather standing. Our Lord Jesus Christ has led the way in sitting as in all else, but Moses turned aside to contemplate. I want the young ones to take notice of this particularly. We come to meetings, and it is wonderful the provision God makes for us; they are a divine provision, but after the meeting is over we are tested. In many instances that which came into the soul and mind is lost ere we leave the room, but the Lord's mind is that we should retain it for an opportunity to sit down and contemplate. Moses came to Horeb, the Mount of God, an excellent position. It is well to come to hear from God; it is well to be there. It is to Moses¬ credit that he led the sheep, and came to the Mount of God, as it is to ours as we draw near to
{365}
hear the word of God, for ministry is intended to convey the mind of God, and it is well to hear it, Yet though the angel came, if he had not turned aside, how much he would have missed. He might have recorded what a wonderful thing he saw in the bush burning but not consumed. I might say to Moses, Was that all? If he had not turned aside that would have been all. Moses said, "I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt". @Exodus 3:3. He had determination to see the thing to the end. It was not a mere apparition but a sight, and the Lord saw that he turned aside. God takes notice of the resolve of our hearts, and there should be resolution with us as the mind of God is brought to us. We are not worthy if we do not make resolutions.
The work of God proceeded in Moses¬ soul, so God says, "Moses, Moses". @Exodus 3:4. In other words Moses is distinguished in this act. He could no doubt have occupied curious ears with it if he had not turned aside. When one's name is mentioned twice one has distinguished oneself in the eyes of God, not of men, for no one was present when God said, "Moses, Moses". There are several instances of this sort of distinction, as for instance Abraham when he offered up Isaac; Jacob when he sacrificed to the God of his fathers; Samuel, and above all Saul of Tarsus, and may it be said of each of us as we turn aside through special interest to take account of what God says to us, for we want it all. Think of God disclosing His mind to us! Do we not want it all? Let us stop, dear brethren, to consider the wonder of it. Is it not worth thinking ever, taking bit by bit, as it were; so that as God says, "let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me", @Jeremiah 9: 24.
Now the word is to Moses, "put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is
{366}
holy ground". @Exodus 3:5. In the time of the Old Testament the way into the holiest was not yet manifest, but not so with us. We are, however, apt to tread easily on holy ground with our shoes on, but if we are to apprehend things aright we must see them in relation to Christ as He is before God. We are enjoined to draw near now by the new and living way; there is no more room for the flesh now than then, but there is a wonderful provision for us to leave the flesh outside. God enjoins us to draw near, for love is intolerant of distance. I doubt much whether anyone enjoys relationship to God save him who enters the holiest. It is right to follow others, but a time comes when you have to go in yourself 'Take off thy shoes for the place is holy'; let us never forget; we are exhorted to be sober. Then the voice goes on, "I am the God of thy father" @Exodus 3:6; you see, God would impress you, as you draw near, with His relationship to you, "The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ". @Ephesians 1:3. The very lispings of the babe in Christianity are in the full light of the revelation of God, so that by the Spirit you cry, "Abba, Father". You are in conscious relationship with God. You may say, my experience belies that, but I would say light goes before experience. The Spirit following light gives experience; be on your guard about placing experience before light. "I am the God of thy father". @Exodus 3:6. The Lord commenting on this passage makes it refer to resurrection, saying that, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. He is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. That relationship can never he taken away; it stands for ever. In the opening of John's gospel we see one who contemplates Jesus. It was not now a burning bush. He says, "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us". Many of us refer to that and rightly, but we overlook the next part, "and we contemplated his glory". @John 1:14. It is one thing to have the service, but
{367}
another to contemplate how He dwelt among men. John was one of them, and he says, "we contemplated his glory". It corresponds with what we call the holiest. "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us". @John 1:14. They were intent to see. You see if the Lord raised the dead, you say there must be something underneath that, and I want to see it; see what is behind that power. Nicodemus says, "none can do these signs that thou doest, unless God be with him" @John 3: 3. You reason backward, it is not of nature, so God is behind it.
They say, "we contemplated his glory, the glory as of an only-begotten with a father". @John 3:14. King James¬ translators missed the point a bit, they say *the* Father, but it is not that quite. It is to bring it within the range of the youngest child, for everyone knows what an only-one with a father is. The apostles saw behind the scenes, as it were, into the shrine. What reciprocated affections there are in such relationship as that. They saw how He spoke to God, His emotion, and the effect of the relationship. How much greater this was than the signs which everybody saw! The grace of relationship -- the grace of reciprocated affections -- and he adds, "full of grace and truth" @John 1:14. So that while He is in relationship to God, yet He is full of what man needs, and no one can serve unless he sees that in Christ. John had received of His fulness, and we must receive of it, "of his fulness have all we received", @John 1:16, the same grace and truth that is of Christ. Witness John's epistle and gospel as a proof of it.
Now I just want to bring out the thought of life. John in his epistle says, "That which was from the beginning, that which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the Word of life". @1 John 1:1. "Concerning the word of life". Now Christianity begins with absolute perfection, and all else is to come to
{368}
that; hence, in the Word becoming flesh all is in perfection, and everything has to come to that. In the Acts, the Lord presents Himself living; that is, He placed Himself before their eyes, making it evident that He was alive; and John says, our eyes have seen it and we report to you. He is qualified to be a witness. So the Beloved develops in John's contemplation, he is filled and can bear witness. One of the greatest things in Scripture is the thought of witness, not only what one says, but what one is. Stephen is a striking witness; his address is a witness, and he lays down himself as a witness; *he was a witness*. So John says, "*we* have seen, and testify, that the Father has sent the Son" and "we have seen, and bear witness, and report to you the eternal life, which was with the Father and has been manifested to us ... that *ye* also may have fellowship with us". @1 John 1:3. So you see how by contemplating we are able to bear witness to what we have seen, for we cannot do anything more. The thought is to bear witness to what we have seen. The need is great for quiet prayerful contemplation of what is presented, and is coming out, so that we may be extending the things, on the principle of witness, "that your *joy* may be full". @1 John 1:4.
{369}
THE WAY OF LOVE
@John 14:15 - 25
J.T. In chapter 13 the Lord shows the way of love, and you are impressed in these verses with the emphasis laid on their love. Even the gift of the Spirit, the Comforter, hinges on their love. Paul had learned the way of love; he had learned it from Christ or he could not have *shown* it. Speaking of a thing is not showing it so chapter 13 is pre-eminently the showing of love -- the way of it. What we have had bears on this. In @1 Samuel 18 we see how David became an object of love to Jonathan, and then to all Israel. The Psalms furnish us with illustrations of this love, in @Psalm 45:1 particularly: "My heart is inditing a good matter ... touching the King".
A contribution is not necessarily always from the heart. Poets ransack dictionaries and other writers to bring in materials with which to paint their word-pictures. The most respected of them were very little morally. Were they to speak out all that was in their *hearts*, the reading would be very poor and demoralising. Where the heart is allowed to play, we get what is abased. The Psalmist's heart was purified by faith. The King was the object of his heart. Solomon said in the book of Proverbs, "Son, give me thine heart", @Proverbs 23:26 and again, "Keep thy heart with all diligence for out of it are the issues of life". @Proverbs 4:23. I think this chapter in John would include for the disciples all these scriptures. Their bearing would be clearly seen by the disciples. The Lord had shown them the way. "Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end", @John 13: 1. He washes the disciples¬ feet; He did that as an example. He showed them the way, and so the commandment was that they should have love
{370}
among themselves; that they should be known as disciples of His after having love among themselves.
R.S.S. The new commandment was not merely that they should love one another, but that they should love one another as He had loved them; @John 13: 34.
J.T. There can be no water really without love. Although we may apply the water in a legal way, unless there is love behind it, it does not wash. Love would supply the towel as well as the water. What underlies the whole teaching in John is the new birth. There can be no issues of life in the heart unless one is born anew. Chapter 4 is the Spirit in the believer.
H.G. Paul says to the Corinthians, "The more abundantly I love you the less I be loved", @2 Corinthians 12: 16. He did not love them because of the love he found amongst them.
J.T. 1 and 2 Corinthians may be taken as an opening up of these scriptures in at least one disciple. They illustrate the teaching in Paul. He loved like the Lord. Peter was refractory. It is a love that overcomes opposition in its objects. Before we can arrive at reciprocal affections (love amongst ourselves) we have to surmount obstacles in those we would serve. Peter raised a barrier, "Thou shalt never wash my feet". @John 13:8. How many a brother takes a strong attitude like that when you would seek to help him! He hinders you, but love as it was in Christ rises above that. The Lord says, "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me". @John 13:8. The brethren might not care so much about one. John would teach us to be lovable. If you were possessed with the love of Christ as Paul had it, you would be lovable. It is worth our while to have part with a lovable person.
H.G. I was thinking of Asher: "Let him be acceptable to his brethren", @Deuteronomy 33: 24.
J.T. A brother is born for adversity. He shines
{371}
where he exists. It is worth your while to have part with him. Are you going to forego what this brother who has ministered divine things to you is going on with? You get many who enjoy things that the Lord is pleased to give us, but they never think of
having part in them with those through whom they come from the Lord. They are not concerned about having their feet washed. If I want to be with those who love, I am prepared to accept this service so that I might have part with them. I suppose that at Corinth before the first letter was written there was very little sense of the need of Paul any more. They could get on without him.
G.W.H. Do you not think that love specially comes in after we partake of the Lord's supper?
J.T. Yes. The presence of the Comforter amongst them would develop and support the love that was there. The presence of the Comforter here maintains love in the full height of chapter 13; how great is the thought in the chapter. The thing is *shown*. Is it worth one's while to have part in the things that He is going on with? Peter loved the Lord and could not brook being separated from Him. He was prepared for anything rather than to be separated from Christ; but how many there are who seemingly enjoy things which are being ministered to them, and yet it never occurs to them that they should have part in them. I think Jonathan represents that class. His soul was knit to David's and he knew that David would be king, but he prefers to remain in the house of Saul. He had no part with David. He desired a part with David in the *future*.
H.G. Washing of feet leads to detachment from things here.
J.T. In chapter 14 He was taking a position on high, and the Holy Spirit would maintain the disciples in the love shown in chapter 13. There is a remarkable correspondence between Daniel and John.
{372}
Daniel is said to be greatly beloved. You have both Gabriel and Michael mentioned, the two leading angelic dignitaries in heaven, and then "a certain man" @Daniel 10:5 comes without his name being announced (chapter 10), but he is clothed in linen. He comes to Daniel whom he would help. Daniel had been three weeks fasting and praying and confessing his sins and the sins of his fathers, and then this heavenly visitant arrives. Daniel was a man "greatly beloved". He embraced in his affections all the interests of God, all the people of God, but he was now without strength; he was unable to stand up in the presence of this great personage. A man stood by him and touched him and he was strengthened. That is what love may look for. He is able thus to listen to what the heavenly visitant says. I think John would show what love may expect. Daniel was a beloved one, for he loved.
Ques. What is the Comforter to us?
J.T. It is for every Christian to answer as to what he has found in Him. It is the Spirit known amongst us in a collective way, and what He can be to us so as to fit us to receive and enjoy the Lord as He comes to us; He was with them already. He was present in Christ.
E.Z. What is the difference between the individual receiving the Spirit and what we have here?
J.T. The individual side is treated in the earlier chapters of this gospel; this and the following chapters refer to the *company*. In the Acts He was amongst them collectively (chap 13), so that you have recorded: "The Holy Spirit said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them", @Acts 13:2 and in @Acts 15:28, "it seemed good to the Holy Spirit, and to us". He is speaking as a divine Person. As Christ had been amongst them, so He is here "another Comforter". The teaching up to chapter 12 has reference to the individual believer, here it is the company. He refers to the saints
{373}
collectively; He shall be in you collectively. There are those who have the Spirit, in the sense in which He is presented in the gospel, who know little or nothing of Him as the Comforter, as known amongst *the saints*. What we get as gathered together is very different from what I may enjoy as walking in the Spirit (see @Galatians 5: 16). These two things have to be seen as distinct. @John 14 contemplates love. Love is the great underlying principle of the assembly; it had been shown. The Lord had shown it. The Holy Spirit here maintains it amongst us.
H.G. The only one who can wash feet is Christ; He uses others to do it, however.
J.T. The saints have things that they are going on with that it is worth the consideration of every Christian to have part in. There must be the washing. "Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep which go up from the washing", @Song of Songs 6: 6. "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me", @John 13:8 the Lord says. It is of great importance that there should be that which is commendable or lovable in those who serve. Is it worth your while to have part in this or are you just a spectator? He has brought wonderful things into this world, and is opening up these things now. These things had already been spoken of, but now He sets them up here in a sanctified enclosure, and He proposes that His own should have part with Him in these things.
Ques. Would you say tabernacle conditions?
J.T. Yes, He brought these things within the range of the Jews, but they would not receive them. He is going out of the world to the Father and is leaving them in the world, and His prayer would show that He would wish them to be sanctified. These things are open now to every believer, but the question is, Are you prepared for the washing? The sheep come up from the washing; things are to be set up in a sanctified company, that is to say, a
{374}
company that loved Him. We are lifted out of this present world morally and brought into association with Christ, where He is. He sends the Spirit that there should be preserved here all these precious things. The Lord can come in by the Spirit; the door is left open. It is His own sphere that He has set up here.
From the fifteenth verse of @John 14 you have an order of things set up by the Spirit. He says, "I wilt not leave you orphans, I am coming to you". @John 14:18. The Lord is taking a place on high; He has gone there as a Mediator, and He asks for the Spirit on our behalf. The Holy Spirit has come down from Christ as having been asked for as of the Father. It is in view of the testimony at the present time. In chapter 20 He breathes on them. Now the Spirit is here so that the appearings are not by an angel but by the Spirit.
H.G. There must be a certain inclination to go that way or you will not get the good of it.
J.T. You have not exactly gone up, but you have all the qualifications for going up. It is the circle, so that what is official is not so much in evidence as that there are those that love Him. It is love that underlies; the Spirit comes in in that connection. He would show them all things, and bring to their remembrance all that the Lord had said; He has promised to come.
There are three things: He *comes* to us, He *manifests* Himself, and then the *Father* and *He* come and make their *abode*. So that you have house conditions and privileges. If any one loved Him he would prove it by keeping His commandments, and you have the Father loving that person, and the Son loving that person, and the Son manifesting Himself to that person. The commandments save one from the errors of Christendom, but the *word* brings in what is positive. The communications
{375}
of the Lord involved the assembly in its privileges. The keeping of that involves the material for the house. So that the Father and Son come and make their abode, and the conditions are there.
The commandments would involve Romans and Corinthians. The word would include the deeper spiritual teaching. There are three main thoughts here: First, "I am coining to you", involving the normal conditions at the beginning; secondly, His manifestation, meaning that He is apprehended in a new way, there is something shown; thirdly, the house conditions and privileges in the Father and Son coming in and making their abode with him. Manifesting Himself means a fresh impression. There is something shown, as, for instance, His hand, as in @Song of Songs 5. It is a great thing to see that. We should get a fresh impression every time. That explains the way the truth has come out; not that there has been any fresh revelation, but there has been emphasis laid on certain features. There may be features that have not been emphasised. @John 20 and Ephesians go together, but this chapter more fits in with Corinthians and Colossians.
{376}
THE TRUTH MAINTAINED BY THE SPIRIT
@Revelation 22: 16
I refer to this scripture especially in regard to the Spirit, the Spirit being the only guarantee for the maintenance of the truth. We have lived to see that creeds, however orthodox, do not suffice. The maintenance of the truth depends upon the Spirit, and whilst He remains here, there will be a witness to the truth, and that not in any mere limited way, but to it in its entirety, for He is said to be "the Spirit of truth", meaning that the truth as a whole marks His activities and teaching in the assembly.
The Lord is said to be "*the truth*". He says so Himself: "I am the way, and the truth, and the life". @John 14:6. He is "the truth", as we may say, *objectively*, and the Spirit is the truth *subjectively* in the saints (@1 John 5: 6). We have to distinguish between the truth and the revelation of God; "the truth" involves adjustment, and it is also a divine test. Every part of the physical system depends upon truth, so the Lord coming into this world is "the truth"; everything is tested by Him as viewed thus. Everything is necessarily tested by Him, and all that is out of accord with the truth, that is, not of Christ viewed in that light, must disappear, for nothing can remain under God's eye that is not of Christ. In that living Man here there was a perfect test for everything; centuries have rolled away, but this remains; God will have all to be conformed to the truth.
But then there is the other side, and that is the Spirit. "The Spirit is the truth", and as He remains here there is the maintenance of the truth. In the parable in @Matthew 25 we have the wise virgins, and the foolish; the latter are not called evil, as the servant in the previous chapter, but what marked
{377}
them as foolish was that they had no oil; in other words, they did not have the Spirit -- the Spirit was neglected. With many who are not characteristically evil or opposed to Christ, there has been a neglect of the Spirit, and hence when a test comes and the truth is attacked, there is deficiency, there is inability to meet the attack; and besides that, there is not power to go on to meet the Lord. Their folly, therefore, is disclosed. "Articles of religion [or faith]", as they are called, do not suffice; the folly is seen in neglecting the Spirit. But then the prudent virgins had oil in their vessels; they were not neglectful of that, although they had slumbered like the others. They had all slumbered and slept, but the midnight cry, "Behold, the bridegroom", @Matthew 25:6 brought out the affection that existed. There was genuine affection for Christ, and the cry brought that to light. Then, having the oil, they were ready and went in with the Lord to the wedding feast. God has called attention to the Spirit, and He has come to acquire a place among the saints, and the result is the maintenance of the truth not some isolated part of it, but *the* truth. The Holy Spirit operates with a view to the maintenance of the truth, for He is it.
Now when the Lord says, "I am the root and the offspring of David", @Revelation 22:16, I believe He would impress upon us the importance of gathering up things. The Lord alludes to Himself as the Root of David, and I think we have there the whole history of the testimony. You can have nothing before the root. The Root of David goes back a long way. Abraham is not the Root of David, nor Isaac, nor Jacob, although in @Matthew 1:2 it is said, "Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob", etc., but the truth is that the Root of David was Christ. Marvellous statement! "I am the root", He says, "of David". Now the Lord had said in His ministry, having concluded His instruction in regard of the kingdom,
{378}
that every scribe who is instructed into the kingdom of heaven is like a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old. The old things refer to the Root. As we recognise the Holy Spirit, there is the linking up from the very origin, we go back to the beginning. Luke speaks about being acquainted with things "from the origin". He refers to the beginning of things in the history of the Lord (@Luke 1: 1 - 4). John in his epistle speaks about "that which was from the beginning", @1 John 1:1 but in his gospel he says, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". @John 1:1. In the last passage we see how the Spirit of God guards the Person of Christ. He goes back to the beginning, not to the outset of Christianity, not to the beginning of eternal life on earth, but to the Person as in the Godhead at the beginning of God's holy operations. But then the Holy Spirit gives us through Matthew the genealogy of Christ, and what strikes one in that is the patience, the accuracy with which He pursues the subject of genealogy in its remarkable course through Old Testament times. We get a woman like Tamar -- the line is through her; through Rahab, through a Moabitish woman, Ruth, and through "her that had been the wife of Urias". @Matthew 1:6. The Lord is thus shown to be the Offspring of David, but He is also the Root of David. John's gospel explains the latter. The assembly understands John and Matthew. She recognises Him who is the Root and Offspring of David; by the Spirit she understands that the Root and the Offspring are in one Person.
It is remarkable that in the unfolding of the gospel in the epistle to the Romans this very truth is stated as to the Lord being of the seed of David according to the flesh and declared to be the Son of God with power (@Romans 1: 3, 4); the object being that the believer should have these truths firmly fixed in his soul from the beginning. As receiving the gospel
{379}
thus announced, the Lord has His place in our hearts, and we form the assembly in which the Holy Spirit dwells, in which He speaks, and in which He operates, so that at the end He has the assembly with Him, and He has our hearts with Him in the full intelligence and truth, of the testimony, that is to say, the assembly understands that He is the Root of David and the Offspring of David; she understands the first chapter of Matthew, and she understands the First Book of Chronicles. The Holy Spirit brings the line right down; God preserved the vessels through whom the line came, and so our Lord was born of a prepared vessel.
The Holy Spirit lingers around the circumstances of the birth of Christ. The holiness of the scene repels the evil workings of man's mind and preserves the truth, and the wonderful fact is established that the Son of God became a Man. "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us". @John 1:14. The foul suggestions of the enemy have been of late voiced by his agents in many districts; these are not new, but the Spirit of God foresaw such efforts and provided for their rebuke. "That holy thing", the angel says, "which shall be born of thee shall be called Son of God". @Luke 1:35. The truth regarding the Person and birth of our Lord is to be preserved in priestly vigilance, "and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death". @Numbers 18:7. As priests, those who form the assembly know the truth of the Lord's Person, hence the assembly knows who it is when the Lord announces Himself as the "root and offspring of David". "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". @Revelation 22:17. The Spirit has got her with Him in all the intelligence and understanding of the truth of the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ as the Root and the Offspring of David, as the One from whom David sprang, and as the true Heir of David's throne. It is beautifully put in @1 Chronicles 29: 23 that David's throne is Jehovah's throne. "Solomon sat on the
{380}
throne of Jehovah". And the assembly understands this by the Spirit; she knows that the Lord is coming to take up the throne of the world. We have it in @Revelation 5:1, "Him that sat upon the throne". The Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Lamb as slain, is He who takes the book -- think of the dignity of that! He takes the book, and He opens the seals one after another. He will clear the scene of all that is contrary and then He will sit upon the throne, for the kingdoms of this world are to become the kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ. The assembly is in the intelligence of all this; she recognises "the root and the offspring of David, the bright and morning star. The Spirit and the bride say, Come". @Revelation 22: 16,17. It is a wonderful note of love and intelligence at the end.
{381}
HOW TO DRAW UPON DIVINE RESOURCES
@John 21: 1 - 14; @Luke 24: 41 - 43
The sea as God made it may be taken to mean divine resources. My thought is to show how the saints learned at the outset how to draw from these resources.
The Lord has His own way of bringing out what we may have. "Have ye *here* anything to eat?" @Luke 24:41. It was a testing question; it was not simply, have ye anything to eat, but have ye *here* anything to eat? It brings out amongst other things a *local* feature. The assembly is wonderfully enriched, the Lord having gone on high has sent down the Holy Spirit and endowed her with all that is needed. Then the question arises, What have ye here? It is true all the ministers belong to the saints; the apostles, Paul, etc., "All are yours". @1 Corinthians 3:22. "God has set certain in the assembly" @1 Corinthians 12:28; all gifts are general, there is no such thing as local gift. The conception of local gift leads to metropolitanism. Gift is for the assembly, but then there is a local feature as to what each locality has acquired through the gifts. If they are available for all, what have I acquired? What has the local company acquired? So the Lord says, What have you got here?
It is most refreshing to contemplate this company, although they needed adjustment, but He was adjusting them. They "gave him" -- it was not that they gave account of what they had. We do not know what they had; on an earlier occasion the Lord had asked as to the food, and Andrew says, "There is a little boy here who has five barley loaves and two small fishes but this, what is it for so many?" @John 6:9. That only indicates the smallness of their faith in the One who was amongst them. He says, "Have you anything here to eat?" "And they gave him part
{382}
of a broiled fish". @Luke 24:41,42. I dwell on this that we might see the extent of divine resources and how they are available.
In @Deuteronomy 33 we get the blessing of Moses wherewith he blessed Israel. This chapter contemplates the saints as possessing the Spirit; their resources lie in the Spirit, they depend on Him. So in reviewing the tribes Moses says, "Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out; and, Issachar, in thy tents. They shall call the people unto the mountain; there shall they offer sacrifices of righteousness". @Deuteronomy 33: 18,19. Where did they get these? They sucked of the abundance of the seas; their territories were on the sea coast. The sea may be looked at in different ways -- viewed as of divine making, God created it. Men may take account of the trees in the world, or the cattle on a thousand hills, they may all be counted; men, too, may be counted, but who can count the fishes of the sea? There are the unknown depths full of these teeming millions, all belonging to God; in their infinite variety and number they are God's. So Zebulun and Issachar sucked of the abundance of the seas. I believe it is a feature of the last days that God has called attention to His wonderful resources which are available to us. The sea belongs to God, and it is for us to suck of its abundance, to draw upon these resources of God set at our disposal.
But I want now to show how we come into them; let us look at Jonah. Jonah was a man of faith, he knew God, but when sent on a message of service he went elsewhere. He went down to the sea, but not "do business"; his back was on Jerusalem, his will was active. There were the piling waves of the Mediterranean as they well-nigh engulfed the ship he was on -- a momentous time for him. God is watching over His disciplinary ways with great interest, He is going to have joy from that process.
{383}
He followed every stroke of the oar that pulled that ship along; it carried Jonah on his way of self-will. Jonah was governed by his will. There is no place for will in the house of God; the proudest and strongest will has to go when God takes it in hand. So Jonah has to go into the water, there is no escape. God loves us too well to allow that will of ours to proceed on its course. However hard the rowing, there was no shore; doubtless these men were skilled rowers and rowed hard to regain the land, but they could not, for God was against them, and the sea became more and more tempestuous.
I have often thought of the girdle that Jeremiah was told to take to the Euphrates to hide there; God says: "Put it not in water". @Jeremiah 13:1. Jeremiah took his journey all the way to the Euphrates, and again later he went as commanded for it; it had not been dipped in water and it was spoiled and good for nothing. God *will* have the water, we have to go into it, we have to come to the water.
Jonah is cast into the water, and now God comes in in His tenderness and consideration for him. God prepared a great fish out of His infinite resources. We may always reckon on God's care, but there has to be the acceptance of the discipline, the judgment of God. We may have all the graces that refinement or education can give, but if the girdle be not dipped in water it is marred and good for nothing. All the refinement is good for nothing in the divine account. But Jonah was good for something when he came out of the water; the discipline of God had that in view. In the process he realised the resources of God, there was the fish. The Lord had prepared a great fish; everything is great that God employs for His children; what men account to be great is nothing. How silent Scripture is on what would interest man's natural mind! God knew what the inquiry of the human mind would be, and is silent on what would satisfy
{384}
mere curiosity. We hear no more of that fish; God had prepared what was great; it was not an ordinary fish, it was a prepared fish. I suppose there never was one like it before or since; it was prepared to swallow up Jonah.
You may think things small in your history, but do not so regard them, for the believer's experiences are prepared; God disciplines sons so that they should be taken account of for His inheritance. Jonah prayed to God -- God has His portion, His resources served Him in providing for Jonah -- and now Jonah worships and ministers to God from the belly of the fish. Jonah learned a lesson, and lessons that are divinely learned remain with us, and these work in a wonderful way in our experience. We learn that salvation is of the Lord. God must have His portion in everything. I am impressed by the portion and joy God has in His service with us.
We see another case of the divine resources when Peter was asked, "Does your master pay tribute?" @Matthew 17:24. To whom must Jesus pay tribute? To admit that He *must* pay tribute to any would be to admit that He is not divine. But Peter says, Yes. We see here what adjustment he needed. The Lord says, "Of whom do the kings of the earth take tribute? of their own sons, or of strangers? Peter saith unto him, Of strangers. Jesus saith unto him, Then are the sons free". @Matthew 17: 25,26. But how are we to be freed? Many of the Lord's people are under tribute, both to the religious world and to the social world. The Lord delivers us from all, He says, "Go down to the sea", @Matthew 17:27, that is His sphere of resources. Only one fish is to be caught; the Lord would never catch two if He only wanted one; there is no waste with God. He says, Take up the first fish and you will find a piece of money -- the Lord knew, He put it there -- "take that for thee and me". @Matthew 17: 27. You are set free; if you have the resources of God you do not need to be under
{385}
any tribute. One fish was caught and there was one piece of money.
The more spiritual we are the more content we are to do without things here; we have them to administer according to God's bounty. Peter had nothing to put in the bank, he has just one piece, which is what was needed. The son is free, there is no longer a claim on him, he has discharged his obligations by sucking from the abundance of the sea. We have the resources of God so as to set us free; God would have us free from every claim so as to enjoy sonship.
Coming now to the company in @Luke 24, they had something, they gave Him a piece of broiled fish. The company are in the light of appropriation of the resources of God. We need to know what it is to draw upon the resources, to be independent of this world. All divine resources are in Christ. How refreshing to the Lord to come to any company and find that the saints in that company have come to rely on the resources of God, to give place to the Spirit; they have something to denote the resources of God.
The systems around us are dependent on human resources, memberships, societies, etc., to keep them going. Here the Lord comes and asks what they have, and He takes it at their hand and eats. The honeycomb refers to mutual feeling and affection. In the systems around us there is no such thing as mutual feelings; that would be quite incompatible with the clerical principle. But the Lord set the saints up with brotherly confidence, feeling, and affection and He says, What have you got? Suppose He went to the great religious organisations around us and said, What have you got? what would they have to offer the Lord?
Every one of His saints is valuable, He has come to enjoy what they had. They gave Him two things -- first, what represents the resources of the Spirit;
{386}
and, secondly, brotherly confidence, the honeycomb, which is the work of more than one bee. I believe the Lord is teaching us what the honeycomb is; the Lord loves to see that among us. I do not love what I do not respect. As I respect the brethren I begin to see beauty in them. In seeing this I respect, I admire, and I love, and in that way a mutual state of things prevails and there is that which speaks to the Lord's own heart. He had taught them how to be together, "One is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren". @Matthew 23:8. Now they bring forth evidence of what they had learnt.
I desire to press on you the importance of divine resources as known among the people of God, the sense of sufficiency in the Spirit.
{387}
READINGS ON 1 PETER
@1 PETER 1
This epistle was suggested with the thought that the government of God might be before us, and that we might see how the truth of the gospel is interwoven with that government. We all are the subjects of the government of God, and we are suffering under it. First, on account of Adam's sin, as having part in the race, for we necessarily suffer the external consequences of his sin; then, secondly, as being among the nations we also suffer. National divisions are governmental. They were intended to be restrictive rather than liberative. These restrictions, which are governmental, have become greatly accentuated in modern times, especially during the last few years, and are felt to be burdensome in a peculiar way. Then, lastly, as forming part of the assembly, as a public body, on account of the declension and sin of it; although we may be morally clear of its departure in having separated ourselves from iniquity, and calling upon the Lord out of a pure heart, yet we cannot escape the governmental consequences of its sin. In this threefold way we have to say to the government of God, or rather, it has to say to us. There are, of course, other features, for God's government has a special application to each of us. It is therefore of all importance that we should learn how the liberative truth of the gospel, and of the assembly, too, in its vital relations, is to be enjoyed in these circumstances. What suggests itself in this epistle is confirmatory of these remarks, for the saints are addressed as "the sojourners of the dispersion". @1 Peter 1:1. It would mean that they were suffering under the government of God. They were not in Palestine or Jerusalem, but in the provinces of Asia Minor, which were not the territory promised to Abraham at all,
{388}
They were dispersed, as subjects of the government of God.
These "sojourners of the dispersion" were Jews; their national calling had reference to Canaan, but they were *dispersed*. God had acted in His righteous government, and although they were believers in Christ and had the Spirit, they were nevertheless suffering under the government of God in regard to Israel's guilt.
The murder of Christ, and the refusal of the gospel, would enter into it as a final thing, but the dispersion really dated back many years. It was of the government of God and the prayer of Solomon had contemplated and provided for it. (See @1 Kings 8.) But in spite of all that, the gospel was there, the election, the new birth, and the possession of the Spirit -- all these things were there.
You would hardly look at these Jews in the light of unfaithfulness. They were suffering with all the Jews, as we are suffering today with all men outwardly, in regard to the sin of Adam. We are also suffering with the nations on account of the tower of Babel, and because of the failure of the church; but this epistle would show how we are to enjoy spiritual privileges nevertheless.
When Adam sinned the cherubim were placed to guard the way to the tree of life. They were a testimony to the fact that man had departed from God, and had forfeited all right to the tree of life; but God found a way of coming into human circumstances consistent with his own honour, notwithstanding the sin that was there.
It was according to God's ordering that some Jews from these provinces would be assembled in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost, so that when the Holy Spirit came, and Peter was called upon to bear witness to the glorified Man in heaven, and to the Holy Spirit upon earth, there were those from the
{389}
dispersion who would hear that testimony. The coming in of the Spirit brought into evidence the greatness of what had been effected, that the governmental consequences of man's sin were overcome, God rising above them. There are many other instances. For example, when our Lord was about to be born, the whole machinery of the Roman Empire was set in motion so that Joseph and Mary should be in Bethlehem when the time of the Lord's birth had come. And so when the Holy Spirit came, there were those that were necessary to bear witness to the triumph of God through Christ; and they said, "We hear them speaking in our own tongues". @Acts 2: 11.
The position in which Peter was when he wrote this letter would have some bearing; he wrote it from Babylon. There was some good thing there now. In Jeremiah's time the Jews were sent to Babylon on account of their state, and because there was no remedy. Jeremiah was told to buy a girdle, put it upon his loins, but dip it *not* in water; @Jeremiah 13: 1 - 11. This girdle was a testimony to the fact that God had originally drawn His people near to Him in love for them. Jeremiah was to take this girdle to the Euphrates, and hide it by the river in a rock to call attention to the fact that although God had brought His people near to Him, they were now very far away from Him and "good for nothing". Later, Jeremiah by the word of Jehovah goes there again and digs up the girdle; it is good for nothing now. This epistle written from Babylon, evidences that now there is some good in it, but it is *dipped in water*. Peter enlarges on baptism. There is the acceptance of the judgment of God on man's flesh and there is now in Babylon what is good for something. God has begun over again on the principle of death and resurrection "begotten us again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from among the dead". @1 Peter 1: 3.
{390}
The reference to the girdle is very striking. The elect in Babylon, as dipped in water, would show a sympathetic interest in what their co-elect brethren were suffering in Asia Minor. There was a great triumph of the grace of God in those of the dispersion. The apostle says, "She that is elected with you in Babylon salutes you". @1 Peter 5: 13. It is the work of God in both instances among the dispersed Jews.
The characteristics of the whole letter savour of suffering. It goes right through from beginning to end; the sufferings of Christ, and those who were identified with Him; but there were joys, too, as begotten to a living hope, which was in Christ, whom not having seen they loved. They had joy unspeakable and were filled with the glory. Peter was perhaps best qualified to write such an epistle, since he had witnessed the sufferings of Christ, and was told by the Lord the manner of his own death, that he should follow Jesus to martyrdom.
Peter's history delineates the government of God, as Job's did. Paul's history delineates the whole longsuffering of God for all that should afterwards believe. Peter's is the delineation of the government of God, and how it eventuates in what is of God. His two epistles pursue that government to its final end, having good in view. We get many references to Peter's personal history, showing the ways of God in discipline. If we look at it in Matthew, we shall see that he was taken up largely in view of the government of God because the Lord said to him, "I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens", @Matthew 16: 19. That would be a most important ministry, to have those keys in order that he should open the door of the kingdom. The keys would denote the administration of it subordinately, as showing the necessity for the vessel himself being subjective to the extraordinary discipline of God, which was actually the case.
{391}
The government of God is represented, as we have already remarked, in the cherubims in the garden of Eden. It is seen again in Noah. We cannot say much as to the cherubims or how they functioned in detail, it is simply the fact that they were there to guard "the way of the tree of life", @Genesis 3: 24, but when you come to Noah you have a man wielding the sword of government magisterially. Later, in Israel, you have a throne; and it is said definitely that Solomon sat on the throne of Jehovah. The government of God was in the hands of a man fitted to wield it, especially as endued with wisdom. He is a type of Christ. In Matthew we have Jesus Christ, son of David, son of Abraham. The government is on His shoulder. Matthew's gospel sets out the government of God. It is His rights in government; when the kingdom is referred to there it is generally "the kingdom of the heavens". The kingdom as found in the other gospels refers more to the presence of God here in Christ or in the Spirit. @Romans 13 says there is no authority except from God.
When you pursue the history in Genesis, Noah, as we know, failed in the government, and subsequently you get Nimrod. He began to be mighty on the earth; he was a mighty hunter before the Lord, that is, he turned his power into subordination of God's creatures for his own pleasure. These creatures were called living souls earlier; @Genesis 1. The logical outcome of Nimrod's example would be slavery. As we proceed in the history we find a world-war, four kings against five, evidently brought about by their lust. But God had His king in the presence of all that; He had a man who comes out mysteriously when Abraham was returning from the slaughter of the kings, Melchizedek by name. He brought out bread and wine to him. There you have the kingdom, the government of God in its benign and blessed character; and we have to understand
{392}
and know it in that way. It deals retributively with the evil, but it meets the good and supports it; Abraham was supported with bread and wine. (See @Genesis 14.) In 1 Peter it is in favour of the saints; in the second epistle it is against the wicked.
As a climax of what we have been speaking, evil was personified in Pharaoh, and therefore God brings in Israel. Another king had arisen who knew not Joseph, and government was grossly abused in the destruction of the male children; but Moses sees one of his brethren wronged by an Egyptian, and slays the Egyptian. He clearly evinces kingly instincts and power in that way. And then he would set his brethren right, but the brother who was in the wrong said to him, "Who made thee ruler and judge over us? dost thou intend to kill me as thou killedst the Egyptian?" (@Exodus 2: 14). There was no readiness to accept one capable of judging and dealing with their enemies. Going away in fear he remains away in Midian forty years, but returns as the deliverer of Israel; and @Exodus 19 is the logical result of all this, for "he was king in Jeshurun [that is, among the upright people], when the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were gathered together", @Deuteronomy 33: 5. The rule of the kingdom is now accepted as a testimony; completely so, in that he is acknowledged king by the *upright* people.
In @Exodus 24 it is indicated that the people accepted the government referred to; then the blood of sprinkling is put upon them as confirming it. Moses says, "Behold the blood of the covenant that Jehovah has made with you concerning all these words", @Exodus 24:8. This epistle is the direct allusion to the position of Israel in the wilderness. We are elected and sanctified unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ then "begotten again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from among the dead". @1 Peter 1: 3. The epistle is to encourage
{393}
the saints of the dispersion, as suffering in relation to the government of God, so that they might do so according to God. First, there is the sanctification of the Spirit to the obedience of Christ and the sprinkling of His blood; God would have among the dispersed Jews correspondence with Christ. He has left us a model, that we should follow in His steps. Entrance into the position, and the profit derived from the teaching, implies that you begin with the acceptance of the governmental conditions; then there is obedience -- it is greatly emphasised. You cannot alter these conditions, *but you can be altered in them*. Obedience is the great test.
We cannot escape the suffering from the consequences of Adam's sin, and along with all men we are suffering because of national discriminations, and we are suffering, too, because of the sin of the assembly. It is a wholesome thing to accept it. We cannot get out of Christendom, it would be apostasy to do so; and yet Christendom itself is essentially apostate, and cannot but bring suffering upon us. The Lord Himself entered into similar conditions and suffered in them; we have to learn how obedient He was in those conditions; it is "the obedience ... of Jesus Christ". @1 Peter 1: 2. In verse 11 reference is made to the sufferings of Christ, not only for us, but as entering into these governmental sorrows there are the sufferings and "the glories after these". Our hopes are bound up with those glories, as were those of the dispersion. In that way there is a reversal of what is said in @Hosea 1. Israel were Lo-ammi, "not my people"; but now, in the acceptance of Christ, there is for every one of them a status of "sons of the living God". When Solomon built the temple, he made two large cherubims for the holiest; and the walls were carved about with sculptures of cherubims, palm trees, and half-opened flowers; @1 Kings 6. The order of things which he established involved
{394}
the government of God worked out in the production of life; and it does that as it is accepted. These things suggested life, and are the governmental result.
Now the Jews of the dispersion were in untoward circumstances outwardly as among the Gentiles, but Hosea brings out what happened in their experience. The book unfolds the working out of divine love towards them, which became effective in them, so at the end of it Ephraim says, "What have I to do any more with idols?" @Hosea 14: 8. Then it says, "I will observe him" @Hosea 14: 8; God is taking account of him, because he voluntarily gives up idols. Then Ephraim says, "I am like a green fir tree", @Hosea 14: 8, meaning that he would stand against all weathers. Fir is evergreen; it stands the tests of adverse winds and retains its vitality. It is very suggestive of life. Then God says to him, "From me is thy fruit found". @Hosea 14: 8. Solomon's regime had that great end in view. Connected with the government of God, under David his father, Solomon brought about living conditions. Every right-minded person values the government of God, because it is against evil but fosters and promotes good. The reigns of these two men brought to pass typically what Christ will effect actually, namely, conditions of life; the cherubims and the half-open flowers are a testimony to the result of government. Of Ephraim God says, "I will tear and go away; I will carry off". @Hosea 5:14. The next passage begins: "Come and let us return unto Jehovah: for he hath torn, and he will heal us". @Hosea 6:1. Then, "After two days will he revive us; on the third day he will raise us up, and we shall *live before his face*", @Hosea 5 and 6. The suggestion of the figure at the end of Hosea is, that the fir tree grows under most adverse conditions, suggestive of the government of God. Then God says, "From me is thy *fruit* found" @Hosea 14: 8; it is more than fir cones!
{395}
When the Lord was here, the Edomite was on the throne and the conditions of life were not there, but rather those of destruction. The Lord brought in life under God, as under those governmental conditions, connected with the sin of Israel; and we are sanctified "unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ". @1 Peter 1:2. There we have the standard in the way He moved in those governmental circumstances. He developed life in them. John in his gospel tells us that "in him was life". @John 1: 4. "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us", @John 1: 14, but the life was there; chapter 1.
Peter got his foundation for writing such a letter as this in the revelation of the Father to him: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God", @Matthew 16:16. It is a *living* hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from among the dead. It makes a Christian unconquerable. No circumstances can overwhelm him. God has come into the circumstances. He found a way of coming into them in Christ; and He has begotten us again to a living hope. The Lord has marked out by His obedience the path in which, if we follow, we shall find the government of God favourable on our behalf. The great point is that we must be changed. It is not now something good for nothing, but good for something. We are begotten again to a living hope, to an incorruptible and undefiled and unfading inheritance. We are brought out for that. This living hope would take both them and us into a region beyond national restrictions, for in chapter 2 we are said to have come to the living Stone, and as living stones are built up a spiritual house.
The sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ is in contrast to the sprinkling of the blood in @Exodus 24. The whole universe is to be reconciled by the death of Christ. In @Exodus 24 all the people were sprinkled with blood, thus bringing into view the pleasure of
{396}
God in a reconciled people. The sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ opens up such a vast line of thought.
At one time Peter would have set aside the suffering, but now he accepts it and enjoins the saints to do the same.
@1 PETER 1: 3 - 25
It was remarked at our last reading that the people of God, as under His government, necessarily suffer from the result of Adam's sin; for certain governmental consequences have come down to us which we cannot ignore; also the building of Babel, and the consequent division of the nations, we suffer from that too; and then the failure of the assembly, as a public body, has entailed suffering that we cannot avoid.
This epistle contemplates those addressed as "of the dispersion", @1 Peter 1:1, which was also governmental; they were outside of their own land and city. They were in circumstances not primarily intended, which were the result of the sin of the Jewish nation; and although converted and now God's people, nevertheless they were suffering under the government of God. This epistle shows how that whilst sufferings are indeed the consequences of sin in these various forms, yet the government of God was in their favour, as in ours.
These "sojourners of the dispersion" were not suffering on account of assembly failure as we are today, yet they suffered in a threefold way as we do. They suffered from the failure of the nation of Israel; we suffer from the sin of the assembly as a public body. This book teaches us that in all these things the government of God is in our favour; things are modified and turned into good for us.
This chapter would divert us from earth. There is
{397}
thus an outlet from the consequences of sin into the heavenly portion. In @Genesis 1 it is said that God created the heavens and the earth. But when dealing with the chaotic conditions later, it does not say that the heavens were "without form and void" @Genesis 1: 2; it was the *earth* that was so described. The heavens here are viewed as a place in which the saints have their inheritance reserved. It is beyond the reach of the consequences of sin "reserved in the *heavens* for you". @1 Peter 1: 4.
The gospel was preached unto these dispersed ones "by the Holy Spirit, sent from heaven". @1 Peter 1: 12. It is well to notice the distinctive place that heaven has. From the outset, as in @Genesis 1, it is regarded as a place where things are reserved. There is another heaven spoken of in that chapter, which is brought into being in connection with the earth, called "the expanse" @Genesis 1: 6 (New Trans.). God called it heavens; it was above the waters. There are several heavens, but the heaven that God primarily created seems to have remained as it was; it is that place into which Jesus has gone. In the gospel of Matthew, which is the gospel that treats of the government of God, the word is generally used in the plural; for all the heavens are involved in the government of God. In @Psalm 115:16 it says, "The heavens are the heavens of Jehovah, but the earth hath he given to the children of men", as indicating the sphere where heaven's rule is exercised. The Spirit of God speaks about three heavens in @2 Corinthians 12. In @Ephesians 4 we get the word 'all'; Jesus has ascended up above all the heavens.
The tabernacle contained three spheres. The innermost would correspond to the third heaven. As contemplated here, heaven is a sphere in which things are reserved. The earthly inheritance was lost, but this one is reserved in the heavens and so could not be lost. So in @Acts 3:21 it says, "Whom heaven
{398}
indeed must receive", that is, Christ is there, beyond the reach of things here, until the times of the restoring of all things. Heaven is to be regarded in that light.
The principle of government must be in heaven, for the angels are subject. Matthew emphasises the fact that the heavens rule, which modern democratic principles disregard. Here the inheritance is in the heavens; it is therefore beyond the reach of the corrupting influences of this world.
These believing Jews were suffering as the consequence of the position of the Jewish nation governmentally. We require spiritual understanding to see how this epistle applies to us; the principles it contains are general in their application. We are not suffering as Jews from the result of the sin of the Jewish nation, but as connected with our assembly position, for the professing thing has failed, as Israel failed, so that we are in a corresponding position. But we have an outlet from that, as this epistle teaches us, a portion in heaven beyond the reach of evil.
The salvation ready to be revealed is what comes in at the coming of the Lord to reign. Our position is pretty much like that of these Jewish Christians; the assembly having publicly failed, our only hope is in what will come out at the return of the Lord. So that the Philadelphian phase is the result of the other phases of the assembly. From Thyatira onward, the coming of the Lord was the great event looked for. There is no thought of setting up anything here after Thyatira. What is to take the place of the assembly as having failed is the Lord Himself coming in, and these Jewish Christians are to know that they have an inheritance in heaven, and are kept guarded by the power of God for salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. They would be looking, therefore, for the coming of the Lord, but were kept guarded in the meantime by the power of God.
{399}
Verse 3 begins: "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" @1 Peter 1: 3; not the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, as in the Old Testament. They were transferred from Jewish ground to Christian ground. There is a correspondence with the second book of Psalms. The remnant are viewed there as outside Jerusalem; hence the expression "As the hart panteth after the water-brooks", etc., and "Why art thou cast down, my soul?" etc. (@Psalm 42:1, 5.) That kind of exercise runs on to @Psalm 45, when the Messiah is brought in; then it is: "My heart is welling forth with a good matter", @Psalm 45: 1 etc., and the sequence is great as seen in this psalm "Instead of thy fathers shall be thy sons; princes shalt thou make them in all the earth". @Psalm 45: 16. In 1 Peter God is known as Father, and the saints have an inheritance in heaven, as the earthly hopes are deferred. They are kept guarded by the power of God through faith. The thought of the inheritance is not developed. The point is rather *where* it is reserved. Ephesians tells us we are blessed with all spiritual blessings in the heavenlies; we are seated there.
We may see historically in the Acts how the gospel came to these believers; no doubt through Paul and Barnabas. They visited these districts, went into the synagogues and preached the gospel to them, so that a basis was laid for Peter's epistle; hence the force of verse 12, "those who have declared to you the glad tidings by the Holy Spirit, sent from heaven". @1 Peter 1: 12. The bondman of @Luke 14 was sent into the "ways and fences"; Paul and Barnabas fulfilled that passage in respect of the provinces named in our chapter. Peter in Babylon, amongst those of the dispersion there, doubtless found a sympathetic interest among them. "She that is elected with you in Babylon salutes you", @1 Peter 5: 13 would be the suggestion of an assembly link between the east and the west. In that way the ministry of Peter was linking up the fragments
{400}
of the Jews who had believed in assembly relations as outside of Jerusalem. This would greatly strengthen Paul's work, which covered a still wider sphere.
"According as our beloved brother Paul has written to you" @2 Peter 3: 15: the two ministries run together and support each other, all tending to lift the saints outside the range of earthly things, and show how the government of God, although apparently against them, was really for them. The Book of Revelation shows that; in Thyatira the overcomer is encouraged with the place he is to have in the kingdom, and so in the three addresses after Thyatira there is encouragement to look for the coming of the Lord. Then chapter 4 opens up with John being taken up into heaven, which no doubt synchronises with our own place there, and the way we come into it. And then a throne is seen standing in the heaven, from which everything is adjusted. The outlet is into heaven, and the adjustment is from heaven, not through any elements on earth. The assembly knows that Christ has the means of adjustment. He is the Root and Offspring of David, so that the Revelation rightly understood enables the Christian to be restful as to everything. Finally, the city comes down from God out of heaven. We are already receiving the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls. The salvation that is to be revealed includes the body, that is salvation in its fullest sense; but soul salvation is already received. Soul salvation is in contrast to temporal deliverances of the Jew. We come into it in the light of Christ in heaven and the Holy Spirit on earth. All that remains is for the Spirit to complete the work of salvation in regard to the body, we are already "filled with the glory" or glorified; and it is thus we are in the assembly in restful enjoyment of soul salvation.
The Book of Ezekiel deals with this subject. The prophet is outside of Jerusalem among the captives
{401}
by the river Chebar, in Chaldea, and in the visions of God he sees the means whereby God carries on His government outside of Jerusalem, and that it is in favour of God's people. Whilst Jerusalem itself was the immediate object of government, its sphere was much wider. But the book goes on to show (@Ezekiel 36) that God would sprinkle clean water on the house of Israel and give them a new heart. We have here (@1 Peter 1: 23) that we are born again of incorruptible seed, by the living and abiding word of God. That is what really underlies the great subject we are dealing with. Ezekiel treats of the government of God administered through a Man. Everything is under the control of the Man in heaven, and that is really what you get in this epistle. Jesus has gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being subjected to Him; everything now is in our favour because it is under the control and direction of the Lord Jesus. Great prominence is given to heaven here. The Holy Spirit has come down from heaven, and brings its resources here. What we are enjoying spiritually now has thus come down. The prophets had spoken about it, but what was revealed to them was not for themselves; they ministered it unto us, and what they ministered is all embodied in the gospel, which has been announced by those who preach it by the Spirit come down from heaven.
In @Isaiah 6:3 one seraph called to another and said, "Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah of hosts". That is the seraphic character; but then His train filled the temple. In our chapter holiness is insisted on "But as he who has called you is holy, be ye also holy in all your conversation because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy". @1 Peter 1: 15,16. God would have us pay attention to holiness. The seraph secures in the midst of all these things what is due to God in holiness. So that one of the seraphs flew to the man of unclean lips with a live coal from off the altar, making it
{402}
touch his mouth. Isaiah is thus brought into accord with the holiness of God and is made suitable for the service of God. Righteousness deals with sin authoritatively and removes it but holiness *shrinks from it*. You recoil from sin in holiness. The principle of holiness is brought into the soul by the Holy Spirit indwelling us.
The girding up of the loins of the mind is most essential if we are to be in holiness, because we all know how easily our minds are caught by things that come under our notice -- public occurrences, and what is announced in the newspapers, for example. We are very susceptible of being drawn away by these things. Our affections must be girded, and so are preserved from what defiles. Girding up is a well-known figure. The mind easily wanders unless on one's guard; girding it means that you are not attracted or detained by what defiles, you turn away from it, as having something else. You are "sober and hope with perfect stedfastness in the grace which will be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ". @1 Peter 1: 13.
The world is largely kept going today by what is represented under two headings: "The man that speaketh froward things" and "the strange woman ... which flattereth with her words", @Proverbs 2: 12, 16. The *man* provides material for the mind, but the *woman* provides the places of amusement. The world is largely kept going by what is found under these two heads, and the young are enjoined to avoid both. This epistle would help us, because if you gird up the loins of your mind, you do not listen to either the man or the woman. You are sober and look forward to what the Lord Jesus will bring in when manifested.
"Pass your time of sojourn in fear" @1 Peter 1: 17; it is a holy fear, similar to what is found in the Proverbs: "the fear of the Lord". In the holiest -- the presence of
{403}
God -- you are without fear, for perfect love casts out fear, but outside in the sphere of His government it is right to fear God. You need to have the fear of God before your eyes. You know what you are liable to do, and are fearful of this; it is wholesome fear.
We invoke God as Father. It does not go as far as to imply that the Father, as Father, judges; they invoked Him by the name of Father, but the One they invoked as Father is the One who judges, that is God. The God that the Jews would invoke is Jehovah. The Judge of all is the One that we invoke as Father; it is the same Person, but it is God that judges. The privilege is an incentive to holiness and fear, seeing that our whole course will come under the scrutiny of God, for we must not take advantage of the precious family relation to disregard His rights as God.
We have a thought here that is very suggestive and encouraging: God has raised Christ from the dead and given Him glory, that our faith and hope may be in God. The great fact of the resurrection and glorification of Christ induces faith and hope in God; for He has taken the One become Man, the Head of every man, and given Him glory. This should inspire every man with faith and hope; God is presented to us strikingly as having come in for us in raising Christ from the dead. God is to have man now in the One who has come in on man's side and died; God has intervened in Him, and has raised and glorified Him. If God has done that, then I may have the most implicit confidence in Him by faith and hope.
These scattered ones had a sphere to which they could resort, and the corresponding position in ourselves makes it so interesting, because our outlet is on the same lines. We have an outlet from governmental conditions as having a *place in heaven*. We
{404}
know the Father and are in the enjoyment of the Spirit, and what He has brought down, being of a new generation. Our relations are family ones, but in the sense of what the word of God produces, "the living and abiding word of God". @1 Peter 1: 23. We are quickened by that which expresses the mind of God, and are loving one another out of a pure heart fervently, so that if two or three of those Jews had met the brethren in Antioch, for instance, they would have been talking about the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, not the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. In other words, you have Christianity in the essence of it and not Judaism. "Being born again" implies that these believers were formed intelligently. It is not the initial idea of the things as in @John 3, but "by the living and abiding *word* of God". @1 Peter 1: 23.
"This is the word which in the glad tidings is preached to you" @1 Peter 1: 25; the gospel they heard gave character to them. In @John 3: 6 it is, "That which is born of the flesh is flesh", but here we are told what flesh is; it is as grass, and hence the necessity of new birth. The Jew would set forth that the flesh has glory. Saul of Tarsus would be an example of the full development of flesh; no one would represent the flesh more definitely than he. He gives an account of himself as after the flesh when converted and as having the Spirit.
@1 PETER 2
It is interesting to note that Peter's ministry, as he proceeds to unfold it, corresponds with Paul's ministry. This chapter is intended to enable the Jewish brethren of the dispersion to live spiritually independent of Jerusalem. They were themselves being built up a "spiritual house", which would answer to the development of the truth of the house in Paul's ministry. The Spirit of God moved in these two
{405}
great apostles to establish the truth of the house of God in order to make the saints spiritually independent of Jerusalem, a place which had been hitherto recognised in a material way. The bearing of this passage was to help the Jewish brethren of the dispersion, so as to detach them from Jerusalem and to attach them to the assemblies of God established under Paul; for there is no obvious difference between the spiritual house here and the house that Paul speaks about in his epistles -- in 1 Timothy and Ephesians. There is, however, a distinction between Judaism and what was established at Jerusalem by the twelve apostles; James carried on the latter line of things, apparently up to the destruction of the city. The epistle of James contemplates an order of things in Jerusalem that recognised the Jews as they were, and the synagogue.
It is very suggestive that the truth of the house of God was developed away from Jerusalem by Paul himself, and by Peter here. In 1 Thessalonians, which is elemental, we see how the believers in Thessalonica made the assemblies in Judaea their model, in that they imitated them. Paul evidently laid down that principle amongst them and they pursued that line, that is, of recognising the assemblies of God in Judaea. It does not say they made the assembly of God at Jerusalem their model; it is the assemblies in Judaea, those formed outside of Jerusalem.
The corner stone as laid in Zion is brought in to establish these Jewish believers in their position. Christ was received, and "To you therefore who believe is the preciousness". @1 Peter 2: 7. What the prophet Isaiah primarily referred to is, of course, the system that will be established at Jerusalem by-and-by, but the apostle applies the truth to those of the dispersion who believed now -- they came in for the good of it, they were on the foundation. Christ was
{406}
presented to them in the gospel as the foundation of everything and they believed on Him. The corner stone is also referred to in @Ephesians 2. There are two thoughts: in @1 Peter 2: 6 it is, "Behold, I lay in Zion a corner stone, elect, precious"; in @1 Peter 2: 7, "The stone which the builders cast away as worthless, this is become head of the corner". The first has reference to the foundation, and the second to the binding stone on the top, which is ornamental, and completes the structure. "To whom coming a living stone" @1 Peter 2: 4 contemplates Christ as that upon which everything rests, and the head of the corner is the finish, the top stone, which also refers to the Lord Himself "To whom coming" contemplates life. The earlier verses contemplate salvation -- growing up to salvation by the pure mental milk of the word, having tasted that the Lord is good. But when He is viewed as the living Stone to whom we come, after that we read, "yourselves also as living stones", @1 Peter 2: 5, that is, we are viewed as living. This would have peculiar force as applied to persons accustomed to stationary conditions at Jerusalem, for life does not suggest anything stationary, but rather movement, so that it conforms with the mind of God. There is a certain elasticity in life which conforms to the One to whom we have come, the living Stone.
There is something very beautiful about life in its identification with everything else that is living. It is that which is capable of being affected by influence. Christianity is always connected with movement; in the Scriptures written to Jews, the thought of life is emphasised because of their having been brought up in what was fixed and material. The "living stone" is the Son of the *living* God, hence the building is all living; Christ is the foundation, the saints are the superstructure, and the Lord is its crown. The whole structure must be *Christ*; first, personally, and then as formed in the saints.
{407}
But before we get the priesthood we must first have the spiritual house; as living stones we have come to the living Stone. We are in the good of the kingdom, having tasted that the Lord is good; our wills are broken down, and we have grown up to salvation. The earlier verses show formation, and the next thing is to be in the movement of life in relation to the living Stone. We grow up to salvation as in the kingdom, and that prepares us for the assembly. The assembly is essential for the kingdom, viewed as a system; just as in David and Solomon's day the house was an essential part of their regime.
In Matthew, the power of the kingdom comes into view on the mount (chapter 17). The house is not in view there, it is the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. The vision accorded was to establish those three pillars, Peter, James and John, in the sense of the majesty and glory of Christ; it is when they come down from the mount that they are given to understand they are "stones" with Him -- His companions; that is the basis of chapter 18, in which you have the working out of the principles of the kingdom as we are in it today. The Lord had said to Peter, "Give it to them for me and thee", @Matthew 17: 27. That was the new position into which they were brought; then chapter 18 opens with the disciples inquiring who is greatest -- meaning that they had not understood the great teaching of chapter 17, which brought them into association with the Lord as "stones". If we know we are "stones", we are not thinking of what we are to be in the kingdom. It is a question of the will of God, not of our dignity. In @Proverbs 25:6 it says: "Put not thyself forward in the presence of the king, and stand not in the place of the great". That is the principle of @Matthew 18, your dignity is already established in the fact that you are a son; so you take a low place, that it may be said, "Come up higher".
{408}
David's sons were chief rulers, but they were sons first. Our dignity as sons goes into eternity. We become as "little children" by taking the lowest place possible, and from that point we grow up. One who has grown up to salvation is a stone squared for the structure. In @Matthew 18 we are told how to begin as a little child, and we are reminded that we have a representative at court. "Their angels in the heavens continually behold the face of my Father who is in the heavens". @Matthew 18: 10. That makes us restful. We are represented in heaven, and may boldly say, "I will not be afraid: what will man do unto me?" @Hebrews 13: 6. We are not then concerned about the attitude of people towards us. The passage goes on to warn us against being a stumbling-block to one of these little ones.
The next case supposed is that of your brother trespassing against you. Being in the kingdom, the chapter shows all the resources that are there. If a brother trespass against you, go to him *alone*. @Proverbs 25: 8, 9, corresponds with that; it says, "Go not forth hastily to strive, lest thou know not what to do in the end thereof, when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame. Debate thy cause with thy neighbour, but reveal not the secret of another; lest he that heareth it disgrace thee, and thine evil report turn not away". The divine way is to go to the brother and if he do not hear you, then take with you one or two besides; and if he refuse to hear the one or two, then tell it to the assembly. The assembly is there to support us in carrying out the principles of the kingdom. Peter in his epistle sought to instruct the sojourners of the dispersion that Jerusalem had been superseded altogether; he shows them that Jerusalem was being set aside and that they are the spiritual house.
@1 Peter 2 suggests a release for the saints from the governmental conditions referred to in chapter 1.
{409}
They were responsible to recognise the government of God in its threefold application to them, but in the house of God there was an outlet into a spiritual order of things. In coming to the "living stone" the thought of life is emphasised. What they are brought into would more than compensate them for what was given up in connection with Jerusalem; they were a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, a chosen race, a kingly priesthood, a holy nation, and a people for a possession; they were all this now in a spiritual way. "To whom coming" was illustrated in Peter himself as invited by the Lord to come to Him on the water. The spiritual sacrifices here are in contrast to the material sacrifices at Jerusalem; they are what we offer to God -- sacrifices of praise. How great a conception it was that these poor dispersed Jews should be set up in this wonderful way. It would be quite a revelation to these saints that they were privileged to offer sacrifices. They had been accustomed to the intermediary of the priest; now *they* were to offer -- they were priests. Nothing is allowed to lapse in Christianity. All that God instituted under the old regime is still found here but in a greater and in a spiritual way.
The man in @John 9 is illustrative of what we find here. The Lord finds him and says to him, "Thou, dost thou believe on the Son of God?" @John 9: 35. John's ministry helps us to understand what is *spiritual*; he begins with new birth. Peter does not say, 'born of the Spirit', but "of the living and abiding word of God". @1 Peter 1: 23. John says "of the Spirit", and what is born of the Spirit is spirit; we must all begin there. John begins at the bottom, and @John 3 is the foundation spiritually. Chapter 1 is movement. In @John 4: 24 we have "God is a Spirit"; this would divert the believer from what is material; Jerusalem is set aside. In chapter 5 there is the great principle of life, the Father and the Son quickening; in chapter 6
{410}
Peter says, "Thou hast words of life eternal". @John 6: 68. John takes account of the least bit of spirituality and looks at things abstractly. A man like Nicodemus would not be called a spiritual brother in our day, but John takes account of the little that was there.
We have in verses 4 - 10 of our chapter what liberates the soul; they tell what the saints are brought into: A kingly priesthood, a holy nation, a people for a possession. They are set up spiritually in Jesus Christ, and then the apostle says, "I exhort you, as strangers and sojourners, to abstain from fleshly lusts", etc. @1 Peter 2:11. They were strangers from the Jewish point of view, but I think Peter uses the term as indicating their calling as heavenly, and their position on the earth as one of strangers and sojourners. They were to "abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul; having your conversation honest among the Gentiles", etc. @1 Peter 2: 11,12. The passage looks on to the time when, in the government of God, the Gentiles would be visited, and God would point to this witness that these people had their conversation honest among them, and God would thus be glorified. The teaching actually extends to ourselves, because as a heavenly people we are viewed as strangers and sojourners on earth likewise. Our conversation is to be *honest* among the Gentiles. A poet has said, 'An honest man is the noblest work of God'. There is a good deal of truth in it; the Jews generally are not marked by that feature among the Gentiles. The force of the passage is all the more evident when you take into account the kind of people that they were, and are known to be, among the Gentiles. The point of honesty here is emphasised because the dispersed Jews among the Gentiles were not naturally marked by it, but where the grace of God is operative, it brings about the opposite of what we are naturally.
In using the affectionate term, "Beloved" @1 Peter 2:11, Peter was coming to what was needed; he had in
{411}
mind that they should be honest -- freed from the natural proclivities which had marked them heretofore. By nature we are all dishonest, but they are particularly so. A stranger is one that belongs to another country; they were not now simply Jews; the teaching brings out that they were a heavenly people, on earth, passing through as temporary residents, like Abraham and others who "confessed they were strangers and sojourners on the earth", @Hebrews 11:13.
Fleshly lusts war against the soul. In @Galatians 5:17 it says, "the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh". The warfare here is against the soul, the soul being regarded as the theatre of God's operations. What God is effecting in our souls is damaged by the fleshly lusts. It may he indulgence in something we feel is lawful enough, but if persisted in, we are hindered by it, and lose the character of being strangers and sojourners.
Verse 13 brings out their relation to the authorities -- the powers that be. Peter gives you the character of the institutions to which we are to be subject -- to the king as supreme or to rulers as sent by him. This adjusts us in regard to the governments that we have to do with on earth. These institutions remain governmentally, but we are enabled to do God's will in relation to them. "Because so is the will of God, that by well-doing ye put to silence the ignorance of senseless men". @1 Peter 2:15.
This chapter, in the first part, shows the outlet from what is governmental; and as in the enjoyment of the outlet, you know how to behave yourself in the circumstances in which you are set, in relation to the king and every human institution, for the Lord's sake. At the end of the chapter we get the Lord set before us as a model in our circumstances here; He sets us the example of how to behave ourselves, following in His steps.
{412}
Referring again to verse 4, "to whom coming"; Peter walking on the water would be an illustration of the thing. Peter began to sink when his attention was diverted from Christ to the water. There are many who start but they do not advance; they break down. The test is real; many have had light yet remain in their religious associations. It is when we start out for the Lord we meet with opposition. But the Lord does not give us up because we begin to sink; if we cry out to Him He will support us, for we never get beyond the reach of His hand. A sinking man who has gone out of the boat is better than one who remains in the boat and does not sink. Had Peter been solely occupied with the Lord he would not have sunk. It is as having gone outside the boat that we experience what the Lord's power is. The Lord is intensely interested in every one coming to Him. It is an immense joy to Him when one responds to His word, "Come".
"To you therefore who believe is the preciousness" @1 Peter 2:7; He is precious to God, and we are in His preciousness before God.
"A chosen race" @1 Peter 2: 9; that statement should be noted; it is not often you find it in scripture. The Jews as a race naturally are well known. But a chosen race has reference to them as having faith, like Zacchaeus, for instance -- a man that would give half of his goods to the poor; the Lord says of him, "he also is a son of Abraham" @Luke 19:9.
In the last paragraph we are looked at as under the authorities and what the Lord was as our Model is emphasised.
@1 PETER 3
In the unfolding of the subject of the government of God it is to be expected that the great question of subjection should be introduced, subjection by all
{413}
saints to every human institution for the Lord's sake, and then servants subject with all fear to their masters, and here, the wives. The government of God necessarily contemplates this principle. Then there are certain moral results in each case, so that, as our chapter shows, an unconverted husband may be won by the pure conversation of the wife. The apostle stops short of the children, possibly because those addressed were scarcely in the light of Christ and the assembly; children morally are to be affected by this relationship.
The subjection of children is taken up in Colossians, Ephesians and in 1 Timothy, but you do not find that subject treated of in Romans or Corinthians. A man's family is set in the light of God revealed as Father. A father of a house should reflect what God is. The children, Moses insisted, must go with them out of Egypt; it was a question of *household's*; so today, Christian parents are responsible to take their children out of the world, but the bringing of them up is in the light of the position in the land, so you get instruction as to them in Colossians, and particularly in Ephesians. Family relationships in nature belong to the wilderness, but they are influenced from above. When Paul was leaving Tyre (@Acts 21), the saints accompanied him out of the city with their wives and children (evidently the households in that assembly were in the light of Ephesians); the children were not only out of the world, but were in sympathy with the testimony, as represented by Paul. We are responsible to take our children out of Egypt, and to influence them spiritually in the wilderness. The apostle Paul quite expected the children to hear the letters to Colossians and Ephesians read. Isaac when a youth knew about the burnt offering; @Genesis 22. It is a cheer to see the children of the saints acquainted with what takes place in the house of God.
{414}
This epistle recognises the external position of believers in regard to the governments of the world; if we are employed by masters, we are to be subject to them. Then as married, the principle of subjection is to be there in the wife; the spirit of meekness and quietness being there would affect the household, so that the children would also be subject by the example set before them. Peter, however, does not go on to speak about the children, but rather to call attention to the results of subjection in the wife that the husband may be saved. It contemplates an incongruous state of things, but does not give countenance to what we speak of as "mixed marriages". Here it would be that the wife was converted in these circumstances. You do not get such a thought as this in Ephesians or Colossians, although it might appear in the government of God. A Christian wife may have an unbelieving husband, but Christianity is such that instead of having to put him away, or (as in @Ezra 10) the Christian husband having to put his wife away, the one or the other may be won. It shows the superiority of Christianity to anything that previously existed.
The Jewish believers were dispersed throughout the Roman Empire, and instead of evincing a rebellious spirit against the Romans, they were to be subject to the king as supreme and to his rulers in the provinces. That would be a testimony for God, as it says, "because so is the will of God, that by well-doing ye put to silence the ignorance of senseless men". @1 Peter 2:15. The best way to learn the government of God is to be subject. Adam lost the moral right to rule when he became insubject. We qualify for future rule by subjection now. Sarah sets forth subjection, as it says, "calling him lord". @1 Peter 3:6. The women of the East had plenty of jewellery, for they were accustomed to wear it, but that was not her adornment; as we read, "whose adorning let it not be that outward one
{415}
of tressing of hair [we may add now, not of cutting it off!], and wearing of gold, or putting on apparel; but the hidden man of the heart, in the incorruptible ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price". @1 Peter 3:3,4.
The thought of ornament is very interesting throughout the Scriptures, and therefore should be of great interest among the people of God. It is remarkable that it should be especially connected with a wife. In Titus it is connected with a slave; he is to adorn the teaching by his conduct; @Titus 2:10. If we took account of God's creation, we should be struck with the principle of ornamentation that pervades it, whether in the heavens or on the earth. It is a most important point that God will have ornamentation, and since it is a propensity with women to adorn themselves, God here lays down what true adornment is. Viewed naturally, it is something added to one; but the incorruptible ornament of a meek and quiet spirit is the outcome of the "*hidden man* of the heart", @1 Peter 3:4, which is Christ.
The woman was placed in subjection at the outset, but the principle of subjection came in especially after the fall; Adam was to rule over Eve, inasmuch as she took the lead in departure from God. @Genesis 4 would allow that she was slow in learning the lesson, because she took the lead in naming the children. Subjection is not natural to fallen man, and is found only in those born of God. The Holy Spirit is given to those that *obey* Christ; @Acts 5: 32.
This scripture shows Sarah hoping in God, whilst Abraham was marked by faith. It came out especially in connection with the birth of Isaac; hope would be the expectation of a fulfilment of promise. Both holiness and hope marked Sarah. This ornamentation that God indicates is so near to hand that it ought to have a voice to us: "the incorruptible ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God
{416}
is of great price". @1 Peter 3:4. Sarah, we may say, saw Christ in Isaac; he was the hidden man of her heart. A meek and quiet spirit is brought about in the apprehension of Christ, the secret of which is "the hidden man of the heart". @1 Peter 3:4. If you have subjection of heart, it works out in your conduct and spirit, so that the evidence of the "hidden man of the heart" is the incorruptible ornament of a meek and quiet spirit. This "hidden man of the heart" should be noted; it is opened up by taking account of the different holy women of the Old Testament that are emphasised. Sarah had a promise, and so Isaac was cherished. Rebecca would have a thought of the promise, as the result of the prayer of her husband (@Genesis 25: 21), and so all down the line. Take Hannah, she had an exercise and asked for a child. These women illustrate the idea of what is hidden, a cherished thought. Now it is no longer in type, the Man has come in; the gospel presents Christ objectively. Paul says to the jailer, "Believe on the Lord Jesus". @Acts 16: 31. The title "Christ" may he omitted. (See New Trans.) He believed on the *Man* up there. He is presented objectively and the subjective answer is that you have that Man in the conception of your soul. Where this is present, Christ is rightly apprehended as presented in the gospels, especially in Luke.
Referring to Luke: Elizabeth had a promise; she had a husband, but what her heart cherished was a *son*. There is the thought of hiding too with Elizabeth, the thing of value is hidden. Mary herself has unfolded to her the facts regarding the child Jesus who was to be born. Luke takes up all this. Joseph and Mary later bring the child into the temple to be presented to the Lord. He was in Mary's heart, so that she kept the things spoken about Him in her heart. There are several instances in which she betrays considerable ignorance and negligence, nevertheless, she kept the things spoken in her heart,
{417}
and would see the child grow in favour with God and men: all this should have a loud voice to us as to what we have in our hearts. There is an interesting passage in @Proverbs 22. It says, "Incline thine ear and hear the words of the wise, and apply thy heart unto my knowledge. For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee". It is not what we have in our bookcases or in our memories, but what is kept "*within thee*". Then it adds, "They shall be together fitted on thy lips", @Proverbs 22:17, 18. What you have thus within you, as heard with the inclined ear, comes out effectually in your ministry.
In verse 8 we come to the final word which the apostle had specially on his heart: "Finally, be all of one mind, sympathising, full of brotherly love, tender hearted, humble minded; not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing; but on the contrary, blessing others, because ye have been called to this, that ye should inherit blessing". @1 Peter 3: 8,9. You have in several of the epistles such an expression as, "for the rest". The thought is that the writer had reserved something he wished specially to lay upon the saints as a parting word. How constantly we are exhorted in Scripture to be of one mind amongst ourselves, it is not agreeing to differ; one mind is brought about as we are in subjection to Christ. It amounts to this, we have the Lord's mind instead of our own. The great thing is subjection, which makes room for the Spirit. Then the mind which was in Christ Jesus is in us; @Philippians 2.
The great secret of unity lies in subjection to the Lord and to one another in His fear, so that you consider for your brethren and seek to be with them in your spirit. Many of us come to the meetings with a definite line as to what we are going to do, but that is not the idea of one mind. If in subjection to Christ and to one another, we should wait on our brethren. One might be in the meeting with an exercise, but another may have "a revelation"
{418}
(@1 Corinthians 14:30), and this makes room for freshness. When the Lord came to Abraham and ate of his provision under the tree, the calf was "tender and good", @Genesis 18:7, and the cakes were freshly baked, *everything was fresh*.
Possibly we regard ourselves too much in our natural family settings, to the shutting out of brotherly love, for after all, our relationship as brethren is greater than any natural relationship. If we valued our spiritual relationships more, the natural ones would take character from them and be expressive of God. Barnabas took account of natural relations unduly and was turned aside by them.
The thought of suffering for well doing is next brought in. There is no need for a Christian to suffer at all for sin; Christ has *once* suffered for that, that He might bring us to God. This leads the apostle to speak about the Lord's activities, backward as well as forward: "in which also *going* he preached to the spirits which are in prison". @1 Peter 3:19. The Spirit in which Christ was raised extends back to Noah in actual preaching, so that we have not only the government of God, but the servants of God linked up from patriarchal times right up to our own times. The Spirit in which Noah preached was the same Spirit as seen in Paul's preaching. Peter looks at the Lord *going* in patriarchal times and preaching; and Paul looks at Him *coming* to preach to Jews and Gentiles; @Ephesians 2: 17. The great principle of salvation announced in Noah's time is available now. It is remarkable how the testimony of God in the gospel is thus linked up as covering all dispensations. The preaching is presented as by the Spirit and it is to the *spirits* of men. The door is left open by God through which He addresses Himself to man, namely, to his *spirit*; "Man's spirit is the lamp of Jehovah" @Proverbs 20: 27; He turns on the light in that way, and so Noah's preaching was of that character.
We have the full position here: Christ in heaven
{419}
endued with all power, and baptism, the outward sign of His death; we are saved through it. Here it is more as an instrument, the water being instrumental to our salvation. Just as in Noah's case, those in the ark left a corrupt earth and reached a cleansed earth, so we are figuratively cleansed from the pollutions of this world through the death of Christ, which death is the *death-knell* of this world.
If Noah when in the ark could have looked abroad upon the deluge, the more he was with God, the more he would say Amen to it. Baptism is our only escape from the polluted world which figure saves us, and is made real to us in that Christ has gone into heaven, hence there is power to support us, as we accept the escape from the world through the death of Christ.
@1 PETER 4
This chapter is the continuation of chapter 3; the connection is particularly with verse 18: "For Christ indeed has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God". @1 Peter 3: 18. The government of God necessarily overtakes us if we sin. It says in the previous verse, "For it is better, if the will of God should will it, to suffer as well-doers than as evildoers". @1 Peter 3: 17. So that there is no need for any one else to suffer for sins. This chapter deals with suffering, as to its bearing on us: "Christ, then, having suffered for us in the flesh, do ye also arm yourselves with the same mind". @1 Peter 4: 1. The bearing of the teaching has in view the government of God, as already before us, and the fact that Christ's sufferings come in on that line makes them intensely interesting; also that in suffering He was actuated by the Spirit in which He had preached of old from Noah's time; so that the government of God and the grace of God are thus seen running side by side. It is not contemplated
{420}
that we can fulfil the will of God and evade suffering; it could not be possible since He, who came to be the perfect Fulfiller of the will of God, experienced suffering all the way through. So that pursuing the will of God brings us into suffering from *men*, but pursuing our own will brings us into suffering from *God*.
There is a point of difference between the foregoing and @Romans 12: 1: "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the compassion of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service". To pursue the will of God on that line, we prove that it is good and acceptable and perfect. Peter insists that we must suffer. It comes out more strongly here than in Romans. We cannot escape suffering, whether we do God's will or our own. In doing the latter, we come under the government of God. In doing the former, we suffer from men. Suffering has a very prominent place in the first epistle of Peter, in contrast to the second, for the reason that the government of God, generally speaking, is in the favour of the believer as viewed there. It moves on, as we say, inexorably, but it is in the believer's favour and not as yet pronouncedly against the world; but in the second epistle, it is formally against the world, so that it is pursued there to its full and final end, in the subjection of the elements, and the clearance of the universe from sin; but what you find in this letter is, it ever has the favour of the saints in view. Nevertheless, even in them the exercise of their will brings about just judgment; we must suffer for sins if we commit them, for we always reap what we sow.
Verse 1 involves self-denial, it is suffering in the flesh as having done with sin. It is in the abstract and refers to the sufferings of the Lord Jesus, for that is where sin is done with; but then we are identified with it in our chapter. The thing is done with in His
{421}
sufferings, and we come into it abstractly. Not, of course, the atoning sufferings, they were undergone by Christ personally, but the application is to us: "No longer to live the rest of his time in the flesh to men's lusts, but to God's will". @1 Peter 4:2. You work it out from the death of Christ; it has taken effect in Him, so that suffering in the flesh is therefore final.
This suffering in the flesh is absolutely true of Christ; it is taken up abstractly in our chapter, but being in the abstract it is perfect; so that any one of us could take it up. It may be that we have had to deal with the thing in our souls and have suffered in dealing with it, but the great dealing with it is in the death of Christ. Our suffering in the flesh is worked out through baptism, but there is no suffering in baptism. Some one has suffered in the flesh. You take that up as a matter of light to start with, but the more you do so, the more you realise the suffering it involves. We are to be armed with the same mind that was in Christ in suffering. The thing is all one piece, and results in living "to God's will".
@Psalm 22 presents the suffering. It should have a great effect upon us as we read and ponder it. In doing so the light comes into our souls, and we arm ourselves with the same mind and say, I have done with sin. The opening chapters of Romans work it out doctrinally; chapter 12 of that epistle brings in the mind, on the basis of the mercy shown in the sacrifice of Christ, and you present your bodies as acceptable to God. "Arm yourselves with the same mind" @1 Peter 4:1 means the mind would be closed to all the flesh presents. In the atoning sufferings of Christ as presented in the Psalms and other scriptures, you get His very expressions when in the suffering; this gives the idea of His mind. It is an objective idea, which you take on as light, and face the whole question of sin as in the world with that armour; the result is
{422}
you definitely take up a line of negation to it. Here it is logically worked out in the believer from the mind of Christ in His sufferings. The point is He suffered *in the flesh*. It was a real Man that suffered, so that you get a real Man's experiences in the suffering and take on that mind.
In @Romans 12 it is *your own* mind, here it is the mind of the suffering One, He suffered in the flesh and you take that up. The expression, "arm yourselves", is a military one; you are on the defensive as having seen the end of sin in the sufferings of Christ and have done with it. The thing is all worked out and settled by Him, so that no investigations are necessary. Take the Book of Ecclesiastes; it is the working out of things by one who tested all "under the sun" by the Spirit; the man that cometh after the king could do only the same, So we in like manner take this up without investigation. As soon as sin came in, God's first movements in regard to recovery were based on the fact that it could only be on the ground of sacrifice and suffering.
In the first sufferer, Abel, you have this principle set forth. We are not told what mind Abel had in the actual suffering, but when we come to Joseph we have a definite word as to his "anguish of soul", @Genesis 42: 21. This mind was expanded in other men of faith right up to Christ, where the perfection of it is seen. It is a settled thing now for us, so that no further investigation is necessary. The detail of the suffering would be seen in one like Paul: "Always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may he manifested in our body", @2 Corinthians 4: 10. There it is worked out in a man's whole life. In verse 13 we are looked at as sharing in the sufferings of Christ, which is another thought entirely. But suffering for sins is atoning, and we are in relation to that. We are not, for the moment, occupied with what He suffered from *man*, but what He suffered
{423}
vicariously, and from God. He dealt with sin in His flesh, so that one begins one's Christian career armed with that mind, and that armour is never given up. It is worked out in bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus, and is to characterise your whole life but you begin with this, that you are connected with Him, the sin He suffered for, as if you suffered yourself.
The believer's whole course on earth is in relation to the government of God, but the sufferings of Christ have taken him out of its range as a punitive government, whereas the unbeliever is still exposed to punishment. If there is departure from righteousness the believer, as under the government of God, comes in for discipline, for judgment must begin even from the house. Judgment affects us in the way of discipline; hence the grace of God is so wonderfully interwoven with His government, and the believer understands this. Affection for Christ, no doubt, enters into this arming, for Christ is presented to the soul as an object in the gospel, and we naturally shrink from suffering; but the point is, you are in the presence of sin, and this part of the passage enables us to take up a right attitude in regard of it, so that you are quite clear as to what to do. Ninety percent of Christians do not know how to deal with sin; they have not armed themselves with this mind.
The Lord, in @1 Peter 3: 18, 19, is said to have been "made alive in the Spirit, in which also going he preached to the spirits which are in prison"; that is, to those that were disobedient in the days of Noah. @1 Peter 4: 6 refers to that again, in view of the government of God having a clear field; on the one hand, if they refused the gospel preached to them, they would "be judged, as regards men, after the flesh"; but, if they accepted the gospel, "live, as regards God, after the Spirit". Wherever the gospel was accepted, as, for instance, in Abraham's case,
{424}
they lived. As the Lord says, "God is not God of the dead, but of the *living*" @Matthew 22: 32, referring to the patriarchs; whereas others, such as the inhabitants of the antediluvian world, and the Sodomites, were "judged, as regards man, after the flesh". @1 Peter 4: 6.
The gospel underlies everything. These passages in chapters 3 and 4 show that the gospel extends backward as well as forward, and clears the whole field for the government of God. God's mind for man was that he should get the benefit of the death of Christ. No one can raise a finger against God's government, for He preached the gospel in Noah's day, as verse 6 shows, to the end that those who heard might live. Christ Himself is the Preacher He preached in Old Testament times and is preaching at the present time. The gospel will be the basis of judgment for all, inasmuch as men will be judged according to their works, the crowning feature of which will be the rejection of the testimony rendered by Christ. @Romans 2 shows that the heathen were responsible to hear the voice of God in creation.
But there is more than one preacher; creation itself is one great testimony, which is prominent from the outset; then you have Noah's preaching and it says that the gospel was preached to Abraham; @Galatians 3: 8. In that instance it was preached to one man. Then you have Solomon, Jonah, and Nebuchadnezzar, who were preachers, so that God saw to it that the testimony was carried through. Peter speaks of the Spirit of Christ that was in the prophets of Old Testament times; and so in regard to the creation the sun, which is the one mighty centre of light, rule, and life, speaks of Christ. It is an interesting fact that the sun is not said to have been created by itself, like other things; it was set in the heavens by God as a witness of Christ. It was "made" on the fourth day (@Genesis 1:16), and so was adapted to control the new order of things in which man was
{425}
placed. Throughout the Old Testament you have constant reference to it as a witness, particularly in @Psalm 19, where you have a spiritual man contemplating it; he says that God has set in the heavens "a tent for the sun; and he is as a bridegroom going forth from his chamber; he rejoiceth as a strong man to run the race", @Psalm 19: 4, 5. There is no doubt that the heavens are intended by God to be a general testimony of Christ to man, to the end that man should live and not die; but if he refused the testimony, the government of God had a clear field.
In Matthew's account of the transfiguration he states that the Lord's face shone as the sun. Matthew takes up the government of God, and Luke the grace of God. One must hold these two gospels together in one's soul. Matthew's gospel would divert the disciples from Jerusalem to Galilee, whilst Luke's gospel would have them first preach there. Matthew's gospel begins with "wise men from the east" @Matthew 2: 1; their wisdom lay in the fact that they could read the heavens. The ordinary astronomer reads them like the face of a watch. These wise men read the heavens from a moral point of view; they said they had seen "his star". No mere astronomer ever saw the star of Jesus! It takes a spiritual person to see that. A star will direct a mariner to the sun; so the wise men from the east arrived at the true Sun by following His star; for they found Him, not in the manger, but in the house.
The testimony of the heavens as set forth in the Old Testament culminates in the house where Jesus was found by the wise men; but now they have the Sun, as chapter 17 says, "His face shone as the sun" @Matthew 17: 2. Matthew presents the royal side, Luke the side of humility; so that it is in the manger the shepherds found Him, whereas the wise men found Him in the house. Matthew presents the house, it is more dignified; and the wise men recognise that He is
{426}
King of the Jews, the Man who is to rule, and bring their gifts in suitability. They did not trace Him in the "fourteen generations" of chapter 1; that was for those who had the Scriptures. It is how any disciple entering into the kingdom of the heavens would follow and find Him. The wise men did not possess the Scriptures; but they had the heavens, and followed the testimony that God gave them. A star would have been entirely out of place in Jerusalem because the chief priests and scribes had the Scriptures; they could tell where Christ was to be born, but had no desire to find Him. The star did not help the wise men in Jerusalem at all. They missed their way, the heavens pointed to Christ, not to Jerusalem. God says to Job, "Knowest thou the ordinances of the heavens?" @Job 38: 33. These wise men did, and discovered the star of the King, and followed it. It is an answer to all the questions that are raised as to the heathen, and men of Old Testament times. So Balaam spoke of a Star, referring to Christ, and the Day Star is said to arise in our hearts, so that the principle continues. In Matthew, the Child is seen *in the house*, with His mother, and worshipped. It is the key to that gospel, but the great end reached is in chapter 26, where the woman anoints His head in the house, as if to say, This is the Man to govern me.
When God resumes His ways with Israel, the Lord will be seen as the "Sun of righteousness". The "everlasting gospel" of @Revelation 14: 6 seems to have reference to God's creatorial rights, since the Gentile had the testimony of the heavens and creation, whereas the "glad tidings" suggest Christ, backward or forward.
All this converges upon our personal position as in the assembly. Judgment is to begin at the house of God, and what is referred to as the house is composed of real Christians. The glory of God is in His house,
{427}
just as in Ezekiel, save that in @Ezekiel 9: 3 it was "gone up from the cherub, whereupon it was, to the threshold of the house". The judgment began at the elders who were before the house, representing the responsible element of the people. The glory, that is, the Spirit, could hardly continue with us, any more than with Israel, were it not that the government of God applies; God rescues and preserves us through His governmental dealings. We are experiencing this in the world today; the government of God becomes a help in God's disciplinary dealings with us, so that the glory of God remains with us. Ananias and Sapphira would illustrate judgment beginning at the house; so in @1 Corinthians 11, where many among them were weak and infirm, and a good many had fallen asleep. Also in @Revelation 3: 19, where the Lord says, "I rebuke and discipline as many as I love".
There is a beautiful instance of self-judgment in the book of Ezra. When Ezra discovers the unseparated state of things, and makes his prayer and confession to God, then come the men of responsibility and unbosom themselves, and say, "We have acted unfaithfully toward our God". (See @Ezra 9 and 10.) The house is brought in here simply to show that judgment begins there. The believer's position in the house is in relation to privilege as considered in chapter 2; that is, the Jews of the dispersion had part in the house although outside of Jerusalem. Here it is more the responsible side; those who form the house come under the discipline of God.
@1 PETER 5
It is significant that the elders are addressed at the beginning of our chapter; for it is well when there are such among us. We have instruction here as to how they are to serve the saints. In this opening
{428}
passage the Spirit of God addresses the saints as classified "the elders", and "ye younger". It is not young men here as in John's first epistle, but those who are young relatively as compared with the elders. The word "elder" here has application to time in the history of the saints, because it would hardly mean those officially designated as elders, but those characteristically such.
Peter himself was scarcely an elder in the sense that elders were appointed for cities; he was an apostle, and therefore not officially occupied in ruling a local company; so that he was an elder, and they were elders, by experience characteristically. Peter would have more weight in addressing them as "their fellow-elder and witness of the sufferings of the Christ". @1 Peter 5: 1. He addresses them more on moral grounds than with apostolic authority; he is an elder with them, having had long experience in the ways of God, and being a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and so was qualified to speak a word to them. He speaks of himself as "their *fellow*-elder", which would bring him to the level of the elders and give more force to his words. Peter was one of the brotherhood, not separated from his brethren by official position. In the wisdom and ways of the Lord, at the outset of any movement, those who came in with it were permitted to remain (like a Moses or a Joshua), so as to foster and nurture the saints, that they might reap the benefit of their experience.
The sufferings of Christ, of which Peter was witness, would connect him with the beginning. His experience went back that far; there were few amongst the saints when he wrote who could speak thus. He does not enlarge on what is personal to himself as Paul does, nor does the Spirit of God single him out as a model generally for the saints but he certainly had advantages that even Paul did not have, one of which was, he witnessed the sufferings
{429}
of Christ. He was a witness of the love that led the Lord to give His life for the sheep, and in a way nothing would infuse shepherdly care more than that.
Peter had received at His hands a commission: "feed my lambs ... Shepherd my sheep ... Feed my sheep", @John 21:15 - 17. It was given in the light of his own martyrdom, and is a word which every young Christian should remember and take to heart, because we are so disposed to be governed by our own wills, even in the things of God. The Lord in giving the charge to Peter, remarks on that too; He says, "When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst where thou desiredst; but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and bring thee where thou dost not desire", @John 21: 18. That is, Peter through experience, as an old man, would resign himself; he would come to the point of the sufferings of Christ, which involves complete resignation, which the will of God requires. He says in the end of chapter 4, "Let them who suffer according to the will of God commit their souls in well-doing to a faithful Creator". @1 Peter 4: 19. The will of God led Peter into martyrdom and he accepted it. The Lord had indicated that to him, and in that connection committed to him the charge of the flock, so that Peter qualified in that way. Now, as a fellow-elder, he is qualified to speak to the elders. It is a great thing when there is one who can thus speak. We all seem at liberty to speak to the young, which of course is a great service, but it takes considerably more power to express oneself to elders. Peter received the charge, not only of the lambs but also of the sheep, he was to shepherd them. There is a specific order in the Lord's commission -- "Feed my lambs ... Shepherd my sheep ... Feed my sheep". @John 21: 15 - 17. The lambs do not go astray by themselves; what they require is *food*. The sheep need *shepherding*; they are
{430}
prone to go astray; the feeding of them, therefore, is secondary to shepherding.
This should be a matter of exercise with us, because we are ready to see the wrong of the lambs in going astray, but what about the sheep? It is also implied that if the young do stray, we should seek, nourish and cherish them; for if the shepherding spirit was with the elders, it would act as a preventative to this tendency. There is, therefore, implied a responsibility for the older to look after the younger; a sense of blame attaches to them if the young are not held and preserved. The Lord says, "Shepherd my sheep". @John 21: 16. That would mean that the tendency of the sheep would be to stray away from those in the lead. When we stand up to address the saints, we are free to say a word to the young, but how many can say a word to the older ones? They need it, for they are not immune from the straying tendency.
Peter was evidently qualified to speak to the elders, because he was an elder; and more than that, his experience extended back to the witnessing of the sufferings of the Christ. So that the order in @John 21 is significant; if it is the lambs, they require feeding; if it is the sheep, they require shepherding. What young Christians need is food; they are held by the things you present to them, if they are to be held at all; they also need guardianship and influence. An old brother will listen; he is amenable to correction; shepherding is more in the way of speaking to him as to one who knows the truth, and you bring it to bear upon him. Timothy was not to rebuke "an elder sharply, but exhort him as a father", @1 Timothy 5: 1. He was to have due respect to the age of the brother and exhort him accordingly; but Peter here does not exhort them as a father, but as a fellow-elder, as one who had more experience than any of them.
Peter was not always wise in his judgment or
{431}
actions in connection with the service of the Lord. There is, however, encouragement for us in him, for we all have made mistakes, and yet if recovered, the Lord can use us as He used Peter, provided there is experience in the ways of God. Paul was a younger man than Peter; but when it became a question of "contending for the faith", as one may say, like Paul, we have to lay age aside, although you would never ignore an old brother. Some of us have had to do with brethren who are aged in crises, and it makes it very difficult where such oppose the truth.
But the apostle Paul evidently felt the incongruity of Peter's action and withstood him. (See @Galatians 2:11, etc.) When a matter like that occurs, the truth must take precedence of everything else. It is an immense thing to preserve *the truth* amongst us, but we must always seek to preserve *the brethren* with the truth. The apostle Paul saved the situation referred to in Galatians; and Peter was preserved as well. We see from Peter's second epistle the affection in which he regarded Paul, saying, "Our beloved brother Paul", @2 Peter 3:15. He well knew that Paul's attitude at that time was approved of the Lord.
Peter views the elders whom he addresses as among the flock, and the flock among the elders, which suggests an atmosphere for the mutual exchange of affections. The word "among" brings all on one level, in a sense. There was evidently a state of intimate relationships so that the elders were among the flock and the flock among the elders, and Peter places himself there, as a fellow-elder. It suggests a mutual state of things in which you can help the saints. One of the greatest assets at the present time is the mutual consideration and feeling that exists among the saints. You can serve them effectively under these circumstances. This is very much akin to Paul when he was taking his farewell at Miletus.
{432}
He sent for the elders of Ephesus, and addresses them in relation to the flock of God in much the same spirit; and points out what he had been among them. So that what is suggested here is the thought of being models of the flock, not as lording it over them; this would have more weight than assumed authority. Peter did not assume the place of chief bishop amongst them. We have no bishop sentiment here; he is simply a fellow-elder, and the elders are such characteristically, not officially. The light of this would preserve us from assuming an ecclesiastical position. There was no idea with Peter to arrogate to himself the chief place amongst them, although he had this position morally.
The idea of a pope is that he is the chief bishop; Peter was just a fellow-elder, who had taken character from the chief Shepherd, who was to appear. Peter would gather up at the cross what the heart of that Shepherd was. To the women who wailed and lamented him, He said: "Do not weep over me, but weep over yourselves and over your children" @Luke 23: 28; and then in almost the same breath, when on the cross, he said, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do", @Luke 23: 34. He also charged John to take care of His mother. All through He is thinking of others, not of Himself. These are the features that come out in the sufferings of Christ; it was the shepherd character of the Lord which Peter could see. So in Gethsemane: "If therefore ye seek me, let these go away", @John 18: 8. He thought of the disciples. It is worthy of note that the three apostles who were prominent in the testimony, Peter, Paul and John, each in their old age dropped the official title and appear simply as brothers of experience. John in Patmos says, "I John, your *brother* and fellow-partaker in the tribulation" @Revelation 1: 9, nothing official, but that which he had accumulated in experience. Paul says, "Being such
{433}
a one as Paul the aged" @Philemon 9; and John says, "The elder to the elect lady" @2 John 1; it all brings out the great value of experience as seen in eldership.
The apostle in speaking of participation in the glory is looking on to the end, to the manifestation. One idea common to eldership is suffering: "When the chief shepherd is manifested, ye shall receive the unfading crown of glory". @1 Peter 5:4. Glory crowns the suffering pathway of eldership; the idea is gathered up from the Lord's path in suffering, for the chief Shepherd necessarily gives the lead to all the shepherds who follow.
What we have been saying hardly covers all the aspects of eldership, for we are not dealing with a local function exactly. It is what would mark any aged brother; so that there is an aspect in which younger brothers, as having gift in relation to assembly functions and administration, may properly take precedence over those old in age. What Peter presents here is the appearing of the chief Shepherd; you are not looking for present gain or advantage, but what accrues at the end, in the perfect government of God. Carrying out the function of a shepherd would involve suffering and self-denial, but the unfading crown of glory is at the end. This is a timely word for those who are older amongst us; their normal occupation should be in looking after the younger, and the saints generally, and at the same time being models for the flock. This "exercising oversight, not by necessity", @1 Peter 5: 2 would mean not doing it as if you are paid for doing it; it is doing it readily, your heart being in it. "The flock of God" is not a local company, but what is general. Peter is dealing with the house of God, and love must be behind our activities, love going out to every one of the whole flock of God. Paul says, "There will come in amongst you after my departure grievous wolves, not sparing
{434}
the flock", @Acts 20: 29. The older one grows, the greater should be his interest in caring for the flock. Peter would lead to this; he addresses the saints of the dispersion, but there were certain among them classified as elders; and being an elder himself he could exhort them to shepherd the flock. It says in Proverbs, "The glory of young men is their strength; and the beauty of old men is the grey head", @Proverbs 20: 29. The corresponding beauty in the old men would be in caring for the flock of God.
It is an important principle in the ways of God that eldership is worked out in a parental way; God Himself is seen in the elders, or fathers: "The glory of children are their fathers" @Proverbs 17: 6; the fathers have brought in and expressed what God is in the parental care of His children, so that the elder brethren are their glory. This should be seen in the way in which the younger ones are influenced and take character from what they see in the elders. The divine thought is passed on from generation to generation, doubtless, in that way.
The thought of subjection being introduced here is noteworthy. The young man, Joshua, was Moses¬ attendant; Elisha, another young man, poured water upon the hands of Elijah; and in due time they fill responsible positions in the testimony. The young man Joshua was envious for Moses at the time when Jehovah took of the Spirit which was upon Moses and put it upon the seventy elders: "My lord Moses, forbid them!" he says. This shows the danger to which a young man is exposed; he is apt to be a partisan. Moses says to Joshua, "Enviest thou for my sake? would that all Jehovah's people were prophets, and that Jehovah would put his Spirit upon them!" @Numbers 11: 24 - 29. That was a desire worthy of an elder. Moses considered for the welfare of the saints only, whereas Joshua thought of Moses only, which is always partisan where a state
{435}
of that kind exists. Also earlier in their wilderness history, when coming down from the mount with Moses, Joshua says to him, "There is a shout of war in the camp". There again he exposes his ignorance and inexperience. Moses says, "It is not the sound of a shout of victory ... it is the noise of alternate singing", @Exodus 32:17,18. So that in these instances we see illustrated the danger attending the young man, and the importance of subjection on his part; because, after all, the elder brothers have more experience, and their judgment is more sound than that of the younger brothers. But later on, when Moses asked the Lord to "set a man over the assembly, who may go out before them, and who may come in before them", the Lord says to him, "Take Joshua the son of Nun, *a man* in whom is the Spirit", @Numbers 27:17, 18. He is no longer called a young man, for he has had forty years of experience with Moses, and with the people of God in the wilderness, and *has the Spirit*, so that he is fully qualified to lead. Now, these things are recorded for us, especially as young, because the young brethren are inclined to think that their judgment is accurate.
On the other hand, there is need that the elder brethren encourage and make room for the younger, so that they may not get discouraged; but here, it is not exactly a matter of gifts or ministry, it is taking the oversight, shepherding the flock of God.
Then it says, "Being models for the flock", @1 Peter 5:3 so that the young see the model in the elders and know what to do. Joshua learned from Moses, as Peter learned from the Lord. God's thought is set out in Christ; the apostles learned it, expressed it, and it is passed on. There should always be the passing on of the divine thought, from elder to younger; hence the importance of the elder ones being models, and the younger being subject to them, Of course, we are to have the Lord before us too, the gospels
{436}
present Christ to us; but in the elders you get the divine thought of a model. It was given at the outset, so that the thing presented in the elder brother is an immense help to us. "Let no man despise thy youth" @1 Timothy 4:12, was a necessary word in Timothy's case, because he had to do the work of an elder, although a young man he was, therefore, to make up for his youth by his conduct in a way becoming an elder.
This word as to humility is very important for old and young: "And *all of you* bind on humility towards one another". @1 Peter 5: 5. The Spirit of God always brings things down to a mutual relationship. Whilst the saints are classified as we see here, they are also brought in on mutual lines here it says, "all of you", all are to he marked by humility.
"The unfading crown of glory" @1 Peter 5: 4 is put before the shepherds for encouragement as an object of reward, and would be received at the appearing of the chief Shepherd, who knows to whom to give it. Evidently there must be correspondence between the shepherds and Himself in suffering endured in their care for the saints. The great Shepherd of @Hebrews 13 is more personal to Christ, as distinguishing Him in supremacy and skill. The chief Shepherd is more relative to under-shepherds.
There is not any difference really between lowliness and humility. Paul in addressing the Ephesian elders at Miletus said, that "with all lowliness" he had served the Lord among them; @Acts 20:19. Humility has to be *bound on*; it is not put on for an occasion; it is there to stay. We should move in and out among the saints as being one of them, and not in any sense above them. The Lord sets us the example, saying, "I am meek and lowly in heart", @Matthew 11: 29. Then in our business relations, we are not any different in them from what we are among the saints: we wear the thing always. With the
{437}
Lord, it was the result of what He was: "Having been found in figure as a man, humbled himself, becoming obedient even unto death" @Philippians 2: 8; in His case, humility was not bound on, it was there naturally, so to say. With us, since the flesh is in us, the thing has to be bound on. The Lord brought humility in (He did not learn it objectively), and has given a lead to us in it. It was in Him essentially, whereas we learn it objectively.
Very few of us have this qualification of humility, yet it becomes and dignifies us; for it corresponds with dignity, if you think of the Lord bringing it here; think of a quality being brought from heaven and set before our eyes! Seeing it in that way, it becomes enhanced to us. There is real moral dignity in humility, and God goes along with one who has it. Think of the company we get! We may admire humility, but the practical test is in our relation with one another; it is only as we are formed according to the perfect Example of it that it is really seen. So that when it comes to the setting out to be useful amongst one's brethren, one must not omit the sewing of the thing on his clothes; because it is not simply for a special occasion that you are humble, but it is there to *stay*. It is said of Mr. Darby that the young and poor were always at home in his company; it was evident that he had bound humility on.
With regard to our business, humility and authority can go perfectly together, for the more humble we are, the more authority we have. Oftentimes those in authority have to rebuke sharply, but God is with us, and recognises the relationship of the master and the servant. We are in the sphere of God's government where these things have to be recognised but then humility is there all the same, you never drop the binding of it on you.
"Having cast all your care upon him" @1 Peter 5: 7 is a word
{438}
that we expressly need. Who among the people of God has no cares? None. Possibly cares interfere more with the work of God in our souls than anything else in the sphere of divine government. On the one hand, you have "the mighty hand of God" @1 Peter 5: 6; it is futile to resist that; we are to humble ourselves under it. On the other hand, we are reminded that He cares for us. It is a most touching word, one that should appeal to us all, because there is not one of us but what has cares, and it is "the anxious care of this life" @Matthew 13: 22, as the Lord said, which chokes the word and hinders fruitfulness. We do not learn to cast our cares upon Him; it is the mighty God, the Creator, who cares for us. "Having cast all your care" @1 Peter 5: 7 suggests an energetic movement of soul; it denotes power to put every care upon God, the smallest as well as the greatest, for we cannot bear one of them ourselves; and our salvation lies in doing this. There is not an item in one's life that is not of interest to God; either in our business or family, or responsibility among the saints, so that there is every encouragement for us to prove that "He cares about you". @1 Peter 5: 7.
We are reminded in what follows of the solemn fact that Satan is very active: "Be vigilant, watch. Your adversary the devil as a roaring lion walks about seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist, stedfast in faith", etc. @1 Peter 5: 8,9. We are to be on our guard lest we should be found straggling. Satan is after the stragglers; our safety lies in watchfulness and in being found in relation to one another, so that no place is given to him. The question is, whether we are able to discern Satan's activities; he is our adversary, he roars, and he walks about to devour. We are not told to attack Satan, because we are viewed in Peter as in the wilderness, where our position is rather defensive; attacks are made in the land. Being in the wilderness our point is to get
{439}
through. The thing, therefore, is to discern Satan's movements against us and not be deceived. We rightly resist him as stedfast in faith, but this entails suffering. He is a roaring lion, the idea is his roar. He is in the form of a beast here, instead of "an angel of light", as in @2 Corinthians 11:14.
It is a comfort to know that we are linked up sympathetically in suffering with the saints of God all over the world; so that we are identified with the brotherhood. In verse 10 we have, "the God of all grace who has called you", etc. @1 Peter 5:10. It is like Paul's committal to God in @Acts 20. We are set up in grace, and God will do all this for us. Then in verse 12 to the end, we have a final word, bringing in Silvanus; it is a personal touch, he is called "the faithful brother". @1 Peter 5: 12. Then, "She that is elected with you in Babylon salutes you, and Marcus my son". @1 Peter 5: 13. He brings in those brothers and the assembly in Babylon. There is a difference between a faithful brother and a son. The former would be one in equality, whereas the latter was evidently in this instance Peter's son in the faith, over whom he exercised a parental influence. It is beautiful to see the sovereign work of God in Babylon linked up in affection with, and saluting, the Jewish Christians in Asia Minor.
{440}
INTELLIGENCE TO MARK THE ASSEMBLY
@Luke 24: 44 - 46; @1 Corinthians 14: 14 - 20
J.T. I have before me the thought of the intelligence that God intended should mark the assembly, as it is constituted here on earth at the present time. The idea of an assembly is that it is composed of intelligent persons.
Ques. We sang in our hymn, "Give us a child's simplicity". How does that fit in with your thought?
J.T. A little child is one who learns, and who is impressionable. Peter says, "As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word". @1 Peter 2: 2. There is no reproach in that, but there *is* a reproach in the word 'babes' in this epistle to the Corinthians; it implies saints had not gone on. @Luke 24 contemplates the public body; @John 20, which is the corresponding passage, contemplates what is within. The "disciples were again within", @John 20: 26 it says, but Luke has in view the public assembly, and hence the place that the Scriptures have. We might have read from Ephesians, which also enlarges on the thought of intelligence, but it would carry the subject beyond our time. Ephesians would show the divine thought that those who form the assembly should have the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of God, the eyes of their understanding being enlightened, and all in view of our being formed for heavenly places.
Ques. How is the intelligence you refer to obtained?
J.T. There are two things in @Luke 24, which have a bearing on the house. The first is the exposition the Lord gives on the Scriptures; then, secondly, He opened the understanding of the disciples that they might understand the Scriptures, and the way these scriptures treat of Himself. Corresponding with that in @1 Corinthians 2, referring to the Spirit, the
{441}
apostle says, "Even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God", @1 Corinthians 2:11 and further, "We have the mind of Christ" @1 Corinthians 2: 16; so that we are furnished from God with all that is requisite for spiritual understanding.
Ques. Would the manifestation between the two expositions in @Luke 24 have any bearing?
J.T. Yes, a very great bearing. It does not appear that the first exposition which the Lord gave altered the course of the two. There are those who enjoy expositions of Scripture, and their course is not altered, nor their associations changed, but the manifestation of the Lord to the two in Emmaus in the breaking of bread led to a movement toward the assembly. The Scriptures cannot be understood save by those in the light of the assembly. The manifestation had the effect of their returning to Jerusalem, and there they find the eleven and those with them. Then they relate what had taken place, and then the Lord came in and said, "It is I myself", @Luke 24: 39, and it is in the light of His appearing to them that we have the scriptures divided so as to become intelligible to us.
"That all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me". @Luke 24: 44. The law of Moses represents the authority of God -- His rights. One has to begin there, no one can arrive at an understanding of what is becoming in the assembly, save as he sees how the rights of God are fully maintained and expressed in Christ. "Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day". @Luke 24: 46. So the law of Moses read in the light of Christ risen represents the authority of God in our souls. Then the prophets impress us with the patience of God. One needs to know the patience of God if one is to reach the psalms, because, if we seek to answer to the rights of God, we soon
{442}
discover that we have to draw on His patience. One of the most interesting things found in Scripture is the patience of God. The psalms themselves testify to this feature, and as I said, if we do not know patience, we shall not reach the psalms. So that is how the Scriptures are to be read if we are to be spiritually intelligent they are to be read in the light of Christ risen.
Rem. The psalms are not mentioned in verse 27.
J.T. Well, they are included in "all the scriptures", but their omission is a mark of spiritual exactness. People who have their backs to Jerusalem have no psalms that God can take account of. They were going through an experience of dejection, and their faces were away from Jerusalem where divine interest was centred.
P.L. So you get in @Isaiah 66:13, "Ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem", there is no dejection there.
E.P. Do we make psalms of our own as the result of this intelligence?
J.T. The psalms are a wonderful storehouse. God greatly honours His saints in that He draws from that storehouse to build up the testimony to the greatness of Christ; @Hebrews 1.
A.G. The "things concerning himself". @Luke 24: 27. You apprehend Christ as set forth in Scripture.
J.T. Where can we get an apprehension of Christ risen, if we do not understand Scripture? How many things one could refer to in a moment to show how true that is.
A.N. What you have been saying will be seen in the remnant eventually. They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward. They have had proof of the patience of God, and are now moving on to the psalms, so to speak.
J.T. Yes, Hosea contemplates that they should return. "Come, and let us return unto the Lord", @Hosea 6: 1. Then verse 2, "Then shall we know, if
{443}
we follow on to know the Lord: his going forth is prepared as the morning; and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter and former rain unto the earth". @Hosea 6: 2. That is what comes within the range of one who is truly desirous of knowing. As light comes into the soul, you see what God has effected on the third day, and so you move on. You are not stationary; you follow on to know, and that brings out the movements of Christ. How many apprehend them? "His *going forth*", Hosea says. If we see Him moving, He is moving in relation to all the thoughts of God; every thought of God is to be fully expressed in the *day*, so His going forth is as the morning dawn. Spiritually you see every divine thought becoming verified in Christ, and the heart is full of hope. The fulfilment of all these thoughts is the end to which we are going. Colossians and Ephesians take account of Christ in that way in relation to the thoughts of God -- the mystery. This principle of following on to know is important. As knowing, and made to live before the face of God, there is power for movement, and you come to see His going forth is as the morning dawn. Wonderful things come into view, filling your heart with hope. "He shall come unto us as the rain". @Hosea 6:3. His coming unto us shows what an interest He has in us.
Ques. Are these movements assembly-wise?
J.T. Yes. You begin to see them as you follow on. The present dispensation is a dispensation of movement on His part, as well as on ours. The Lord's appearings after He rose suggest a dispensation of movement, so it contemplates freshness in the assembly. Hence it says He comes to us as the latter rain, shedding refreshment on us, but that is dependent on following on to know.
Rem. In the end of John's gospel you have, "Follow thou me". @John 21: 22. Does the thought of following run through the dispensation?
{444}
J.T. John's gospel gives *manifestations*; he gives three; Paul gives six "appearings", then Matthew, Mark, and Luke give a variety of additional appearings. John in the two first manifestations in chapter 20 has in view a weekly experience, they were on the first and the eighth day, the third manifestation is in chapter 21; we do not know on what day it occurred, as it is not a question of assembly experience as the two others were. It has reference to recovery, not of the whole body, but of leaders -- leading brothers who went astray. Luke has in view the recovery of the most insignificant persons who, we might consider, are of no note. But the public assembly requires *every* believer, the least as well as the greatest, so they have to be brought back. One, it says, named Cleopas; it is not like Peter, for instance, well known to every one. But it was worth while for the Lord to travel sixty furlongs to bring him back. It is well worthy of note that they set out the same hour. The Lord in His work of recovery would not overlook the humblest of the people of God when the public body is in view.
P.L. So "I have much people in this city". @Acts 18: 10.
J.T. Yes; all are to be sought out, but if they come back they are to be intelligent.
E.P. It says in verse 13 "that same day". Is there anything in the fact that all takes place then?
J.T. It shows the wonderful activity of grace. Things are all done at once; God does not put off. The seraphim *flew* in @Isaiah 6. Thomas was absent from the first meeting in @John 20, and he has to learn in the interim what he has missed.
J.M. As we take account of the Lord's movements we shall be exercised to get something fresh every time we come together.
J.T. Yes. He comes to us as rain. In relation to the thoughts of God we see Him going forth as the
{445}
morning. The "morning dawn" would include the effectuation of all the divine thoughts in Christ.
F.W. Spiritual intelligence largely depends on the apprehension of resurrection as in Hosea.
J.T. Yes; we are made to live before God in the resurrection of Christ on the third day. He is risen, and would set the disciples in movement in regard to spiritual intelligence, as there is much more beyond. You observe He is never seen sitting in these appearings, as the end is not reached.
Ques. Are all His activities in view of the assembly getting the gain?
J.T. Yes; the disciples come in, in the light of Christ risen. "It is I myself". @Luke 24: 39. He is now apprehended as risen, and they are to be set in movement here in the intelligence which should mark those who form the assembly publicly. The Scriptures provide a basis for what is authoritative, and the study of Scripture is in the light of Christ risen, and the understanding He gives has in view the setting up of a public body here representative of God. They know what to do, they know the position as it is. The Jewish remnant should have part in this, and the Scriptures are instrumental in severing them from the accredited religion of the world. Those led into the light would use the Scriptures with powerful effect in delivering the Jews from their then moorings. Take Genesis in the hands of a scribe instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, how effectively he would use that book (abounding, as it does, with types of the assembly) for the deliverance of the Jews from Judaism. The Gentile, too, would be reached. We are told that Jacob fled into "Syria, and Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep" @Hosea 12: 12. That would be understood, showing a Jew the divine thought, extending beyond themselves, and showing that the Gentiles were in the mind of God even in Genesis. They were to form part of the assembly.
{446}
P.L. The Syrophenician woman would come in in that way.
J.T. Quite so. Here in this chapter we want to see the place the Scriptures have in the constitution of the assembly. You know where you are. You have in the right understanding of the Scriptures an authoritative groundwork for all you do. This chapter shows how the assembly as a public body is to be instructed by the Lord directly. The assembly is God's and He has a right to speak there.
J.M. In the recovery of the truth there is the place *scripture* has and the place the *Lord* has; both have to be taken account of.
J.T. In 1 Corinthians the truth of the Lord's supper is introduced, and then the body, then love, and the exercise of gift. In ministry you have God speaking, particularly in prophetic ministry.
Rem. Peter refers to the writings of Paul in his epistle.
J.T. He recognises that Paul's letters were Scripture. Peter tends to unify the work of God by writing to the Jews of the dispersion who had been scattered, and he reminds them that Paul's letters were Scripture. But what I was thinking of was the assembly convened, which the first letter to the Corinthians contemplates, and how room is made for divine communications. My impression is that the tendency in assembly meetings is to overlook the divine right to speak. I believe the tendency is growing among saints, unconsciously, perhaps, to view the assembly meeting as the place where saints speak to God. Now, it *is* intended that saints should speak to God, but it is *never* intended that our speaking to God should shut out His speaking to us. If God speaks -- and He will speak -- there will be something that will greatly enhance what I may have to say to Him. Rain coming into my soul (referring to our scripture in Hosea) greatly invigorates
{447}
me and accentuates what I have got. I fear the tendency is to make no provision for God speaking; people come without their Bibles, and do so deliberately. They say it is not a time for the Bible, only for the hymn-book.
Ques. Do you refer to the morning meeting?
J.T. It is not so called. The assembly is the word used. In the early days they met in the evening apparently. The word is "in assembly". The breaking of bread is the term employed in @Acts 20. It is God's assembly, and there should be the full recognition of the rights of God; it is where He can speak. It is a denial of the rights of God in the assembly if we say we should not have a word on that occasion.
P.L. "He shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter and former rain unto the earth". @Hosea 6: 3.
J.T. The rain comes into the soul, and it enhances what may be there, and freshens and enlarges it; a word from God instructs you.
A.N. We may have a tendency to go from one extreme to another. There was a time when a word given in the assembly was corrective in character and had relation to the wilderness; now, it may be, no room is given for a word at all.
J.T. Of course there is to be no licence for the activity of our wills. We simply want to get the right principle that governs the assembly. The assembly is God's, and He speaks, and we should expect it and make room for it. In the end of each gospel what is emphasised is what the Lord says. The Lord is not here corporeally now, but He comes in in a spiritual way and if He speaks, He speaks through selected vessels. The assembly is furnished with these, and gift will be there, if desired, particularly prophecy.
E.L.M. How would you distinguish between what is prophetic and what is expository?
{448}
J.T. A prophetic word would bring God into the conscience of saints; He is identified with His word, as in @Hebrews 4. This does not at all interfere with the outflow of worship, it rather enhances it, if there be a worshipful condition.
F.G.W. Would the psalms help us in regard to the assembly on the line of intelligence?
J.T. Oh, yes; take @Psalm 45: 1: "I speak of the things which I have made touching the king". Someone has made something, he has got it fresh; what an asset that is!
M.O. Would a prophetic word connect you with Christ?
J.T. Yes, quite so; it brings God in, as in Christ.
P.S.P. A word spoken would not be of an individual character, but one expressive of the mind of God at the moment.
J.T. Yes; a word spoken in the grace of the Head. If we see it is God's assembly, we shall recognise that He will speak according to what is needed. It is a question of what may exist and He knows. Here He had to allay their fears. We may give out beautiful hymns and say nice things, but the Lord is concerned as to what lies behind. There might be a very low state, a very worldly state, and yet saints can give out hymns in a formal way. Generally speaking, if a word is given, one would look for something in the grace of the Head in the way of refreshment.
A.G. You spoke of God speaking through selected vessels.
J.T. Yes, He *does* select His vessels. It says in referring to the gifts, "God has set certain in the assembly" @1 Corinthians 12: 28 -- the ones fitted to speak, no doubt.
Ques. Suppose there were no gift, would one be precluded from giving a word on that account?
{449}
J.T. If you give the Lord His place, gifts are provided; that is part of the furnishing. If you leave it with God, He will select His vessels.
A.N. We have thought of ministry Godward in relation to the assembly, what you are now speaking of is ministry manward. Is there the ascending and descending, as when the thought of the house was first introduced? @Genesis 28:12.
J.T. That is good, that was the first thing in connection with the house. David dealt to every one of Israel a loaf of bread and a good piece of flesh and a flagon of wine; @1 Chronicles 16: 3. There is the thought of God's bounty; you go out richer than when you came in.
F.W. Is gift open to desire?
J.T. Yes; it is there to be had. The Lord has plenty to give if we make room for it. "Desire earnestly the greater gifts", @1 Corinthians 12: 31 the apostle says, and he adds in @1 Corinthians 14: 1, "but rather that ye may prophesy".
{450}
HEAVEN REFLECTED IN THE KINGDOM
@Matthew 17; @Matthew 18: 21,22
J.T. In reading these scriptures one's thought was that the Lord might help us to see the bearing of this chapter on our conduct in the kingdom of heaven. It will be observed that the Lord's face shone as the sun in this account of the transfiguration, and that would teach us how to reflect heaven in our relations with one another as in the kingdom of heaven. The sun in the physical system suggests supremacy in what is beneficial to man, whatever may be the conditions on earth. The sun rises and sets majestically, and it is only as we take account of this idea that we can shine in the kingdom of heaven and reflect the character of that kingdom. There are several features in the chapter that bear on chapter 18 in that respect. There is the Lord's face shining as the sun, then emphasis laid on faith after He comes down from the mount, then sonship -- sons are free. These features laid hold of by us, among others, of course, in the chapter, elevate us morally, and by that elevation we are content to be little here, of no account, like a little child; and then we shall not mislead or give offence, and we shall know how to deal with every one. The final touch as to that is in the Lord's answer to Peter as to forgiveness. He wanted to know how often he had to forgive, and the Lord's answer shows the character of forgiveness which should mark the kingdom of heaven That is the outline I had before me. One thing may be noted in regard of that; I think He uses Peter as a model for us for assembly education.
H.E.S. What is the difference between the kingdom of heaven and the kingdom of God?
J.T. The kingdom of heaven conveys what is in
{451}
heaven for good; the rule and influence of that on earth; it suggests the sphere of good. The heavenly bodies made and set on the fourth day of creation in the firmament are presented as provided of God beneficently -- the greater light to rule the day, the lesser light and stars to rule the night. The fourth day furnishes us with what is absolutely indispensable to us if there is to be any life on earth. I think Matthew connects us with that; in the Lord's face there is the reminder of it. And then Moses and Elias appearing makes it a scene which would impress the disciples as extremely significant. All this was intended to affect them as in the scene below. The kingdom of God refers more to what is connected with the Spirit here. (See @Matthew 12: 28.) When the Lord was here the kingdom of God was present; @Luke 17: 21.
Ques. Would Stephen be an example?
J.T. Quite; his face shone as it had been the face of an angel, but there you have a further thought. The angels are a family in heaven. The sun, moon and stars are a constant reminder to us of the goodness of God, and supremely so; for whatever happens on earth there they are. It is as possessed with such forces of good that we can overcome evil with good.
Rem. We are to shine as lights in the world, as we read in Philippians.
Ques. Tell us how to get into the shining of the sun so that we can bring it down.
J.T. Well, it says the Lord takes with Him Peter, James and John and brings them up into a high mountain apart. I think you get a knowledge of the Lord by following. Divine things do not go begging. The Lord looks for appreciation. He selected these three men; He is sovereign, but He takes account of the desires men have. If the Lord acts sovereignly in regard to the choice of Peter, Peter has to conform with that and justify that
{452}
selection. The Lord knew he would! He was first among the apostles; the Lord knew what was there, and there can be no doubt with these three men, Peter, James and John, that there was desire to enter into what was presented to them. If you desire a thing you will get it. The Lord knows the desires of men.
R.W. The cross and glory go together.
H.E.S. God chose David sovereignly, but he was a man after God's heart.
J.T. There are three hearts in the opening of Samuel. Hannah wanted a son and she got him; the people wanted a king and got him; God desired a king after His *own heart* and *chose* David. God's operations are in relation to hearts, in relation to what is underneath; the operations of God have in view that the thoughts of many hearts might be revealed. The cross brought exposure of hearts. Samuel is sent to Jesse and looks on Eliab and said, "Surely the Lord's anointed is before him", @1 Samuel 16: 6, but he was not looking at the heart. The divine ideal is not to look on the outward appearance. The Lord had not chosen him, and then Samuel says, as the others pass before him, "The Lord has not chosen this". @1 Samuel 16: 10. God knew what was in David's heart, and which subsequent history brought out. Peter says later, "Lord, thou knowest all things" @John 21: 17; he got on to this line; he saw that the Lord knew hearts. Whatever pretence we may put up, what is inside must come out.
H.S. In regard of these three disciples, why do we hear more of Peter and John than of James?
J.T. James suffered martyrdom early; Herod killed him with the sword; @Acts 12: 1,2. The Lord appeared individually to the James who, I think, wrote the epistle; @1 Corinthians 15: 7. The Lord had His own reason for taking up these three; we know what Peter was and we know what John was. It is a
{453}
question of hearts. In @Proverbs 23:26 it says,. "My son, give me thine heart", and the apostle says, "God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness hath shined in our hearts" @2 Corinthians 4:6; not in our heads. Intelligence must come in, but the substance is in our hearts.
Ques. What does the mountain top suggest?
J.T. Matthew deals with mountains more than the other evangelists, suggesting, I think, moral elevation. In chapter 5 we have the Lord going up, and coming down He meets a leper. That corresponds with @Isaiah 6. The Lord is seen there high and lifted up, and the prophet realises then his uncleanness. When Jesus came down from the mountain in Matthew there were crowds; many of them would doubtless refer to the "beatitudes", but there was one there who was a leper, and what comes out in the Lord is the expression of all the good of heaven, not only the throne, and the law and power to enforce that law, but all the wealth of heaven expressed in grace down here. The law is most essential, but how am I to use it for good? I take it that chapter 17 enables me to take up chapters 5, 6 and 7 and express them for good to man. It is as we are with Him, as these three disciples were with Him, that we can express the good of the kingdom of heaven. When His face shone as the sun it was for them, not that He needed it.
Rem. Not that He needed to be more glorious.
J.T. He was transfigured *"before them"*; it was for them.
Rem. You were speaking of the heart, Paul was changed from being a hard man.
J.T. Quite so, even the countenance has to be changed! What one sees the need of in brethren having to do with one another is that of being with Christ; you can then afford to be little for the sake of others. "Heap coals of fire upon his head", @Proverbs 25:22, that will bring a brother down when nothing else will.
{454}
The spirit of a little child is that you are simple and transparent, you do not desire to retain anything for yourself; you are on your guard too not to offend a little one. It is one thing to condescend, and another to descend. The Lord's supremacy *in judgment* is seen in Revelation; His head and His hair were white, He is girt about the breasts with a golden girdle, and His feet are like unto fine brass, all showing that judgment was in view; but in @Matthew 17 it is His supremacy in good that is evident. This is the thing to be impressed with, and to carry the sense of it into the scene of need. The test was that there was a case they could not help, and then the Lord points out that this kind does not go out but by prayer and fasting. You may come down with the light, but there is no power without going down and becoming lowly. Prayer is the power, it brings God in, and fasting shuts out the flesh. There are very few then who can fast continually; one has to *practise* it, and the Lord helps one.
Ques. Will you say a word as to the two going up to the temple in Acts 3?
J.T. The difference between the gospels and the Acts is that in the gospels the disciples were *learners* and in the Acts they were finished *graduates*, so to speak. In @Acts 3 there are Peter and John, two of those here; they had completed the educational course and could say, "Look on us". @Acts 3: 4. All through the gospels Peter is the learner and asks questions. We learn by asking questions. One question he asked was how many times he had to forgive his brother; but in Acts God can bring him forward as one who has learned. He takes the lame man by the right hand; he knew how to do it, and now in the man we see a product of Peter's work.
I would particularly commend to all Peter as seen in Matthew; he is the model learner, positively and negatively. In chapter 17 the Lord comes down and
{455}
Peter is again put to the test as to what his apprehension of the Lord was, as to whether He was a divine Person really -- the Son. "Doth not your master pay tribute?" @Matthew 17: 24. We never know what may be thrust upon us, and we may deny the truth, so the thing is to have the truth as essentially in our being. Peter missed it; he says, "Yes". He had the truth presented to him, but it was not really in his soul, and in view of that he must undergo all this training. He thought the Lord was like every one else. His soul was not yet in the good of what he had seen on the holy mount. Every young believer ought to take up Peter. You can learn better at school, and Peter is at school here, and we are all at school. Peter had to be rebuked in chapter 16. The Lord recognised him as material for the assembly, and yet alongside His remark as to being blessed in chapter 16, He has to say, "Get thee behind me, Satan" @Matthew 16: 23.
This chapter is unique, you get things mentioned here that are found nowhere else. Peter had not got things he had seen on the mountain worked out; if he had he would have said, My Master is not like any one else, but he was for the moment beneath the light, speaking as if the Lord were like anybody else, but he has to learn not only that the Lord is the Son and free, but that the *sons* also are free. The Lord was really the creator and had the rights of creation, all was His, so He could command the fish of the sea. At the end of chapter 16 the Lord says, "There be some standing here which shall not taste of death till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom". @Matthew 16: 28. So they saw and heard that He was the Son of God, but they also saw that He was the Son of man.
Ques. Do these things head up in your forgiving your brother?
J.T. That is what I was leading up to; that the effect of them was to be seen here. Peter was a fisherman, and the Lord gives him a lesson in that
{456}
with which he was most familiar; he knew what a hook meant. If the Lord had told him to use a net he might have caught a hundred, and would have had to pick out one, but here it is one hook and one fish; it was the concrete evidence that the Lord knew the fish of the sea severally. This is beyond men, it was a miracle. It would remind Peter that the Lord knows every man, woman and child on the earth, for the Lord had said He would make Peter a fisher of men. The feature of this incident is to bring out sonship, not only in Himself, but for us -- the *sons*. They belong to the royal family, "Of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of their own children or of strangers?" @Matthew 17: 25. In Matthew the Lord was *born* King and this suggests that we are children of the King. Later Peter says, we "were eyewitnesses of his *majesty*", and speaks of the voice from the *excellent glory* @2 Peter 1: 16,17. If any one went then and asked him the same question, how different the answer would be! It makes a great difference when we see the brethren in this light -- their place of sons. The effect of it would be seen in the attitude we take up. The Lord calls the saints to this, He loves to have a model to take up; the saints are within His call as the little child is; Jesus "called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them". @Matthew 18: 2. There is nothing to be afraid of in a little child; inwardly it is so simple and inoffensive, but it has a great place in heaven, and I should dread offending such. "Woe to that man by whom the offence cometh". @Matthew 18: 7.
F.A.P. When Peter asks the question in the next chapter, does he come out like a little child?
J.T. Well, he is at school, and what marks a learner is that he hears and asks questions. The Lord Himself sets us the example of that in the temple. The sun is not concerned about what is below; it shines. That is the idea of its supremacy: "He maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the
{457}
good". @Matthew 5: 45. The Lord is not here dealing with confession of sins, He is dealing with the supremacy of what is good; you maintain your relations with heaven no matter what happens -- like David, who said, "Is there not yet any of the house of Saul, that I may show the kindness of God unto him?" @2 Samuel 9:1. You want to be like God.
{458}
CONFIDENCE
@John 2: 23 - 25; @John 3: 1 - 6; @1 John 5: 1 - 5; @2 Corinthians 1: 12 - 21
J.T. What is before us is to show how confidence can be maintained among the people of God; how the confidence that we assume exists among the people of God may be continued. Without confidence we cannot have fellowship, nor can we have the truth of the house of God maintained in any practical way. In John's writings we see how among other things he brings in the elements of confidence. He first calls attention to what is not to be trusted, what you cannot confide in; @John 2: 23 - 25. I thought of the word of Jehu to Jehonadab, as peculiarly applicable to the people of God now, "Is thine heart right, as my heart is with thy heart?" @2 Kings 10: 15. It is a question of *hearts*; God deals with us according to what is in our hearts. First of all it is what is in His own heart.
Ques. Are you for the moment speaking more of confidence in God, or confidence in one another?
J.T. Confidence in one another. The Spirit of God is working in a wide field. Distance separates the people of God, and whilst we lose sight of one another we become local, or unduly parochial. I think John's writings tend to overthrow that in us. John's "whosoever" is the basis of what is universal. The truth of the house of God is necessarily a universal thought, and what underlies it is the divine nature, the family, so that John brings forward the abiding-place. First we are directed to Christ, and according to him we are invited to abide with Him, and we know what that was. We know where He abode. It is a spiritual matter, and involves the knowledge of God in the believer. No one can be in the house of God who does not know God, and does not know love.
{459}
"He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him". @1 John 4: 16. What underlies the house is the knowledge of God, each one knowing God as his dwelling-place; that involves the work of God in us. By virtue of the work of God we are to be trusted. God cannot confide in us, nor can we rely in one another on the ground of flesh.
Christ in the saints is trustworthy; nothing short of that. Here is a man, Nicodemus, who had every chance among his fellows to be trusted -- a "teacher in Israel". @John 3: 10. Fathers and mothers would have no difficulty in sending their children to such a man as that to be taught, but such as he was naturally, he was untrustworthy. The Lord says, "Ye must be born again". @John 3: 7. The thing has to be done all over again. I refer to that, because we may as well look at things as they are. Not any one in this world, however he may be educated, can be confided in in regard of anything moral. So that you have to begin over again. That is what the Lord meant. And while we are put on the right line by the truth of new birth, the thing is to see that it is the foundation of that in which we can have confidence. Nothing of the flesh can he trusted. We have to learn that in ourselves to begin with. Each one has to begin there. As the truth of John's writings lays hold of us there is an unloading. There are many things carried that are really in the way. It is well to get down to the bottom and see what is being confided in in each other.
In the last chapter of John the Lord has the food, and with Peter the unloading was the basis of confidence amongst the brethren. There is the feeding (ministry) first, then the probing. Peter says, "What shall this man do?" @John 21: 21. We have to leave each other in that way as to what we are to do. It was a very vital moment as to the restoration of confidence. On account of Peter's breakdown he had to be
{460}
restored, not only in secret but before his brethren. The Lord went down to the bottom with him, because He knew what was there. Peter's was no vain boast when he said he loved the Lord. He really did love Him, but there had to be the unloading. These verses in the beginning of @John 3 are more the foundation. We should be familiar with them, as indicating what can be confided in.
Rem. It is not that the Lord would support us in the suspicions of people, but rather in looking for the work of God. Nicodemus must have been somewhat different from others; it says, "There was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews". @John 3: 1.
J.T. Undoubtedly he was born anew, only he did not know the truth of it. John's epistles address the saints in that way; he was able to take account of them in the light of what is in them, whatever good there is "The acknowledging of every good thing that is in you", as the apostle said to Philemon @Philemon 6. If there, it is bound to come out. The thing is, however, to see there is that which the Lord here would not trust, and that refers to anything in me affected by what is merely external. There is a great deal of religiousness mingled with piety that passes muster, but it will not stand. "That which is born of the flesh is flesh and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit" @John 3: 6; you cannot make it anything else.
Ques. Would the light in our souls of the lifting up of the Son of man help us on the unloading line; and would the appreciation of God's giving His only begotten Son and eternal life secure brotherly confidence amongst us?
J.T. I am sure it would. In the lifting up of the Son of man, the thing is that sin has been dealt with. We do not see clearly what has been dealt with, how horrible it is to God. Then the knowledge of God in His love, in the gift of His Son, establishes confidence in Him. So that "he that doeth truth cometh to the
{461}
light". @John 3: 21. Not that he *should* come, but he *does* come. The point is he does come, and the coming establishes him in the confidence of the saints. We see him coming to the light, and have confidence in him. Hence coming to the light is characteristic and habitual.
Rem. It says Jesus did not trust Himself to them @John 2: 24. @John 20 brings in a company to whom He trusts Himself fully.
Rem. He trusts those who do not trust themselves. Peter had had a good deal of trusting himself previously; it had to be unloaded. The apostle says, "We trust not in ourselves". @2 Corinthians 1: 9.
J.T. If you see what is untrustworthy in yourself, you are not going to trust it in another; but if you see the evidence of the divine nature you can trust that. John's epistle shows what that is. It enables you to identify a person with the work of God in him. He becomes a very different person in your eyes from what he would be if you identified him with the flesh in him. In the second and third epistles of John we see this both in regard to the elect lady and Gaius. "Every one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of him" @1 John 5: 1; it is the divine nature in the two, in Him and in you. That promotes mutual confidence. The thing is to take account of one another according to the work of God in us. If I do not see any evidence of the work of God in a person, I could not regard him as a Christian. We have here (@1 John 5) a threefold witness; it all goes to make up conscious knowledge of things; we *know* we have eternal life. "These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have eternal life". @1 John 5: 13. All this is working up to that, but for the moment it is a question of how I regard the saints, and whether I am able to regard them abstractly, to regard them in the light, and only in
{462}
the light, of what they are in regard of the work of God.
Then you see you must have confidence to be able to regard them in that light. "We know we have passed from death unto life because we love the brethren". @1 John 3: 14. How do we know? "Because we love the brethren". It is like the mariner's *soundings*. A mariner has to take account of things in the heavens, but he has also, under certain circumstances, to take account of what is underneath him; if not, he may get on the rocks. I mean that we must take account of the work of God in each other. John looks upon the work of God in the saints as present. If he did not look upon the saints as identified with the work of God I do not see how he could say, "He cannot sin". @1 John 3: 9. Under certain circumstances you must take account of saints abstractly; that is, regard them wholly in connection with the work of God in them. The disposition very often is to identify the saints with what they are naturally, to see nothing but the flesh in them; that would not promote confidence, but just the opposite.
Ques. Would you say what the difference is between being born again and being born of God?
J.T. Born again is an initial thought, but it is born throughout; the old does not count at all. How much furniture it means to be thrown overboard in everybody morally, everything preceding it has to be thrown overboard -- ancestry, natural breeding, etc. (Compare @Philippians 3.) One is born over again, and this affects him from top to bottom. Here is a great man; the Lord says, Nicodemus, you have to be born again. Nicodemus faces the thing, and the Lord went on. He enforces the truth, "that which is born of the flesh is flesh and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit". @John 3: 6. He came to anoint the Lord's body at the end which would suggest that Nicodemus had learnt his lesson. He
{463}
was a disciple, but secretly. John always notes the effect of the work of God, however small it may be.
The counterpart of new birth is that the Son of man was lifted up. "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up". @John 3: 14. In what way was He lifted up? As made sin. He was made in the likeness of the thing. If I see that, I am not going to maintain the flesh. The point is to see the thing, "whosoever *looks*" -- the thing is to be seen. What do I see? It is Christ, the Son of man, made sin. What an awful thing! He was made in the likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh.
Ques. Is there anything of that in the thought of being born of water and of the Spirit?
J.T. Water is not a positive but a negative thought; it is that I have by the death of Christ a means of disposing of the thing that I see to be so abhorrent to God. He came by water and blood according to the epistle, because it is a question of subjective state, the water comes first. The Lord said to Peter, "Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat". @Luke 22: 31. He employs Satan in that way. He did in Job's case, but he can only go so far. "I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not". @Luke 22: 32. This is that I am to be reduced to what I am by God's work. The Lord puts the finishing touches Himself. He knows how to do it, and He loves to do it. He begins at the bottom. We see this in Peter; @John 21.
When the Lord was led into the wilderness there was nothing to unload with Him. We have to pass that way and there is unloading with us. The Lord entered the wilderness on Deuteronomy ground; we have to enter it through the Red Sea. The forty years there is to search and try us so that *we* may know what is in our heart.
Ques. Will you say a word now about the Spirit?
{464}
J.T. We read in @Ecclesiastes 12:7, "The spirit shall return unto God who gave it", I get it from God, I do not get it from my parents.
Ques. Could this element be trusted?
J.T. No; I am only referring to it as in man naturally. In man naturally there is spirit, which indeed is himself, but it refers to God; the spirit returns to God who gave it. Here it is being born again, and "that which is born of the Spirit is spirit". @John 3: 6. As born again I refer to God. There is development, of course, but that is the principle of it. In *result* I am spiritual in every way.
Rem. Man has a spirit before he is born again, only new birth brings an operation of God to bear upon him. "The spirit of luau is the candle of Jehovah". @Proverbs 20: 27. God in His sovereignty produces new birth; man finds out he is lost and ruined.
J.T. That is it. I think Quakers have made a mistake in making that true of man naturally. The spirit of man is that by which he is in relation with God. But the immediate result of being born again is that a man is hopeless with regard to himself; he sees he is lost. Then what is presented to him objectively is the Son of man lifted up; He is to be seen. Every one in the camp could see the serpent of brass; so with the Son of man lifted up. What do I see? The condemnation of this thing that is so abhorrent to God. All that leads to being born of God, so that you are like God.
*Ques*. Do you think Elihu sought to help Job on that line?
J.T. That which is born of the Spirit is spirit, but the Holy Spirit is not given to us at new birth. My spirit is my identity; the new birth changes it, but it is still my identity.
Ques. What is it the Spirit bears witness with?
J.T. With my spirit, which is really myself.
Ques. It would have to be renewed?
{465}
J.T. It would be, because new birth has to be applied to it. "The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit" @Romans 8: 16; that is a further thought.
Ques. How are we to recognise another person being born again?
J.T. There is the acknowledgment of guilt, and a desire after God, and the things of God. Thus the light of the gospel will be appreciated. Born of God goes further; one is thus regarded as of the children of God. John's epistle gives us the marks of the children of God. They are marked by righteousness and love.
The practice of righteousness is the first great feature of the children of God, and then that they love one another; as it says here, "Every one that loveth him that begat, loveth him also that is begotten of him". @1 John 5: 1. He may be in the antipodes; your heart goes out to him. Love enables us to disallow all local or national feeling. In that way confidence is preserved; because physical distance has great influence with us, much more than we are apt to think.
When Paul left Corinth they began to doubt him, that he was not just telling the truth, but prevaricating, hence he has to say so much about himself in the second letter, so as to assure them that what he said he meant.
Ques. You were connecting it with fellowship. Is your thought that fellowship is universal and has to be preserved in that way?
J.T. That is how it is preserved, as far as I understand. In @2 Corinthians 1: 12 - 15 it says, "For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you-ward. For we write none other things unto you, than what ye read or acknowledge and I trust ye shall acknowledge even to the end; as also ye have
{466}
acknowledged us in part, that we are your rejoicing, even as ye also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus. And in this confidence I was minded to come unto you before, that ye might have a second benefit".
Rem. He did not come. There was a change somewhere, and not in Paul, but in the Corinthians. There was no yea and nay in Paul, was there?
J.T. I think we see in him how in any one of us confidence may be encouraged. He gave them credit for things. He says, "as also ye have acknowledged us in part". @2 Corinthians 1: 14.
Ques. Do we help one another as we seek to develop what is of the Lord in one another?
J.T. Surely. I was thinking of the way he recognised what was in them; they had recognised him in part. There was a good deal wanting, especially with them as to him. He was recognising every good thing in them.
Ques. Does he not refer to himself as to being so weak before them so as to encourage their confidence?
J.T. Exactly. Then he says "Ye have acknowledged us in part". @2 Corinthians 1: 14. He would acknowledge what there is, however little.
Rem. And we have it before us to so walk as to encourage confidence on the part of others.
J.T. He was insisting in the first letter on the feast of unleavened bread. The feast was to be kept with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. That, I think, is a great feature in Paul. It was true in him, he had a good supply of unleavened bread, and ate it. Without that the feast would become a mere outward form. Christ our passover remains. It is *how we keep it*. I think the apostle shows how he kept it, with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. There is much covered in reserve amongst us, because the feast is not kept with unleavened bread. The feature of the feast according to the first letter is the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. In
{467}
@Revelation 4 in connection with the throne there is a sea of glass, not varying or unstable purity, but solid purity. All our movements should be in the light, just as they are; that is what Paul speaks of here.
Ques. What would you say is involved in our eating unleavened bread?
J.T. One thing is that it keeps us small; it is intended to reduce us, to preserve us from fleshly inflation. It is really a negative thought; the emphasis is on the absence of leaven, not on the ingredients of the bread. Paul shows that he kept the feast with it. All his motives were on the surface, he had no hidden motives; his ways were in sincerity and truth.
Ques. Would it involve that we were in keeping with the passover?
J.T. It is our correspondence with it. They had the lamb in the house four days, so that it was before all in the house what the lamb was. So Christ says, I am altogether what I say unto you. I taught daily in the temple, etc. He was before them as He was. And Paul was among the Corinthians in the same spirit, he was there to be seen and known. The unleavened bread went on for seven days. That is, I must be in accord with the death of Christ. He was slain as our passover, so we are to keep the feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
*Ques* Do you suggest this would help confidence?
J.T. I think it is most essential; we could not have confidence in one another without the feast of unleavened bread. I have nothing in reserve at all. The Lord had nothing in reserve: All I say, I am, He said. He taught in the temple; the whole matter is out. You cannot go beyond that: simplicity and godly sincerity. He says to the Corinthians, You are in my heart, I love you. He had preached the Son of God, Jesus Christ. What was He? Jesus Christ is the kind of man; there was no yea and nay with
{468}
Him, but yea. That is what the feast of unleavened bread maintains; it maintains short accounts. You do not let difficulties remain unsettled. I have known a meeting shut up many years. That should not be; the feast of unleavened bread would settle that. Things must be gone into with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. There is the evidence of life among the saints, thank God! but the thing is to preserve it, and keep the weeds out. Nothing fosters weeds more than hidden motives, hidden feelings. The apostle is unfolding what is in his heart in regard of the Corinthians. "Our mouth is opened to you, Corinthians, our heart is expanded". @2 Corinthians 6:11.
Ques. Would you say unleavened bread would rather keep out the contrary elements?
J.T. The unleavened bread would prevent weeds growing. Then there is the positive thing among the saints, that is, *love*. It is very fine that the apostle brings out that his teaching was in accord with the Person he preached: "The Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, even by me and Silvanus and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him was yea". @2 Corinthians 1: 19.
Rem. Would you say a little more about that expression, "in him was yea".
J.T. He brings God Himself into the thing. God is in the light; He has reserved nothing. Every promise of His is verified at last. He brings God Himself into it, "unto the glory of God by us". @2 Corinthians 1: 20.
Rem. So that you would lay it upon us that it is not only the exclusion of what is hindering, but the preservation and presentation of what is good that should be before us.
Ques. Would you say keeping the feast of unleavened bread really means to live in self-judgment?
J.T. That is what it means, that is, in the light of the passover; Christ our passover being sacrificed for us. It is not an occasional thing; it is a constant
{469}
thing, every day for seven days. It is a wonderful thing that God should bring into this dark world the circle of His people, formed in the light, where all is transparent, as He is Himself. God is there in the light, so if we walk in the light we have fellowship one with another; not that we may have, but we *have*.
Rem. I suppose nothing hinders this confidence you were speaking of more than our being inflated with the sense of our own importance, and the taking up the unleavened bread would preserve us from that.
J.T. I have often thought of Lot. He had unleavened bread in his house. Thus we can understand how it could be said that he was a righteous man. The angels, I suppose, brought out the necessity of it.
Rem. In your speaking of the feast of unleavened bread keeping out the weeds, I suppose if we fed more on it there would be no weeds.
J.T. That is what I was thinking. If there is no dark part, it is "as when the bright shining of a candle doth give thee light". @Luke 11:36. The whole body is full of light, there are no dark places in it, no reserve. As I am before God, I am before the saints. God knows what I am, the saints know too.
Ques. Would you say Lydia was a beautiful example of transparency: "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there" @Acts 16: 15.
J.T. Yes, she would not desire the apostle in her house otherwise.
Rem. I was thinking how different Lydia was from Simon the Pharisee, who received the Lord into his house; how different were his motives!
J.T. The holy city is a great example of what God can do in bringing about transparency.
Rem. How much there is covered, held back now, but in the end we have the city, the gathering centre of the universe, and the pure river of water of life, clear as crystal.
{470}
"RIVERS OF LIVING WATER"
@John 7: 1 - 18, 37 - 39
I have in view to speak of the believer, as seen in this gospel; what he is as following the teaching of the chapters preceding this -- this being a sort of culmination of that teaching; the culmination being what the believer is as in this world -- what he is to it on the part of God. He is regarded as having received the Spirit from heaven; hence he is to correspond with Christ in certain moral features that the Lord indicates in Himself in this chapter. The believer, as formed in the teaching of the earlier chapters and having the Spirit, comports himself here in such wise as to create in the religious world uncertainty as to whence he is, and how it is that he can be what he is. His features are unknown to the ordinary religionist; the Lord was an enigma to them, and I wish to dwell on the things that come to light in this chapter in Him as indicative of what the believer in Him should be.
You will observe that the Lord is said to be "walking". He walked, it says, "in Galilee". "And after these things Jesus walked in Galilee, for he would not walk in Judea, because the Jews sought to kill him" @John 7: 1. This gospel presents the Lord Jesus as serving at Jerusalem and in Judea more than any of the others; being intended for the last days, it prepares us for a sterile soil in which we have to sow -- the hard religious soil. The Lord sowed in it; the results were not as they are seen in the synoptic gospels, in which He is seen as labouring more at Galilee. Galilee was a more fruitful field; being despised and under reproach, the ear for His ministry was keener. The first three gospels mention abundance of miracles. John gives but a few isolated ones, and he gives them in order that nominal
{471}
believers should become genuine believers. You can see therefore, beloved brethren, the analogy between John's and our own times. We are living in times when there are multitudes of nominal believers in Christ who are not trustworthy -- who have proved, times without number, to be faithless in crises. So that John tells us that many believed on the Lord because of His miracles at Jerusalem but He did not commit Himself to them, for He knew all men; He knew what was in man (@John 2: 24). As to the sign at the marriage, in chapter 2, there is not a word said as to the effect of it on the guests as such in a spiritual way. All that is said is that His disciples believed on Him. There is nothing said about the bridegroom or the bride believing on Him. It was an occasion indeed in which He plainly intimated that He was not there on merely natural lines, for, as His mother said, "They have no wine". @John 2:3. He said to her in answer, "Woman, what have I to do with thee?" @John 2: 4. He was introducing the spiritual where the natural, as I may say, was at its high-water mark -- at a marriage festival. He was there on His Father's business, as ever, and so the sign -- the turning of water into wine -- is said to have been the "beginning of signs", @John 2: 11 and it was not fruitless -- His disciples believed on Him.
In this chapter, as I said, the Lord is walking, and as we follow the teaching of the previous chapters, we come out in a certain moral way, not governed or trammelled by any of the old things, religious or otherwise. It is an entirely new way, incurring the severest hostility, rising to murder. His brethren say, "Show yourself to the world". @John 7: 4. In their view, He should make capital out of His works to make a show in the world. How this exposes the natural heart of men! We see it exemplified in Simon Magus (@Acts 8), who offered to buy with money the power to give the Spirit. "Thy money go with thee to destruction",
{472}
says Peter, adding, "Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter". @Acts 8: 20,21. And so, as I said, the Lord's brethren would have Him show Himself at the feast: 'Why, these miracles are capital for you to make a name for yourself'. How that manifests what our natural hearts are as governing us in the Lord's service! If the Lord has endowed one with ability, the flesh in him would take advantage of this to make a show.
Jesus, therefore, says to them, "My time is not yet come, but your time is always ready". @John 7: 6. "Your time is always ready". The Lord says, in effect, that the natural man is just an opportunist. Naturally every one of us is an opportunist -- we try to make the most of any situation that comes up. This has to be owned and refused constantly. The Lord says, "My time is not yet come". @John 7: 6. Nevertheless, He went up "as in secret" @John 7: 10; it was for testimony, not to show Himself. What is recorded here is for our learning; we should note the deliberate refusal to capitalise what is of God to make a name in this world. The Lord goes up into the temple and teaches; there is moral qualification to teach, as we refuse religious fame. The Lord had no thought at all of His own glory. God will use us and help us in our service if we are not thinking of our own glory, but of His who sent us. But, they say, "How hath this man letters having never learned?" @John 7: 15. As people say today, 'He is not a college man; he has no degrees'. Where did He get all this? Need I enlarge on the corresponding features of the present time? It is God showing how entirely independent He is of man's apparatus for turning out religious workers. God will not have it; He despises it! Does He need man's devices? Is not He God! If He sends His ministers, can He not supply them with all they need? That is the point here. The Lord says, "My doctrine is not mine, but that of him that sent me". @John 7: 16. And moreover, He says, I will tell you how to get the doctrine: if you practise
{473}
His will. And that is the secret of so much ignorance of spiritual things -- it is the want of practising the will of God. "If anyone desire to practise His will he shall know concerning the doctrine whether it is of God or that I speak from myself". @John 7: 17. If you are practising the will of God things will not be puzzling you -- the things of God will become intelligible to you, as it says in the book of Hosea: "Then shall we know"; and it adds, "If we follow on to know the Lord, His going forth is prepared as the morning and He shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter and former rain unto the earth", @Hosea 6: 3. That is how knowledge comes.
Well, now, all this leads up to that cry of the Lord in @John 7: 37. He calls attention to what a believer on Him is to be in the very midst of one of the greatest religious convocations of that day -- the feast of tabernacles. It was the last feast of the year, and much entered into it; it was the last day of the feast, too -- the "great day of the feast". @John 7: 37. As it were, things had been reserved to make it a success, and the Lord cries. It is most interesting to note the many times in Scripture in which the Lord is said to have cried. I suppose what is meant is that the thing was urgent. He would have it heard; it was most important that it should be heard. "He that believes on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water". @John 7: 38. Think of that! This passage has been read for nearly two thousand years, and it is perfectly simple to us. But what was it then? Think of the novelty of it! It was entirely different from current teaching. It was altogether a new feature. The Lord says, "As the scripture has said". @John 7: 38. Could the Jews have found the scripture? Not one of them! One can fancy those rabbis, doctors of the law, and scribes turning to the Bible to see where the scripture was. Could they find it? The truth is this, beloved brethren, that the appeal is
{474}
to ourselves as to whether we know our Bibles. If the Lord Jesus says, "The scripture has said", it is for us to find out where the saying is. The truth is, as I understand it, the scripture has said it in effect. It is not a question of a formal verse; it is what the scripture says in effect. We must know all scripture to correspond fully to the idea of believing in John. After the Lord was risen the disciples believed the scripture and the word which Jesus had said; @John 2: 22. We must understand "the voice of the prophets" to understand the prophets; we must understand all Scripture to know what it may say directly or in effect. You find the idea of rivers from the garden of Eden onwards; God indicated that there should be here a great spiritual influence flowing out. You get it in the garden of Eden, in Ezekiel, in the Psalms, and in Isaiah. What did it all mean? Surely not merely rivers of water. It meant the Spirit of God come down from heaven, who is "As rivers of water in a thirsty land". @Isaiah 32: 2. And so here -- "This spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive; for the Holy Spirit was not yet given; because that Jesus was not yet glorified". @John 7: 39. The Holy Spirit is here now from a glorified Christ, and in the believer, from the seat of his affections (that is alluded to), flow out rivers of living water.
Thus you see what a genuine believer in Christ is -- what a benefactor he is under God as believing in Christ. The Holy Spirit being in him, he is a power for good here. Whether in his house, in his office, in the workshop, on the streets, or among the brethren, the rivers of water flow out. It is here in the desert, as it were, that the living water is a present existing thing; and thus we see the importance of saints, as representative of God in this world, making full room for the Holy Spirit come down from heaven so that He may influence others through them.
