{1}
*Pages 1 - 98 -- "The Rights and Patience of God in Testimony". Belfast and Dublin, 1934 (Volume 118)*
THE RIGHTS AND PATIENCE OF GOD IN TESTIMONY (1)
@1 Kings 17: 1 - 24
J.T. Those who have read the book of Kings with attention will discern that this chapter begins a section, in which is worked out the thought of God's rights; as conditions reached their worst in Israel. Then further, we have the thought of His patience, Ahab and Jezebel affording examples of the worst influences that had been in Israel, for in them is developed the greatest wickedness -- and yet God uses Ahab, and helps him against the Syrians, and then ultimately saves Jehoshaphat, although he was in a false position when, as allied with Ahab, he went to war. These chapters, therefore, afford much instruction for us; and the first feature of the instruction is in the discipline and formation of the vessel through whom God spoke and wrought.
W.H.M. Elijah says, "Jehovah ... before whom I stand", but he had something else to learn.
J.T. Yes, he had come into the attitude of service; so that a secret, untold history is suggested. The epistle of James throws light on the first verse, because James tells us that Elijah was a man "of like passions to us" (chapter 5: 17), so that he was not anything extraordinary in that sense, thus bringing the service of God within the range of anyone. "He prayed with prayer", it says, meaning that he was a man who had learned how to pray, which must precede all useful service. His was not only a formal prayer, but that which is really prayer. The result was that "it did not rain upon the earth three years and six months; and again he prayed, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth caused its fruit to spring forth". We are reminded in the first prayer, of what is secret in the history of God's servants, for there is no
{2}
allusion to it in the Old Testament. God will not identify Himself with any servant save as he has a secret history with Himself earlier, and has learned how to pray; that is, prayer means that I depend on God, not on myself. "The surpassingness of the power may be of God, and not from us", @2 Corinthians 4: 7. The position is thus clear enough as applicable today. The previous chapter depicts the darkness of the state that prevailed in Israel, but at the darkest hour God brings forward an unlikely man, a man hitherto unheard of, but who had had relations with Himself and had learned how to pray, to depend on God. He takes him up and puts him through certain exercises, and then uses him in the most striking manner, as a vessel of His power.
T.G. Is that why he is said to be "of the inhabitants of Gilead" -- he was not known till God called him, he was in secret with God.
J.T. Yes, he was from a territory that was under reproach spiritually; Gilead was under reproach as the territory of the two and a half tribes -- the sovereignty of God is evidenced in that.
H.B. Would that come in as a rebuke to those in the land, that one from that territory should be chosen?
J.T. Yes. The nine and a half tribes would assume they had special spiritual advantages, but God is not restricting Himself to those who make claims; as soon as we begin to make claims, God shows He is not under obligation to us on those grounds; He acts on account of what He is in Himself.
P.L. The early ministry of the great Prophet, the Lord, in Mark's gospel is much in Galilee. Is the place of it a rebuke to apostate Israel?
J.T. That is the thought in the Lord's great activities in Galilee in the synoptic gospels; it is to bring out that God is slighting the claims of Jerusalem. Elijah's subsequent history shows that he had relations with God. Our relations with God should arise, not from any specific feature of God's work or ways, but from our
{3}
knowledge of *Himself*, that is, it is a question of *God*.
P.L. And does that knowledge of God enable us to hold Him to His promises, so that, however dark the day, we can refer to Him as the God of Israel?
J.T. Yes, it is *that* God. "As Jehovah the God of Israel liveth", that is, it is the covenant God, which implies all that He is, in so far as He may be known. Paul says, "God, who ... called me by his grace, was pleased to reveal his Son in me", @Galatians 1: 15, 16. It is the full thought of God. Service ought to be based on the full thought of God.
J.C. Was Paul referring to his conversion in the verse quoted from Galatians?
J.T. Yes, but it is a fuller thought; he refers to more than is recorded of his experience outside Damascus. The revelation of God's Son *in* him includes more than that, his commission is involved -- "That I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations".
Rem. We usually connect prayer with blessing, here it is to withhold it, there was to be no rain.
J.T. The withholding of blessing in a disciplinary way is with a view to blessing, so that we might be prepared to enjoy it. The two prayers viewed together imply blessing; discipline has blessing in view. The shutting up of the heavens for three years and six months seems severe, and Elijah had to go through the experience himself. We must bear in mind that, if we pray for anything, we cannot escape the consequences. If our prayers have to do with the people of God, we must go through the thing we pray for, with them; if it be disciplinary, we must go through it with them. The thing is with a view to blessing -- he prayed again: it is all of one piece, we must have the *two* prayers. If we are with God, we learn God has blessing in view. Jehovah the God of Israel implies the covenant God. God is true to His covenant. If the servant sees that discipline of this severe kind is necessary and asks for it, God accedes to his wish; and then he has to go through
{4}
the thing with the people, but he goes through it with great advantage. He is with God, and God knows where the torrent is, but the servant has to go through the discipline. That is the teaching of this chapter. It is a question of going through things with God, so that there is a feeling with us about them. It is all very well to pray that a brother might be disciplined, seeing that he needs it, but going through the thing is another matter; in going through it, you have power as to it. It is a certainty that in praying for a brother I shall have power with him in time, if I go through things myself. Elijah is immediately sent -- "The word of Jehovah came to him saying, Get thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the torrent Cherith, which is before the Jordan". This position, the torrent Cherith in the neighbourhood of the Jordan, has a great deal in it for faith: as there, I am in the presence of something that may dry up, a very solemn matter. Plenty of water at a given moment may not always last. God has a means of drying up the brooks, and Elijah had to go through the experience of seeing the means of his supply dry up; that is a solemn matter! Then moreover, he had to learn God's power in the creation. We, perhaps, overlook that, in intervening for us, God wishes us to understand Him, not only in redemption but in creation; the servant has to learn God in creation. He is a faithful Creator, and He has great resources in the creation.
C.A.B. How would drying up the brooks refer to us now?
J.T. In the removal of those whom God has fitted to refresh His people. The man with a pitcher of water may not always last; we know how the Lord removes those whom He uses in the service of refreshment. We do well to keep that in mind that we might value what we have.
J.McC.R. The meaning of Elijah's name has a bearing on his ministry -- 'Whose God is Jehovah'.
J.T. Very good.
{5}
P.L. Would the turning eastward suggest that, while you humbly thank God for the brook, you can survive the drying up of it?
J.T. Yes, 'eastward' is a region of hope. Elijah had not a word of complaint so far, but the education of a brook drying up is important for those who serve, we may have been drinking from other sources, depending on other brothers, or other ministry, but that may come to an end. Elijah has to go through that experience, and it would result for us in this, that one can say: As far as I am concerned, the brooks will not dry up; that is to say, one relies on the Spirit of God oneself and thus *I* become a means of supply. Then the creational resources of God have to be apprehended; He is a faithful Creator and has agencies He can employ. If men are not available to Him, He is not without resource, and the agency used here is the raven. Nature teaches us, we are told, and the teaching of the ravens here would be unselfishness. A raven is a carnivorous bird, and why should he deny himself to bring flesh to Elijah? Why does he not devour it himself? It would be unselfishness; and that is what the woman had to learn. Elijah learned from the ravens the principle of unselfishness, and now the woman of Zarephath has to learn that principle too -- "make me thereof a little cake first".
W.J.W. The raven was an unclean bird, was it not? Why did God use the raven in particular?
J.T. To show what resources He has. He left it to Noah to determine which were the unclean birds. When we come to a crisis like this, there is nothing unclean in itself. "Every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected, being received with thanksgiving", @1 Timothy 4: 4. The fact that the raven's character was changed would show that God had cleansed it, @Acts 10. We have to learn these things -- what God has in His creation. God can bring His creation into accord with Himself, for these lessons of unselfishness all centre in Christ. It is a question of what God is in His creation,
{6}
awaiting the time when He shall be fully expressed.
W.H.M. I was thinking of that word, "my God shall abundantly supply all your need according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus", @Philippians 4: 19. Elijah was learning that.
J.T. Yes, and he was being instructed in the spirit of thanksgiving. "Every creature of God is good". "Meats, which God has created for receiving with thanksgiving for them who are faithful and know the truth" -- a very great lesson that God would teach us in nature, "Does not even nature itself teach you?" @1 Corinthians 11: 14.
H.L. Why is he told to hide himself?
J.T. It is important for the servant to learn to hide himself, especially if he has great gift; it is the teaching of Colossians; when God enjoins it, it is the more important. "Get thee hence and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the torrent Cherith, which is before the Jordan". He is hiding himself in a good place, there is refreshment -- bread and flesh. These things are amplified in Christ -- bread and flesh. He is the bread of God, and He gives His flesh for the life of the world. It may be humbling to learn from a creature, from nature, but it is important that we should not miss the lessons of nature, for "the invisible things of him are perceived, being apprehended by the mind through the things that are made, both his eternal power and divinity", @Romans 1: 20. That encourages us as to the whole race of mankind in all its history; God has not left Himself without a witness in creation. He has His ravens and asses.
W.C.G. Would not the bread and flesh represent the doctrine of the Christ: "rooted and built up in him, and assured in the faith" (@Colossians 2: 7): and yet we need the water as well, we need the unction of the Spirit to give it vitality?
J.T. It is a learning place, that is the thought in hiding. It is a most instructive chapter if we are to
{7}
have part in the great patience of God in His testimony towards christendom. Christendom embraces about five hundred millions; am I to have any part in the testimony of God to that wide area? We see here how God can be so patient as to use a man like Ahab. I have to be brought alongside God to learn His patience, and I have to be nourished in this way in hiding. I do not suppose it was any great trial to Elijah to be hidden away, for he was a man who had a secret history with God, or he could not have stood as he did. This is nevertheless a further lesson.
P.L. Is there something akin to Philadelphia in this? Elijah, having learned the resources of God through so many different agencies, would connect with the "opened door". Then the Lord speaks of "the word of my patience" and there is the "little power". Everything is small here: the brook -- a "little water" -- "a morsel of bread" -- "a handful of meal" -- "a little oil", and so on. Is this like Philadelphia?
J.T. Yes, I think it is the setting of the whole Apocalypse. "I, John, your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and *patience*, in Jesus, was in the island called Patmos, for the word of God and for the testimony of Jesus", @Revelation 1: 9. He was equal to the service put upon him, to write "what thou hast seen, and the things that are, and the things that are about to be after these". He is to write as the Lord touches him. He puts His right hand upon him; he is under the touch of Christ; but he is "in the ... kingdom and patience in Jesus", he is a brother and companion of the saints in tribulation.
Ques. Would you connect the thought of the ravens with Onesiphorus, who diligently sought out Paul when he was in such reproach? (@2 Timothy 1: 17).
J.T. Very good. He found him -- these ravens had to find the prophet, and they brought refreshment. Onesiphorus refreshed the apostle. He was not ashamed of Paul's chain.
{8}
Ques. Would you say we are all to take up the reproach of the situation as seeking to serve, and to be committed to God, standing before Him in the service, like Elijah?
J.T. Yes, that is the lesson, to be hidden; not to seek to make a show by preaching immediately, or taking a reading, or a special meeting, as we say, but to learn in secret with God, knowing fully the actual situation which you are in; a situation which you have brought about by your prayers, as it were. Then, being regulated by God in that very situation which you have yourself brought about by prayer, God follows you up to see that you do not get elated by the great place you have, but that you are hidden away, and kept in the enjoyment of these positive things, all coming about in the most unlikely way; a humiliating way indeed. The ravens were under reproach, but they are doing this work well, morning and night, and every time they come, you would say, 'Thank God for the unselfishness of those birds': they would become great in your eyes.
H.B. The example of the ravens should help us in our ministrations to those who serve the Lord.
J.T. Yes, that is the idea; that the saints should all become of the raven kind, morning and night looking after those whom God has set aside for His service.
P.L. The Philippian jailor setting the table for the servants of God would be a kind of raven.
J.T. Quite so: a very unclean one to begin with -- a jailor. This learning from nature is humiliating, it would be so to Elijah, that an unclean bird should be feeding him; but he would begin to see through the mere letter of the law; to see that after all we have to connect God's creatures with Himself, and not to regard them as unclean and detach them from God; that would be misleading. They are *God's* creatures; as already said, the type shows there *had* been divine cleansing. Then the saints have to come to see that we are to be servants like the ravens, that is a lesson for every saint. This
{9}
service of God is to be carried on, and if so, there must be bread and flesh morning and night for those whom God is using. I may despise the ravens, but am I up to them? Is there the element of unselfishness, that cares every morning and night? Bread and flesh is needed, for it is a question of strong meat; these servants of God need all the support we can give them. Then there is the water coming down; it is a torrent, not a pool, the water comes of itself; it is not merely that it is forced to come, it is a symbol of the energetic action of the Spirit in the way of refreshment; the Spirit is here, active, a divine Person, and He moves of Himself.
Rem. "Doing good and communicating of your substance be not forgetful, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased", @Hebrews 13: 16. Is that on the same line as the raven's service?
J.T. Quite so. It is humiliating to be on such low ground as the ravens, but we learn from nature how God puts into His unintelligent creatures the ability to reflect what He is Himself in unselfish service; all this is perfectly set out in Jesus. The Jordan is near by all the time; it is not a question of drinking out of Jordan, or of drinking death yet. There is always plenty of water there, we never hear of Jordan drying up, it overflows, it is the power of God in death; Elijah is not enjoined to drink of the Jordan. He now has to go straight across to the north-west, to a territory that would not be very attractive to him, Tyre and Sidon -- to a woman who is a widow, and God says, "I have commanded a widow woman there to maintain thee". This thought should be taken in, I think, that the servant is to be *maintained*. You cannot conceive of God sending out anyone at his own expense, or that he should be without what is necessary. He is to be maintained -- but then how? It is a *widow* woman; that denotes one whose means, whose resources, are cut off in the loss of her husband. So that we have a further lesson now, that is, the feeding of the household. We see what God
{10}
has in households in the case of the jailor at Philippi: what the apostle and Silas found in that house. The ravens are not spoken of as having houses, but the widow has a house; it is alluded to twice, her house is sustained, and then she is the mistress of it.
R.K.C. You find the Lord working in the same territory in @Mark 7, but it is said of Him that He could not be hid.
J.T. Quite so. The Lord could not be hid, I suppose that comes into this chapter. The ravens did not tell the prophet that he was a man of God, the woman did; she said at the end of the chapter, "Now by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth". He is now becoming known, as the Lord was.
Ques. Why is she called "a widow *woman*?"
J.T. I suppose it is to stress the thought of "woman".
P.L. Is it in contrast to Jezebel, and also to Babylon? -- "I sit a queen, and I am not a widow". Jezebel was the daughter of the king of Zidon. It is in the very presence of the apostasy here, in Zidon, that this widow woman comes to light.
J.T. Just so. The combination of circumstances would suggest the great ministry God raised up about a century ago, and what it afforded. The two thoughts run together; the widow woman and her poverty denoting how very little there was among christians, but they learnt (in the revival of the truth of the house) what is in the house. Christians of a hundred years or so ago began to see there was something other than that which the clerical system afforded, or even required. The clerical system is a great system regarded as necessary for the preservation of divine things. The saints began to see that there was something outside of that. This woman had a little meal in a barrel, she had it in a suitable vessel. A barrel is a large kind of vessel, apparently it had been full and was greatly reduced; still the meal was in the proper vessel, it was
{11}
not taken out of it. And the oil was in the cruse, that is, in the proper vessel. It was in regard of that, that God helped the brethren, and out of it you have plenty for the development of what is living.
Rem. The woman is commanded to maintain Elijah, but she did not appear to be wholly prepared for it at first. She had the water -- what does that signify?
J.T. We are never wholly prepared for God's overtures, no person is: what God proposes is much beyond anything I am prepared for; but she came into it. It is remarkable that she came under Elijah's notice immediately he entered the city, and she is gathering two sticks. It is remarkable how definite she is. I think God takes account of definite people; people who are indefinite in the little things of life are not likely to be definite in the great things.
W.C.G. What is typified in the water and the oil?
J.T. I thought the first (verse 10) was the Spirit in His free action in meeting need. It is available at hand. In the other case the word is "torrent" (verse 4), meaning that gravity brings it down; but oil is dignity, which you would expect in a woman in her house. The Spirit is now to be understood as dignity, so that I do not need university or clerical honours in the things of God; the Spirit is dignity enough. He puts dignity upon the saints; she had the means of that in the house. The Spirit takes account of circumstances. He has to be viewed as meeting the thirst of the soul -- "If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink" (@John 7: 37); but you learn afterwards that that same Spirit puts dignity upon you, makes you so that you do not need the degrees of the universities; they do not help you in the things of God, in the things of Christ, or in your service. It is the Spirit who puts dignity upon the service of God. I should think, when God works in a man who has these degrees, it must be a great difficulty for him to be free from the importance that attaches to them in human estimation.
{12}
J.C. I think you intimated that God has blessing in view in all this -- what would Ahab represent?
J.T. If you read chapter 16 you will see what he is -- he represents wickedness; the most consummate wickedness was there, he represents that -- and we see God acting in spite of that, not in judging it, but to show that He can use Ahab, even as He uses christendom in spite of what it is.
P.L. Does the word "Zarephath", meaning a place of refinement, suggest anything? Is that a Philadelphian setting that the best is made available by way of the furnace? -- the gold separated from the dross.
J.T. Very good, I think what comes out at Zarephath is the finishing thought. The woman has to learn the idea in the cake -- "make me ... a little cake first", as if God were to say to us, 'The assembly is in My mind in all this. It is the *whole* thought, not the multitude of religions that marks christendom. I have but one thought in My mind, that is the assembly, and I am not going to be diverted from it'. The woman has to act upon what the ravens had already manifested; she has to learn unselfishness and surrender to God. The prophet has to be taken here as representative of God's rights. And when Elijah says, "make me thereof a little cake first", I can conceive of the woman saying, 'What a selfish man that is!' and Elijah would feel that; but he had to do violence to his feelings to represent God, to bring in the great thought that God is not selfish. The acknowledgment of His rights involves our blessing, that is the result; and Elijah had to go through the shame and reproach of demanding a cake from a poor woman who had just a handful of meal in order to prove this to her. But she would never forget this, she would never forget how she had arrived at the whole thought in her soul. Just as a christian today gets the thought of the assembly, and says, 'I would not give up that for anything; I see there is one idea in the heart of God, and that is the assembly'.
{13}
A.E.L. Would you say a little as to the meal? You spoke of the water and the oil.
J.T. The meal would be an allusion to the humanity of Christ; it is that kind of humanity coming in now, the humanity of the Lord Jesus. "Other foundation can no man lay besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ", @1 Corinthians 3: 11. Jesus Christ is the kind of humanity that exists here in the presence of sin; all that has to be learnt, and that enters into the cake. What is in the mind of God is the assembly -- He never gives up that thought -- that which He purchased with the blood of His own, the assembly of God. At the very beginning He would impress on us, as He did on this woman, the thought that we belong to the Israel of God. The woman was to be unselfish in regard of God. I acknowledge the rights of God; He claims all I am, and all that I have; that is the epistle to the Romans. God was bringing this woman to unselfishness in regard of God, acknowledging the rights of God. God was testing her; He was testing Elijah and the woman at the same time, but Elijah represents the rights of God.
Ques. Is it not remarkable that when there are suitable conditions, there is always a *little* with the man of God? I was thinking of Jacob when he told his sons to carry a little balm and a little honey (@Genesis 43: 11).
J.T. Faith always has something.
J.McC.R. The Lord said there were many widows in the land of Israel, and here we see God asserting His rights in a sovereign way, to go outside the confines of Israel.
J.T. That is the way it is presented in the New Testament; but what a testimony it must have been to Elijah! How is he to get water and flesh all along the way until he reaches Zarephath? We have to learn it all spiritually.
Ques. Do we get the thought of hiding and sustaining suggested by Paul in the epistle to the Corinthians?
{14}
He reminds them he had not gone with wisdom of words and that he was with them in much fear and trembling; suggesting the thought of hiding: then he reminds them that out of their poverty the Macedonians had ministered to him; the spirit of the widow came out in them as they supplied what was lacking.
A.W.R. Are these experiences necessary for what we get in the following chapter -- "Go show thyself"?
J.T. When God tells you to show yourself there is something to be shown, but it is better for you to hide yourself till then. I think the suggestion as to what the apostle was at Corinth is good, for he was a tent maker; he hid himself as not knowing anything but Jesus Christ, and Him crucified. He kept himself hidden, but then he was working with them; their faith was being set on the right foundation by the power of God. The widow is like Mary Magdalene, a subject for the teaching of God, but though a teachable person, she was on wrong lines when she was going to eat and die; she had to be put right, but she was definite. What you see in many is so much indefiniteness. It is haphazardness that sows so much mischief amongst us. If I am not definite in my business relations, and my private matters, it is not likely I shall be definite in the things of God. Now she becomes dignified; it is her house now -- she and her house were sustained. You say, 'She had only a son'; well, God clothes it with the dignified term of 'household', meaning that she is evidently growing. The idea of the household has been greatly stressed during the last forty years amongst us, for at one time nearly half those amongst us were Baptists; but God has brought us round to the thought of the household and this woman came to the idea of having a house, and later, she is called the mistress of the house.
P.L. So you have the desolate woman keeping house, and then she becomes in principle the joyful mother of sons (@Psalm 113: 9).
J.T. Quite so. This thought of the household is
{15}
important. I believe God is augmenting the assembly through the households. The household thought comes out in Paul, it is in his ministry you get it, and it is there you get the assembly properly. So the idea of the household and the idea of the assembly are both suggested here -- that is, in the little cake. The idea of the house comes in in @Acts 16 first, in Lydia; it stands peculiarly in relation to Paul's ministry. The Lord opened the heart of Lydia that she attended to the things spoken by Paul. That is, she was a person of ability, so to speak, she attended to things, she paid attention to what was said to her. Then she said, "come into my house and abide there". She baptised her house, and then asked Paul and his company in.
P.L. You mean the household habitually feeding on the meal, Christ, the Second Man out of heaven, and the oil, the Spirit, will provide spiritual support to the assembly in the locality?
J.T. Exactly. There is the groundwork of the right kind of humanity in the house; the humanity that, if one becomes sick, is subject to resuscitation, is subject to the influence and impress of the man of God. That is a sure evidence of right conditions in a household, if the children are impressionable, if they recognise the man of God. So that it says, "it came to pass after these things, that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so severe that there was no breath left in him. And she said to Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come to me to call mine iniquity to remembrance, and to slay my son?" He did not intend that, but it is a very wholesome thing for parents to call to mind earlier days, and review their whole history in regard of their houses. Why this concern? This son is of value: why this sickness? It is the "mistress of the house", she is feeling it house-wise -- and recalling her sins -- she knew her history, she says, "mine iniquity". We all have to admit that these things have existed; and it is well to recall how
{16}
God has dealt with them in the death of Christ. Maybe the sickness of this child is the result of some governmental action of God, because of the parents, but that was not the point -- the point was that God is going to bring in life by the exercises of the prophet: the son is going to be brought into life in the upper room too, not down below in the bosom of the mother; she has to learn that the children have to get away from her influence. If I hold the children under my natural influence, they will never get into life, they have to be taken away from that and up to the chamber of the prophet -- "where he abode".
Rem. It is in accord with @Acts 9: 37, as regards the upper room.
J.T. Yes, Dorcas had been laid there and Peter putting out the natural element, having prayed said, "Tabitha, arise", and she opened her eyes and seeing Peter sat up.
W.A. How keenly the prophet had felt the breakdown of things at the end of the previous chapter! And Hiel was made to feel his conduct in building up Jericho -- the world; he laid its foundations in his first-born, and set up the gates in his youngest.
J.T. Yes, it was a terrible state in Israel. But what a different thing you have here; it is a son resuscitated into life in the household of faith. He took the child "*up* into the upper chamber where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed". You can see the complete change of circumstances with this boy, he is now taken out of his mother's bosom, and placed on the bed of the prophet -- the circumstances of God, you might say, in a world of evil.
P.L. Is it a little like Timothy taken by Paul from a pious home into the fresh circumstances connected with the testimony and spiritual power?
J.T. Yes. "And he cried to Jehovah, and said, Jehovah my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son? And
{17}
he stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried to Jehovah and said, Jehovah, my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again". It is very like Eutychus; it is a question of the young. It is not death and burial, but resuscitation. That is to say, life is promised in keeping the law; but this is bringing them back into it after having sickened and died, as you might say, in the natural, in such circumstances as are depicted here; now they are brought back into life, but in other circumstances, in circumstances in which the rights of God are recognised in this world. This would be the great end of all the discipline of God. As Hezekiah said, "by these things men live", @Isaiah 38: 16. It is a great thing to get souls into the moral elevation indicated here; it is where the prophet himself had lain, his own bed in the upper chamber. Is that too exalted a thought for the youngest child amongst us? The more we can get them into those circumstances, the more we are rewarded.
W.J.W. Did the rich woman in @2 Kings 4 recognise that? She went up and laid the child on the bed of the man of God.
J.T. Exactly, that illustrates how the truth was cumulative. No doubt she would know what preceded as seen here; every true christian coming into the truth goes back to what preceded him and profits by it.
Ques. Do we fail in not bringing our children who are sick morally into the presence of God?
J.T. And bringing them into the circumstances of God; God has come in here in lowly circumstances, but which are morally elevated, such as those in which the prophet had his own bed.
P.L. Would it be a little like John Mark's recovery -- "Take Mark ... for he is serviceable to me for ministry", @2 Timothy 4: 11. Is he brought into the circumstances of the testimony?
J.T. Yes, he had left them, but he is brought back.
{18}
J.C. Is there not a little help in the fact that she acknowledges her iniquity?
J.T. I think there is a great deal in that. It is well to look back on your history, even if you are spiritual, and see what is involved. So you are always in the house of Simon the leper, the greatest things happen there.
H.B. Do we not often lose by thinking that the children will not understand what goes on at the meetings, whereas if they were brought they might come to the prophet's bed, and become familiar with what happens there?
J.T. Quite so, habituated to the circumstances of God: He has come in in the lowliest way. You may depend on it, it was not any great bedroom Elijah had.
Rem. I was thinking of Samuel; he is put by the ark.
J.T. Quite so, placed in the house. So the great end here is that Elijah is becoming known. "I know", she says, "that thou art a man of God, and that the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth". You can understand how that precedes what is said in the next chapter, that he is to show himself -- "Go, shew thyself to Ahab". He has been already discovered in the woman's house as one through whom life had come in.
P.L. Is the prophet's bed in contrast to Jezebel's bed? "I cast her into a bed", @Revelation 2: 22. It is a very degraded atmosphere, not an upper room, but a large bed, like Og's.
J.T. How terrible is the thought of Jezebel's bed!
P.H. Should the thought of abiding be more definite with us? God told Elijah to abide in Zarephath; there is a definite place in the house; the bed is in the chamber where, it says, he abode. Is it an increase in apprehension on the part of the woman to make these things more definite to the prophet?
J.T. Quite so. The education that runs through and the progress made in the woman, and in Elijah himself too, is very striking; so that God could say, "Go, shew thyself", as it were, 'I commit Myself to you'.
{19}
P.L. Having proved the power of life in relation to the immediate case on hand, he was fitted to face all the hosts of darkness in that power. Can we do anything in the power of God if we have not proved that power in our immediate surroundings such as in a test case like this child?
J.T. He had gone through the thing in the deep exercise of his soul -- he "cried to Jehovah and said, Jehovah my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son?" -- he is not here speaking as a prophet, but as a believer feeling things. "And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried to Jehovah and said, Jehovah, my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again!" He is speaking, you might say, as a priest, praying to God. It is state that is in view, he himself is learning.
W.C.G. Would the third year represent an advance in the knowledge of the Spirit's power? The first year, the brook: the second year, the oil: and the third year, the quickening power of the Spirit?
J.T. Quite so; the three and a half years have been filled out. Then the showing to Ahab, God has something that can be shown. "Seest thou this woman?" for instance; and He "having taken a little child set him by him": there is something now with which God can identify Himself, something to be seen in testimony. You ask yourself, 'What is there in me that God can call attention to as promoting the testimony? that He can commit Himself to?'
P.L. He is said to be hidden. Is he like the prophet Isaiah, made a polished shaft and hidden in his quiver? Now is he as an arrow in the hand of Jehovah?
J.T. Yes, it is all very beautiful; and, as applied to ourselves. God would bring us into a living state of things, for whilst Colossians is hiding -- "Your life is hid with Christ in God", yet it is *life* of the highest order, and that is the thing that is to be shown.
P.L. That would be the new man.
{20}
J.T. That is how it works out.
Ques. Verse 20 does not seem to be cleared up. Elijah gets no answer to it. Have we to take it as indicating right feelings?
J.T. Yes. It is the prophet, of course, but the prophet going through things himself, so that God can use him publicly. It says, "Jehovah heard the voice of Elijah, and the soul of the child came again into him again, and he lived". It is definite progression in the things of God. If you look abroad at the current conditions, what can you do unless God comes in? "And Elijah took the child, and brought him down from the upper chamber into the house, and delivered him to his mother; and Elijah said, See, thy son lives". What a triumph that is! It is a living state of things in the house now.
F.I. It is very beautiful to see that Elijah is taking up these things in relation to Jehovah, and he does not say to the woman that the death of her son was the outcome of her iniquity.
J.T. No, he does not. It is a question of God's power, that God might be known in life-giving power in the household.
P.L. Does Paul urge the upper chamber on the Galatians by the introduction of sonship, saying, so to speak, 'See, Titus liveth'. I mean Paul has Titus with him as a product of his ministry. You spoke about a model produced, what an effect it has.
Rem. In regard to the prayer in verse 20, the prophet then has to go through the circumstances that came in -- he stretches himself three times on the child before he prays again and the power comes in for resuscitation.
J.T. Yes. It represents the power of Christ identifying Himself with us that we might live.
H.B. It says they ate "a whole year" -- would that correspond with the period during which Paul was at Antioch before he was commissioned for public service?
{21}
There must be the secret history, then assembly history, before there is qualification for public service.
J.T. Quite so, the whole assembly was being helped and Paul and Barnabas were being helped by all that proceeded, so they are the product of the assembly there, as it were.
{22}
THE RIGHTS AND PATIENCE OF GOD IN TESTIMONY (2)
@1 Kings 18: 1 - 46
J.T. Our subject this afternoon is public service. Elijah had spoken to Ahab, according to verse 1 of chapter 17, saying, "As Jehovah the God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, except by my word". The position was thus made clear, it was one in which the word stood, an important principle in public ministry that the servant's word stands; as it is said of Samuel that none of his words fell to the ground, @1 Samuel 3: 19. Jehovah saw to that, and the position being made clear, the servant has to go through certain experiences, so as to fit him for showing himself to Ahab; this time not merely to announce the mind of God, but to express it in power, so that we have "the word of Jehovah came to Elijah in the third year, saying, Go, shew thyself to Ahab; and I will send rain upon the face of the earth". The commission of the servant is thus accompanied by the assurance that the blessing is coming.
H.B. Do you think that the public service, by his showing himself, has not only the word of the Lord through the servant in view, but that there is to be the personal representation of what is in the mind of God?
J.T. That is what I was thinking, that the person himself enters into the testimony. So Luke calls attention to the Lord as in the synagogue, how they wondered at the words of grace that were coming out of His mouth, and every eye was fastened on Him; attention is called to the Vessel of grace. As we see in the type, the light was to shine over against the candlestick -- meaning that the candlestick itself was to be in evidence. It says here, "Elijah *went* to shew himself to Ahab" -- that is the point. Then there are other movements which enhance this, the movements of Ahab and Obadiah; they
{23}
are occupied profitably with a view to positive good. That is to say, as the servant moves under divine direction, other conditions come into evidence ordered of God, which enhance the service. The enemy's power is checked in that Ahab at the moment is occupied in looking for grass, with Obadiah, the steward of his house; that is to say, we are to take account of every movement in Christendom, that has good as its end, as so far in our favour.
Ques. The position of hiding is now over when you speak of his showing himself to Ahab?
J.T. Quite so. We read in the New Testament of "the day of his showing to Israel", @Luke 1: 80. God indicates a suitable time when the servant is fit for it and the circumstances are ordered of God so as to make the service effective, so in serving God we are to have our eye abroad on the whole sphere of profession.
P.L. Is not the desire for food among the people of God the great opportunity for this kind of service?
J.T. I thought that, even although it is food of a very low order, it is still food. So that the circumstances are favourable, and it says that "Elijah went to shew himself", and then in verse 6, "Ahab went one way by himself, and Obadiah went another way by himself". It is well that they are separated for the purpose in view, so that it goes on to say, "as Obadiah was on the way, behold, Elijah met him". It was much more advantageous for the purpose in view that he should meet Obadiah first, Obadiah forming a link between Elijah and Ahab. There is thus a modification which is ordered of God between what is wholly of God and the opposite. God does not order sudden clashes, He brings in the principle of modification. "Obadiah was on the way", it says, which is an expression having its own meaning in Scripture, beginning with the servant of Abraham, who said, "I being in the way ..." @Genesis 24: 27. He was occupied under orders with a profitable end in view.
Rem. Your point is that the Lord would gather up
{24}
what is of Himself? The scripture records that "Obadiah feared Jehovah greatly", and although he was occupied here with this menial gathering of food, still he fed the Lord's prophets in a cave.
J.T. Yes, that is the thought. What is of God in the service, however insignificant it may appear, is to be taken account of as of God. Then the Spirit of God records what marked him; we are told, "now Obadiah feared Jehovah greatly; and it was so, when Jezebel cut off the prophets of Jehovah, that Obadiah took a hundred prophets, and hid them by fifty in a cave, and maintained them with bread and water". The Holy Spirit tells us about it, to remind us that, if we are set to serve, He will put us in touch with the interested element, with what is of Himself, however small in measure.
Rem. And the servant in touch with the Lord will be quick to detect that. Elijah *standing* in the presence of the Lord suggests alertness.
J.T. That is what I had in mind, that we might see the setting of service today, that we are not to serve in a corner but in relation to the whole area of christendom, to take account of what is of God. Even an Ahab if he is moving with a good end in view is not to be despised.
P.L. You referred to Revelation this morning; would the encouragement of the overcomer even in the darkest stage be an incentive to take account of what the Lord has everywhere?
J.T. I thought that. That is his first concern, to write to the assemblies; the whole area of christendom is in mind, so that we take account of what is good: the Lord does that in each address.
Ques. Do you regard christendom as an area for the operations of God's work?
J.T. Well, it is different from heathendom; we do not encounter demon power in christendom -- there is a certain advantage. The testimony really now is to those who are professedly christian, so there is no need
{25}
of miracles and the like. Ahab and Obadiah are in movement before Elijah shows himself. He does not show himself to Ahab first, but to Obadiah, and it was when Obadiah was in the way.
P.L. Would this principle be found with the eunuch? Philip is hidden in the desert and then he is called to show himself to an element that is enquiring, and, in principle, in the way.
J.T. I think that is right. The eunuch was reading the Scriptures, and Philip was enjoined by the Spirit to join himself to the chariot, which is really more than what you get here. Elijah would not join himself to Obadiah in what he was doing, but he was doing something; he was working under the orders of Ahab, and Elijah says "thy lord", referring to Ahab. Ahab was not Elijah's lord in that sense. The Holy Spirit tells us about Obadiah, he was a remarkable man; God will love to bring into evidence the fruit of His own work, even though it was in a false setting. A man who hid fifty prophets in a cave from Jezebel's wrath is not one to be despised.
Ques. You would say that Obadiah was a good man, but hampered by the fear of men.
J.T. Just so. Whatever was good with him God would bring into evidence. Obadiah, I think, in what he says, in his anxieties, represents that weakness of faith that marks those who are the subjects of the work of God in these circumstances, that is, it is the work of God in a set of circumstances that is inimical to it, but still it is the work of God, and God loves to bring out His own work.
P.L. So that separating "the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth" (@Jeremiah 15: 19), is seen with Elijah here.
J.T. I think so.
Ques. What would be involved in "Shew thyself", at the present time, referring to christendom?
J.T. It is a question of what is of God. There is
{26}
that in us of which God is not ashamed, and, especially in His service, there is that to which He commits Himself. I think it is seen in chapter 17; a man who can bring a boy back from the dead, with all the exercises that are depicted, is, you might say, full of Christ -- that is what is to be shown.
Ques. Would you say that Obadiah was not positionally righteous, for "the righteous is as bold as a lion"?
J.T. Yes. He was in circumstances that weakened his faith. We all know what it is, as we come in contact with persons in whom the work of God is, but who are in circumstances that are foreign to it, how weak their faith is, and how uncertain such people are. You are conscious you have darkness to deal with in their settings. To get them out of those settings is very largely the work God would commit to those who have the light. You will observe how uncertain Obadiah is, how he feared Ahab, who represents the ruling religious class, whoever it may be -- how people fear it!
Rem. Obadiah's name means, Servant of the Lord. Do you think the Lord has His servants even in positions that we might not regard very favourably?
J.T. That is the point we are at. He is really in circumstances that are wholly inimical to his progress as a believer, and people in such circumstances have to be delivered. How are you to deliver a man like this? He was true to his convictions; there is assembly material in this man, he will divide the saints up into a number that can be handled profitably, hiding them fifty in a cave: he is in keeping with the character of the day, the time of hiding. Large meetings are contrary to that; the principle is this -- fifty in a cave. He is conversant with the movements of Elijah.
Rem. This man had an assembly principle which some of us in Belfast need -- fifty in a cave.
J.T. That is right. That is a principle many have not accepted, and he is in keeping, to that extent, with the idea of hiding -- smallness.
{27}
Ques. Would that indicate the number that it would be suitable to feed?
J.T. Quite so. It is carried out in the Lord's own case -- "Make them sit down in companies by fifties". This is a company that can come under an administrative hand. You may speak to any number, but when it comes to the administrative side, you need to have a manageable company. Fifty are easily managed -- we know each other.
P.L. One of Elijah's last acts was to save a company of fifty, @2 Kings 1 -- The captain of the fifty "fell on his knees".
J.T. Yes, due to the state of the captain, that is, the leading brother. It shows how the saints may be saved by the leading brother being in the right spirit. He died for the company, you might say; that is, he surrendered his dignity as a captain and saved his fifty. This choice of a cave belongs to faith -- the "dens and caverns of the earth" are not man-built, they are God's doing. They are formations and have their own voice, something God has prepared in His creation that faith employs. God provides in nature things that faith appropriates. The more you think on that line, the more you will see how the creatorial thought enters into redemption, for what God is in creation He is in redemption, only redemption is the intensification of it.
P.L. Would you say that redemption and creation are brought together in chapters 4 and 5 of Revelation as following on this?
J.T. That is very good: chapter 4 is creation and chapter 5 redemption. It is to bring out an important testimony which God would centre in suitable vessels, in order to bring out all that is good in the realm of profession. We have to view ourselves in relation to creation. The celebration of praise in chapter 4 is in connection with creation -- "for thy will they were and they have been created"; then chapter 5 is redemption.
Rem. "They went about in sheepskins, in goatskins
{28}
... and in dens and caverns of the earth", @Hebrews 11: 37 - 38. That was a period of faith.
Ques. Why does God regard Ahab at all?
J.T. To bring out that He recognised the responsible element in the profession: He never loses sight of that. So, "thou permittest the woman Jezebel ..." is said to the responsible element -- the angel of the assembly. God recognises that to bring out how patient He is, but never failing to judge the wickedness that is there. The intelligent Christian understands that the Romish system as represented in Jezebel is definitely set aside. The remnant is called out, and that is the moral setting aside of that system. "I cast her into a bed ... her children will I kill with death". She is definitely dealt with judicially. In the latter part of the Revelation, Babylon is fallen, and *has become* the cage of every foul and hateful bird. Morally it has been dealt with.
Rem. As we move, as Elijah did, to show ourselves in a right way, the sympathetic element will come to light.
J.T. That is what comes about, and we know it has been so in the history of the revival. As God raised up His servants, He also worked and brought in a sympathetic element, at least, an element He worked with, like Obadiah.
Rem. I wondered whether this would work out in our localities, whether we could not count on something sympathetic coming to light under God's hand.
J.T. I think that is what marks the work of God that He brings to light what He has been doing in others, so that the prayer was, "Let thy work appear unto thy servants". We have the record of the movements of Ahab and Obadiah; then that Obadiah was in the way when Elijah met him. He did not meet Elijah, Elijah met him; as the Lord says in the gospels, "A man shall meet you carrying a pitcher of water", @Mark 14: 13. We must recognise that God works, and even Elijah would have to recognise that God worked without him,
{29}
but then He would bring His work into the view of Elijah, and that is what we see in the chapter. "Let thy work appear unto thy servants ... And let the beauty of Jehovah our God be upon us; and establish thou the work of our hands upon us, yea, the work of our hands, establish thou it", @Psalm 90.
Ques. What does Elijah recognise in Ahab?
J.T. The great general thought of the responsible element. The pope is responsible, the hierarchy of Rome is responsible. So is that of protestantism, and God will recognise any element of good there may be in any one of them. It is a great thing to recognise what there is, what God is doing.
P.L. Obadiah was one of the seven thousand who had not bowed to Baal.
J.T. Exactly; Elijah missed that, Obadiah should have reminded him.
Rem. "The firm foundation of God stands, having this seal, The Lord knows those that are his", @2 Timothy 2: 19.
Rem. In speaking even to a Romish priest, we have to remember that there is an element of responsibility to be recognised there.
J.T. A great dignitary of the Roman Catholic church, set over against an apostate movement in Germany, recently said, 'There is no blood of any importance but the blood of Jesus' -- a man who says that is not to be despised.
Ques. Do you mean such persons belong to the assembly?
J.T. Not exactly: a man might say that and not be a Christian; those who belong to the assembly must have the Spirit.
Rem. Ahab said a good thing a little later on.
J.T. Yes. It is to enlarge our view as to what God is doing. We come to see that God has one thing in His mind, and that is the little cake that Elijah spoke of,
{30}
and we see here the twelve tribes of Israel -- that is what He is thinking of.
Ques. Do you not think we need this collective aspect in view of our attitude towards those who do not walk with us?
J.T. I think we do, but we should have in mind that we are to hate "the garment spotted by the flesh", and with fear to pull "out of the fire" some who are believers, @Jude 23.
Rem. While we stand aside from all the systems, through mercy, we would appreciate anything that belongs to the Lord wherever it is.
J.T. That is it, to get the gold. Gold is alluded to in @Genesis 2, and it runs right through. Gold is gold wherever it is, but it is not useful if it is in the mines, it has to be separated from its surroundings.
Ques. Ought we not all to be concerned that the written ministry should be circulated as widely as possible amongst believers, in the systems?
J.T. Well, it is for them: it is for the poor of the flock, it is for all.
Ques. Does Obadiah, as subject to the word of the Lord, now become the link with Ahab?
J.T. That is how it is introduced. He establishes a link with Ahab, modifying the distance, as it were, so as to prevent a breach. Had Elijah come into direct contact with Ahab at the beginning, there might have been a definite breach and what we have here would not have resulted. But there is a modification, so it says, "Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told him"; "And Ahab went to meet Elijah". Now that is a great matter: you have Ahab going to meet Elijah, that is a great advantage.
Ques. I wondered whether it came about through the exercises of subjection on the part of Obadiah to the word of Elijah.
J.T. I think Elijah showed him that he could rely on what he was saying, and he secured a movement in
{31}
Ahab -- Ahab went to meet Elijah. It is something if you get any of these great men in the systems coming to meet one who has the word of God. They do not want to hear you much now, but if one comes to meet you, that is something. Ahab comes to meet him; he has a hard word for him, but it is remarkable that Ahab does what Elijah tells him to do. Ahab calls him a troubler of Israel first, and Elijah says, "I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy father's house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of Jehovah, and thou hast followed the Baals. And now send, gather to me all Israel to mount Carmel". That is, Elijah has selected the meeting place, it is not to be in a cathedral: it is not on Ahab's terms.
P.L. Or in the plain of Ono (@Nehemiah 6: 2).
J.T. No, mount Carmel has its own meaning: it means fruitfulness, and it certainly was fruitful at this time. The meeting place is dictated by Elijah. He slays the prophets at the brook Kishon, not at Carmel.
P.L. Would the fact that the prophet knows exactly how many false prophets there are suggest that he had measured out all that sorrow with God? He is not indifferent to what is transpiring, as we might say, in christendom today.
J.T. What a company he had to meet, but he did not under-estimate it.
Ques. Would you say that the wisdom of Elijah's movement resulted in the testimony gaining a place with Ahab?
J.T. That is how it stands; Ahab came under his direction. We may act in such a narrow legal way as to preclude any thought of getting influence over others. It is very striking that Ahab comes under the direction of Elijah and does exactly what he wishes him to do. It was no small undertaking to gather them all there. Chapter 16 tells us that Ahab is the wickedest man; added to that he has taken Jezebel: yet God deals with him in this way, so that our hearts should be impressed
{32}
with the grace and the patience of God in dealing with christendom.
Rem. Jezebel was the great supporter of the false prophets and the destroyer of the prophets of the Lord. Is not God today protecting what is of Himself amongst us, and promoting what is spiritual, in spite of Jezebel?
J.T. That is what comes out here. It says, "Ahab sent to all the children of Israel, and gathered the prophets together unto mount Carmel". That is a remarkable moral triumph; no one else could have done it. They would not have come at Elijah's bidding. So that God can use a man or an element like this.
P.L. This warrior of God has the great advantage of. So to speak, choosing his own battlefield, and he takes the initiative all the time till victory is assured. The priests of Baal would be on very foreign territory at mount Carmel.
J.T. They would; they would have been at a disadvantage at once. Now the point is, what will the people do? What effect will it have on the people? If you cannot get the people, the end is not reached. So it says, "Then Elijah drew near to all the people, and said, How long do ye halt between two opinions? if Jehovah be God, follow him; and if Baal, follow him. And the people answered him not a word". Well, he is left to divine what they think, they are not saying anything; but the hand of God is, as it were, passed over them and they are not opposed; it portends good that they say nothing. Then it says, when Elijah makes his proposal as to the two bullocks, that one was to be offered by the prophets of Baal and one by himself, that "all the people answered and said, The word is good". If we get the people to say that, we have got something. You have to reach the people, to speak to the people, and that is what he does here. He had been speaking to Ahab and to Obadiah; now he speaks to the people for God: he has them in his mind.
Rem. He does not wait till the people come to him,
{33}
he drew near to them: he had an evangelical heart.
J.T. Quite. Then the next thing is the great power that he had so as to become ironical: he is like Jehovah sitting in the heavens laughing at them. It is the power God gives His servants as they proceed on this line, they can mock the enemy -- "The virgin-daughter of Zion despiseth thee, laugheth thee to scorn", that is, the Assyrian, @Isaiah 37: 22.
Rem. That was the effect of choosing his ground and his means of testimony. If they had chosen themselves they would have chosen something that would have given them the advantage.
J.T. Yes, they would. In moving towards our brethren who are in the systems, we are not true if we allow them to take up things on their terms; they must be on God's terms.
P.L. Does the bullock suggest that the prophet takes account of the greatness of the Person?
J.T. That is what comes out. He even proposes bullocks -- large offerings.
Ques. Would the light in Elijah's soul be shown in the fact that he refers to Jehovah of hosts? Would that help us in the gospel?
J.T. I am sure it would -- the greatness of God. I believe the Lord has been helping the brethren in calling attention to the Deity, what He is in the absolute, and what He is creationally, and what He is in redemption. The great background is what He is in absoluteness. The greater place the Lord has in your soul, the more power you will have with men. Many christians have a very poor estimate of God, and a very poor estimate of Christ. Elijah is impressed here with the greatness of God. The offering of the bullocks and all that ensued would be to detach the people from Ahab and Jezebel, it is the greatness of God brought in. So the result in verse 39 is, "all the people saw it, and they fell on their faces and said, Jehovah, he is God! Jehovah, he is God!" That is, God is in their souls now, but He
{34}
was in Elijah's soul first: it is the minister that conveys this, so that the people get it.
P.L. "The Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me", @Galatians 2: 20. Is that the thought of the bullock -- the glory of the Person, all to detach the Galatians from those who troubled them, whom Paul wished would cut themselves off like the priests of Baal?
J.T. Just so.
Rem. We see the possibilities that are with God.
J.T. That is what comes out. So Elijah now allows the prophets of Baal to do their utmost, and what an exposure! All day long, there they are in their wretched efforts to bring in power; and no power, no answer, comes. What an exposure! Then in verse 30, "Elijah said to all the people, Draw near to me": he had drawn near to them, now he says, "Draw near to me". You are impressed with the manner of the truth as it is stated here -- "Draw near to me", that has a gathering power.
Rem. I suppose spiritual power in ministry lies in access to God. In the ministry of the prophets of Baal there was no access to God or spiritual power: we see the contrary in Elijah.
J.T. Yes, that is the way it stands. The jugglery of these men, their deceptiveness, is all set aside: they are exposed in the withering irony of Elijah. It is God's way to wither up opposition by irony, and now he says, "Draw near to me". That is, the enemy is already defeated in this exposure, but the power of God has not come in yet. We are now coming on to what God can do in the way of power.
P.L. So that the Lord exposes all the cities of the plain, coming under apostate influences as they have done, and then He says, "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened".
J.T. Quite so. It is very beautiful -- "Draw near to me", here, and Jesus says, "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened". Elijah is typical of the Lord here; he is someone to come to, he is gradually gaining
{35}
power, and it says, "he repaired the altar of Jehovah which was broken down". He is now approaching the idea of worship; worship is to be on God's terms and it is His own altar; broken down though it be, it is the altar of God, it is not a new one, there is only one, and God will accept it. And it says, "Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom the word of Jehovah came saying, Israel shall be thy name". We were speaking of the cumulativeness of the testimony; we are on spiritual ground now, the Israel of God: a great thought in a dark day like ours -- "the Israel of God", the tribes coming into evidence, meaning the saints viewed as formed in love, the work of the hand of God. You can see how we are getting on to moral elevation here. The corrupt system is withered away by the irony of God, there is nothing of it in the presence of all this. We ought to see the magnitude of the position -- the twelve tribes, the sons of Jacob, to whom the word of God came -- "Israel shall be thy name". It is the Israel *of God*; it is not the natural, it is of God.
P.L. "I will destroy the wisdom of the wise". All the wisdom of man is ridiculed and brought to nothing. It is at the time of the evening sacrifice: would you say a little as to that?
J.T. It was an advantageous time. If anything could be done for the prophets of Baal it would be done then. The time of the evening sacrifice means that you are as powerful in the evening as you are in the morning.
P.L. "Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense, the lifting up of my hands as the evening oblation", @Psalm 141: 2 -- it is Christ really.
J.T. Quite. It is the idea of continuance in your soul. What God especially values is that a man is as powerful in the evening as in the morning; the heat of the day has not damaged him.
Ques. What about the twelve stones here? Is the
{36}
altar to be permanent now? Does that show he was on the ground of counsel and faith?
J.T. Yes, I think God is showing us the end now. The number twelve is never seen more concretely than in the heavenly city; that is the view now, involving love. Twelve allows for the manipulation of love -- love can understand.
Rem. "The Lord knows those that are his" -- does that cover the twelve?
J.T. Well, the twelve goes beyond that, it is the great thought of counsel; it is the saints viewed as one whole answering to the mind of God, not simply every saint. We come down now to Elijah's direction as to the altar. He is not wishing to make his position easy. The altar is built, and he puts the wood in order, cuts the bullock in pieces, and he says, "Fill four pitchers with water", so that now we are in the presence of the power of death: it is not minimised, but Christ is in it -- the bullock is there. That is, it is the great fact of the power of God, testified to, operating in Christ. Everything is consumed, licked up, although the trench is dug according to measure and filled, yet the power of God is equal to all that; taking Christ out of death, the "surpassing greatness of his power". The people arrive at the great truth -- "Jehovah, he is God". Israel's covenant God is the only God, there is no other -- that is the meaning of it. He is God, God is one.
Rem. You have twelve suggested again in the four pitchers filled three times.
J.T. Yes, it goes beyond. The power of death is seen in its fulness -- not three but four -- four goes beyond full testimony. As it says of Lazarus, he was four days dead.
Rem. In the light of @Ephesians 1 it is possible to conceive of saints being for God's pleasure, the power for it is set forth in Christ.
J.T. Well, that is the setting of it, the chapter brings us on to that ground. We have the whole truth in that
{37}
chapter: we reach here the ground of @Ephesians 1 typically in regard of power, the exceeding greatness of God's power, God known in that way. It is an Ephesian saint who can bear testimony properly, "The power which works in us", what a fine point that is to reach, and that is seen here in that Elijah would have the trench full, "Fill four pitchers with water, and pour it on the burnt-offering and on the wood" -- "Do it the second time" -- "Do it the third time". Four pitchers every time!
P.L. You referred to Ephesians; "even as the Christ loved us, and delivered himself up for us, an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour" (chapter 5: 2). Is that the time of the evening sacrifice? You move in the savour of that now.
J.T. Exactly. The priests of Baal had that advantage; it was the time of the offering of the evening oblation. It says, "The water ran round about the altar; and he filled the trench also with water. And it came to pass at the time of the offering up of the oblation, that Elijah the prophet drew near and said, Jehovah, God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel, let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel ... . And the fire of Jehovah fell, and consumed the burnt-offering, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench". It is a remarkable type of the power of God taking Christ out of death.
P.L. This answer to the fervent prayer of Elijah is a little like the bowed knees of Paul.
J.T. Quite so. It really enters into Christ's agony in the garden: He is heard from the horns of the unicorns.
Ques. What is the thought of a torrent?
J.T. Water coming to you of itself, is what we have in the torrent Cherith. Here we have a different idea in the torrent. Kishon is a river or torrent in a place of great combats; it is where Sisera was destroyed in the days of the Judges and Deborah -- the ancient river of Kishon (see @Judges 4: 7, 13; @Judges 5: 21; and @Psalm 83: 9).
{38}
It refers to the judgment of God; yet it dries up entirely sometimes, as the judgment of God works out, but it comes back in power, and carries away the enemy. The suggestion here that the prophets were taken down to that torrent and slain is the overwhelming judgment of God.
Finally Ahab is spoken to kindly, for there is going to be rain. What a word it is to the sinner! How the grace of God rises above the sins of men: even an Ahab is told there is a sound of rain; the word indeed is, "there is a sound of abundance of rain", "And Elijah said to Ahab, Go up, eat and drink". It seems to me there is remarkable grace in that, this is the present moment, this dispensation and it is not changed. Evil will not be passed over, but the responsible element is dealt with in grace -- "Go up, eat and drink; for there is a sound of abundance of rain". But then how is it to come? Ahab does not agonise over it; Elijah does, he puts his face between his knees on mount Carmel. Carmel is the place.
Rem. It shows what faith he had, he hears the sound of abundance of rain before he prays.
J.T. He does not forget to pray; we must pray. He told his servant to "look toward the sea": the sea refers to divine resources which are unlimited; the servant says, "There is nothing". "And he said, Go again seven times. And it came to pass at the seventh time that he said, Behold, there is a cloud, small as a man's hand, arising out of the sea. And he said, Go up, say to Ahab, Harness and go down, that the pour of rain stop thee not. And it came to pass in the meanwhile, that the heavens became black with clouds and wind, and there was a great pour of rain". That is the end of it; that is the end of the two prayers of Elijah. In between there is all this evidence of the power of God operating for us.
Rem. A little like Paul speaking of the unsearchable riches of the Christ.
{39}
J.T. I think it is. It is a full thought, plenty of it, abundance of it -- the riches of His grace.
Ques. Does not this show the importance of our persevering in prayer until God comes in in this way, and watching in the same with thanksgiving? His head was between his knees.
J.T. Putting the head between our knees would save us from intellectualism in our ministry. A very good place to put your head if in need of power.
Ques. What about the little cloud? You spoke this morning of the little cake.
J.T. It is the beginning of the thing. The thought of sympathy is suggested in "a man's hand", what began so small yet becomes enlarged.
P.L. Does running before suggest that the servant does not rest on his oars in relation to past success, but buckles on his armour for the next spiritual exploit? "He girded up his loins and ran".
J.T. He outran Ahab: the servant of God has more agility than all the great men of christendom. Obadiah understood that Elijah's movements were spiritual, it is to his credit that he understood that (see @1 Kings 18: 12).
{40}
THE RIGHTS AND PATIENCE OF GOD IN TESTIMONY (3)
@1 Kings 19: 1 - 21; @1 Kings 20: 13 - 21
J.T. It seems as if it is required that we should pay special attention to the vessel in whom God intervened in a positive way, so that the Spirit brings us back to the history of Elijah, personally, in this chapter, though alas! to record his failure. This is a feature of the subject that enters into our own times; for God graciously brought about a state of things through which He intervened in christendom in great power, bringing about the exposure of all its features and ramifications. But there was failure, as in the case of Elijah, yet not irretrievable failure, for, through grace, the testimony still goes on in conditions more or less suitable to God: and, as we see in Elijah, we may look for a triumph at the end, for he is received up into heaven. The culmination of the present activities of the Spirit in the saints will be their catching up into heaven. Elijah's history furnishes light as to this, and encouragement; but it also rebukes us, and that is seemly, so that saints should feel the terrible failure that has come in in that which God raised up, and through which He spoke and acted towards the whole of christendom. As we have part in the revival that continues, through grace, we have also our part in the failure; and, if there is to be any culmination according to God of the present service, we must be cast upon God and His faithfulness and patience with us. He has to bear with us every day, He suffers our manners, but He goes on with us. So this chapter begins with Ahab's disloyalty as to what had come about -- he told things to Jezebel; and her true character comes out for she "sent a messenger to Elijah saying, So do the gods to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by tomorrow about this time!" She makes no allusion to Ahab, it is what *she*
{41}
will do: showing in the system that is symbolised by her, the persistence of open opposition now, to that which God owns and uses; for Elijah is signalised, according to the previous chapter, as God's servant. There had been the acknowledgment that Jehovah was God, and Elijah was His servant, so that her sin is all the more glaring and bold, in that it is directed now against the vessel as owned of God.
H.B. Do you speak of Ahab as the outward responsible element in the profession, and of Jezebel as being the spirit of opposition and idolatry that finds its place and is permitted there?
J.T. That is right. Ahab represents the responsible element, including all that are in the *place* of responsibility, whether the Roman hierarchy or any other of the elements of responsibility. Ahab represents all these; and Jezebel is the subjective state that prevails, especially in Rome, for the New Testament leaves us in no doubt as to what she sets forth, for there are children of Jezebel, and later, daughters of Babylon.
H.C.L. What is before us would carry us back to the Reformation.
J.T. Yes, but Jezebel continues on. The Reformation is more especially typified in Jehu's service of destruction -- that is, morally -- for it is not yet literally. It is said in @Revelation 18: 8 that "strong is the Lord God who has judged her", showing it is beyond man's power to deal with her finally, but she is dealt with *morally*. The Reformation was the testimony to the power of God in overthrowing her system in a moral sense, so that men were able to escape from it, to come out of it. Here, Ahab and Elijah are still alive, but she is continuing on in her brazen opposition to what God owns. She had slain the prophets before and cut them off; but here is a prophet God has signally owned and she would kill him, so there is no veil now as to her motives, she is opposed to God.
H.C.L. There were the exercises of spiritual men
{42}
before the Reformation: there were glimmerings of light.
J.T. Yes, there was always something. The addresses to the assemblies in @Revelation 2 and 3 really form the history of the assembly. What we have as histories of the assembly are most useful, but the authentic history of the assembly spiritually is in those two chapters. We find in the addresses that there is something in each one of the assemblies which God can own to some extent.
W.C.G. Does verse 3 indicate decline of faith? Previously Elijah had stood before God, now he flees before a woman.
J.T. Yes, his faith is failing. "When he saw that, he arose and went for his life", he is concerned about himself. The Lord did not go for His life; He laid down His life.
P.L. The day after the conflict and victory becomes the most testing day for us? Is the Lord, in the first day of His resurrection and the forty days after, the great model for us as to how to act consequent on victory, and how to gather the fruit of the spoil?
J.T. Exactly. Elijah had some agility; according to the end of the previous chapter he outran Ahab and went to Jizreel. There would be no lack of energy, he could easily have got out of the way of Jezebel. What you find with the Lord is that, when an attack was made, He got out of the way till His hour was come. No enemy can interfere with a servant of the Lord till his hour is come. There was a power operating in Elijah which Obadiah understood: it was proved in the rapidity with which he went to Jizreel; but here he fled for his life, and I do not believe he went nearly as quickly as he did when he went from Carmel to Jizreel; he went in his own strength now.
W.H. Is there a voice to us in connection with Ahab that, as cherishing what the Lord has given us, we should be very careful and wise to whom we speak
{43}
of it, and when, so that neither the testimony nor the saints are unnecessarily attacked?
J.T. I think that is right. Ahab was treacherous in this, he knew well enough what Jezebel would think of it. It is like the case of the man in @John 5 who told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well, and the Jews persecuted Jesus because of it. So that we have to be on our guard not to disclose things to persons who will make bad use of them, we must not cast our pearls before swine; but Ahab had none of these holy qualities. This chapter brings out that though he was not so virulent in his opposition as Jezebel, he was nevertheless collaborating with her. One of the features of our readings is to consider the patience of God, but in due course no wicked person can escape the just judgment of God: what seems to be a bow at a venture will bring him down, it was thus Ahab's sin found him out. So there is no hope of escape for christendom, everything will come under the just judgment of God; but meanwhile in the exercise of His patience, God selects the wickedest man to display what His patience is, not because he is a wicked man, but as a wicked man in office, in the place of responsibility he affords the opportunity for the display of God's patience.
J.C. Do you think that the elements represented in Ahab and Jezebel, might be found inside?
J.T. Well, it is the flesh, and you and I are as capable of these things as Ahab. If our own hearts are not searched, these meetings are not of much value. As the Lord said, "One of you ... shall deliver me up"; the greatest sin of all is put in that way; I am capable of betraying the Lord.
Ques. Would it be right to say that Ahab represents protestantism and Jezebel Rome, making a covenant one with another to slay the prophets?
J.T. Ahab is more than protestantism, he gives the general thought of responsibility in christendom, including even the Greek church. There is responsibility
{44}
attaching to each, and God owns them in so far as they are prepared to do anything for Him, but not, in any sense, passing over their sin -- "by no means clearing the guilty". There is a sphere that belongs to God and He is operating in it; it is well to see that. Ahab represents the responsible element generally. It is one of the features of the policy of Rome to wax bolder and bolder; the more her wickedness is exposed, the bolder she becomes. So, after the Reformation, there was the Council of Trent, in which she asserted her wickedness with greater effrontery than ever. Then, in our own times, after the revival and the assertion by the Spirit of the headship of Christ and the truth of the assembly, Rome asserted the infallibility of the pope. That is her policy, to become bolder in wickedness: she has got out of hand, but "strong is the Lord God who has judged her". You see her boldness here: she would fix the hour for what she would do to Elijah.
Ques. Do you regard Elijah as suggesting the revival a hundred years ago?
J.T. That is the idea. We are sharing in the benefits of it, but we cannot evade the responsibility for its failure.
Ques. Would Jerusalem in Matthew's gospel set forth God's centre, and the patience of God be seen in Luke's gospel in relation to it?
J.T. Luke brings out the patience of God in regard to that city; Matthew takes the opposite view, he generally casts a slight on Jerusalem, for he is making room for the assembly. In Luke, Jerusalem is still the centre on earth.
H.B. The patience of God, as seen towards Ahab in his official capacity, is very different from God's gracious care of the prophet when he fled.
J.T. Yes. It is well to keep our eye on the prophet, for it is a question how we are to behave ourselves as having part in this very thing. It says, "he arose, and went for his life, and came to Beer-sheba, which belongs to Judah, and left his servant there". Why should it
{45}
be mentioned that it belongs to Judah? Judah, and Beer-sheba itself, ought to have reminded him of the faithfulness of God, and that God would not forsake him, that his life was God's property and that precious life would be defended as a treasure by Jehovah. Then, in going south, he passed territory which ought to have spoken to him every moment of what God is -- Jerusalem, Hebron and Bethlehem -- all these landmarks of divine faithfulness and power; and he went to the extremities of the land, to Beer-sheba, which in itself is the city of the oath, where God entered into covenant with Jacob (@Genesis 46: 14).
Rem. Paul says they "were excessively pressed beyond ... power, so as to despair even of living. But we ourselves had the sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not have our trust in ourselves, but in God", @2 Corinthians 1.
J.T. That is a very suitable scripture to bring in here. We can reckon that God will come in at the extremity. We find in the history of Jehoshaphat, according to the record in Chronicles, that as the enemy was about to kill him, Jehovah diverted them at the last moment (@2 Chronicles 18: 31). The lives of the servants of God, are specially precious in His sight.
Rem. In @Acts 9 Paul was threatened with his life and he gave himself into the hands of the disciples. Instead of fleeing from the danger, he was let down from the wall in a basket, and he went to Jerusalem, to the very seat of the danger, thus expressing his confidence in God.
J.T. Just so, and at Lystra, when surrounded by the brethren, he rose up and went back to the city, showing the courage he had.
W.H.M. What led to this sudden and great failure? Was it spiritual pride on the part of the prophet?
J.T. You just question your own heart. You have a successful preaching, for instance, or a sense of the support of God in your ministry, and how often the
{46}
flesh rises and takes credit for it! You lose faith. The need is to go to Gilgal, so to speak.
W.H.M. God answered by fire previously; in this chapter God told him He had others.
J.T. That is what comes out to prevent undue exclusivism amongst us. As the apostle Paul says so forcefully, "what says the divine *answer* to him?" The divine answer -- "I have left to myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed knee to Baal" (@Romans 11: 4), so that we have to bear that in mind all through these chapters.
Ques. By exclusivism, do you mean we may get the idea that God is working only through us and so we may despise others?
J.T. That is what I thought. Exclusivism is right of course, up to a point, "hating even the garment spotted by the flesh" -- but then we should be loving the brethren, in whatever circumstances they may be. Let us not be afraid of the word 'hate'; that may be called exclusivism, it *is* exclusivism, and more, it is a judgment: hating a thing is a judgment on it, and God says, He has "judged your judgment upon her" in @Revelation 18: 20. So we have to gather up the thoughts of God as to things right down to the smallest independent company in christendom, it is that we have to judge.
W.C.G. Has not Elijah moved away from the first position of faith, when he said, "Jehovah, ... before whom I stand"?
J.T. Yes, he is thinking of himself. That is very humbling, how it arises with one -- concern for oneself.
P.L. So he ought to have left himself at Gilgal, instead of leaving his servant at Beer-sheba. Does not God answer that by showing He will not leave *His* servant, and does He not give him a servant too, in Elisha, who later will not leave him? (@2 Kings 2).
J.T. Yes. That is very beautiful. He "went for his life and came to Beer-sheba ... and left his servant
{47}
there" -- the servant is in the same circumstances now, he is in Beer-sheba. "And he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a certain broom-bush, and requested for himself that he might die; and said, It is enough". Well, he might as well have died in harness; you had better die gloriously in the conflict, than die in the wilderness alone under the hand of the Lord!
P.L. "Blessed the dead who die *in the Lord*".
Rem. Nehemiah says, "Should such a man as I flee?" @Nehemiah 6: 11.
J.T. Quite so. The brethren often bring up such things as they did in Nehemiah's day -- See what is going to happen! -- but we must stand our ground; that is the simplest and safest thing to do. Why should God slay His servant? He "requested for himself that he might die": his mind is running in a very poor channel.
P.L. Can you resign the commission the Lord has given you?
J.T. That is what he did; he resigned his commission. There is no speed now, like on the journey from Carmel to Jizreel! It is a toilsome journey -- "a day's journey into the wilderness" -- this is poor work! And the Lord would teach us by these things; if we are selfish and cowardly, this is the sort of thing we may expect. Elijah's undertaking was very great physically, and what comes out is what *God is* to a failing servant, and we ought all to understand that. What marks our position, the failure that attaches to it, cannot be forgotten, but what God is to what has failed, is the lesson of the chapter; what God is to us. So he said, "It is enough: now, Jehovah, take my life; for I am not better than my fathers". He wants Jehovah to do what he would not let Jezebel do. There certainly would be no honour in Jehovah taking his life, nor would there be any honour to God in it; it is the mixed feelings you find in people who are in the pathway of unbelief.
{48}
Ques. What would Judah speak to us of?
J.T. Well, we know the place Judah had with God, for the history of David and Solomon lay behind it; he was perfectly conversant with all that. When you are dealing with souls in unbelief, you feel you are dealing with darkness; the most positive witnesses on the part of God are there, and yet they do not affect such persons. The Lord wept over Jerusalem -- He felt things. All this seemed to have been absent from Elijah; it is just unbelief, the most powerful witnesses are unavailing.
A.W.R. "In Judah is God known" -- does that come in here?
J.T. Quite so, all that would be known to him, the place Judah had in the testimony. "The Sceptre will not depart from Judah, Nor the lawgiver from between his feet, Until Shiloh come", @Genesis 49: 10. He would know all that. But then, with people who have turned aside from the path, you may bring to their attention the most powerful evidences of what God is, and it all seems unavailing. Beer-sheba had a wonderful history, it goes back further than Jerusalem, to what God had been to Abraham and Isaac and Jacob there. Later on, Elijah comes back to the idea of spiritual geography before he is received up into heaven, that is to say, he went with Elisha from Gilgal to Bethel, and Jericho, and the Jordan; but here he has lost all thought of it. It shows how it is possible with the most spiritual of us to drop suddenly into the realm of darkness and unbelief.
W.J.R.B. Do you see the same principle in @Mark 16? The disciples disbelieved the news Mary brought.
J.T. That is the idea. Mark stresses the unbelief of the greatest servants, that is, the apostles. Why should they disbelieve a woman like Mary Magdalene? But what she and the others said was "as an idle tale" to them (@Luke 24: 11).
Ques. Had Elijah forgotten the bush in @Exodus 3?
J.T. Quite so, unbelief forgets everything in this
{49}
sense! As a matter of fact, even though one rise from the dead, the state of unbelief will not be affected: God has to come in afresh; there has to be another conversion. Most people need several conversions, and that involves a fresh work of God, in the believer.
J.P.H. Will you say a little more about Elijah leaving his servant there?
J.T. Well, it was to the advantage of the servant, I think. There was something there in the place which spoke of the faithfulness of God, and that is what the apostle brings out in 1 Corinthians -- "God is faithful. " In 2 Corinthians he shows that that same faithfulness is in Christ -- "For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen".
Ques. Would Chloe be somewhat like the servant left in the faithfulness of God?
J.T. Exactly. She is there and the house of Stephanas: there is always someone there, however obscure.
Rem. The apostle strengthened Timothy by saying -- "be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus", and "take thy share in suffering as a good soldier of Jesus Christ".
J.T. Quite so. Things in Christ Jesus are fixed. The great point in 2 Timothy is what is "in Christ Jesus". It says of Elijah that "he lay down and slept under the broom-bush. And behold, an angel touched him", (chapter 19: 5). There is not simply something objective now, the bringing up of promises would not help him; he could tell you more than anybody; it is a divine touch people need. You feel that in dealing with unbelief you are powerless, God only can affect a man in unbelief.
P.L. Was the food put at his head, because his thoughts were wrong?
J.T. God has not given up His thoughts: the cake was at his head, as we see, and set forth the truth of the assembly. As the great failure came in, Bethesda
{50}
made a travesty of the truth of the assembly, brought it down to the human level and lost it; but then *God* has not lost it: and if there is one man or woman who holds the truth of the "cake", -- the one body -- that is the truth of the assembly, all is there. Somebody holds the thing, if it is only one or two.
Rem. I have looked upon the cake as Christ; you make it the assembly?
J.T. The suggestion of the cake is that. Of course it is food; but it is a question of interpreting the thing spiritually, as to the suggestion of it. It is a whole idea, it sometimes denotes Christ, but you carry the thought into the assembly: "So also is the Christ" (@1 Corinthians 12: 12) -- that is not Christ personally, but the anointed vessel here, the assembly; it is the same thing carried through.
P.L. Would the hot stones be an allusion to an appreciation of the sufferings of Christ for the assembly?
J.T. You have in the types the idea of dough; that is what is needed in your soul's exercises, but it cannot be made into a cake unless it is baked, and that is the judgment of God.
J.W. Simeon and Anna were morally clean themselves and never gave up God's thoughts.
J.T. Yes, and that is what had marked Elijah himself up to this point. In the "little cake" and the "twelve stones" of the altar, no one held to the whole idea more than he. But now it is very beautiful to see how God comes in and draws attention to "a cake baked on hot stones, and a cruse of water"; there is a cruse now; he would not forget he had had to do with a cruse and the cake before -- everything is as it should be here.
H.B. Do you think the process of conversion with us a second or third time is often a recall as to our original impression? Here the cake is recalled and the cruse.
J.T. Yes, so you are set up in relation to all the previous light you have had; that is the idea.
{51}
Rem. No ravens are employed now.
J.T. No, it is an angel. There is no repetition of the word cake in verse 7, that is already there. The angel says "Arise, eat": eating and drinking now are a general thought.
W.C.G. Would the cruse suggest the operations of the Holy Spirit in the assembly?
J.T. That would be the suggestion, that it is the Holy Spirit in a vessel. The torrent is not that, it is the sovereign action of the Spirit to revive one.
Ques. What journey was too great for him?
J.T. The going to Horeb, the retracing the journey of Israel. He would be reminded by every step he took, that he was going the reverse way; the Lord's purpose does not move this way. Faith has moved far away from Horeb, but I am going back to it; still he went "in the strength of that food".
Rem. He had to learn he was no better than his fathers.
J.T. Exactly. "All flesh is as grass", even Elijah's flesh!
W.H.M. I get the sin question settled, but then I have to learn "that no flesh should boast before God". That is what you would speak of as a second conversion?
J.T. Quite so, and we often get away from faith: Peter had to have a second conversion. It is interesting to read the four accounts of that Second conversion, and how the Lord's word came to his mind -- "Peter remembered the word that Jesus Said to him".
J.McC.R. Would you say Elijah recognised that God could carry on the testimony without him?
J.T. Yes. It says he "went in the strength of that food forty days and forty nights to Horeb the mount of God" (chapter 19: 8). We have spiritual touches here, it is the mount of God still; that is, the law is not abrogated, it has force. Horeb denotes the law in the way of the covenant. So that it has force. We are now being led into spiritual surroundings -- it is "Horeb the
{52}
mount of God", and it is no small matter for a man to go forty days and forty nights on two meals. He is in wonderful company in the duration of his fasting, the company of Moses and the company of the Lord Jesus, now. So there is encouragement for anyone who may have turned aside from the path, in the way God comes in and touches him, and enables him to take a journey like this. He is on spiritual ground now, he is at Horeb, the mount of God. "The word of Jehovah came to him, and he said to him, What doest thou here, Elijah? And he said, I have been very jealous for Jehovah the God of hosts; ... And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before Jehovah". Now he is to be brought back to earlier history, he is to stand before Jehovah: God brings us back to earlier history, and sets us up in all that we have been. Then these three things come out: first, "Jehovah passed by", that is exactly what Moses was privileged to see on the mount earlier; but Jehovah came down full of grace to Moses; here it is that Jehovah passed by in relation to His power in creation. It says, "and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, ... Jehovah was not in the wind. And after the wind, an earthquake: Jehovah was not in the earthquake. And after the earthquake, a fire: Jehovah was not in the fire. And after the fire, a soft gentle voice". *He is in the voice* -- that is the idea, there is a *voice* in all this.
P.L. That brings us back to the Revelation -- what the Spirit says to the assemblies.
J.T. Quite so. So John "turned back to see the voice", -- an anomalous thing -- he turned to see the voice because he had a Person in his mind. There must be a person behind the voice. Here it is Jehovah Himself in His own voice, not in the wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire, for it is not a question of His attributes, or His power in creation, it is what He is Himself, in His own voice.
G.H.P. There is progress. First an angel came to
{53}
to him, then the word of Jehovah came to him, but now a voice came to him.
J.T. Yes, a voice has something distinctive about it; it denotes a person. The voice here is God speaking in Christ.
P.L. Is the voice peculiarly attached to the thought of the cake? Paul heard the voice from heaven saying, "Why persecutest thou *me*?"
J.T. The "me" is the cake. You have the sound from heaven in @Acts 2: the voice from heaven in @Acts 9: and the sheet from heaven in @Acts 10. The voice is very appealing: the bridegroom in Canticles says, "Let me hear thy voice" -- the Lord loves the voice of His people. But what an appeal has the "soft gentle voice" to anyone who has turned aside from the path of faith! God has been touching him in his circumstances in one way or another, and now He would speak to him, 'It is I myself'.
Rem. So the food has the end in view, not the journey through the wilderness exactly.
J.T. Quite so; but here, it is the mouth of Jehovah, and never more tenderly apparent than here; for Jehovah is there Himself, not as He had spoken in thunder, but in a soft gentle voice: there is nothing to alarm the heart, but to attract it. He says, as it were, 'It is I myself'.
P.L. Do you not think Elijah with Moses would take on the soft and gentle voice, as they spoke to that same Person about His decease on another mount?
J.T. Yes, the mount of transfiguration. Elijah "wrapped his face in his mantle", it says here, "and went out and stood in the entrance of the cave". I suppose the mantle had some virtue: there is some encouragement in his soul in relation to the mantle, so that he goes out, he is now moving towards God. The mantle has its own place, he will use it at the end of the chapter in relation to Elisha; and he will use it again at the Jordan.
{54}
P.L. Does the mantle suggest that in his soul he is returning to the dignity of his commission?
J.T. Yes, I think it is his measure spiritually; he is coming back to that. After all, every christian has a measure, lack of faith robs him of it; but now Elijah is coming back to it, to what he is in Christ. The next thing is, "he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entrance of the cave". That is, now he is facing God according to the soft gentle voice, and then he is there according to his measure. I think faith is coming back. Think of what Peter was as he came back! All that he had been enters into it, he lost nothing. We lose nothing, the work of God stands, and faith comes back to it. It is not only what God has done in Christ, but what God has done in me, that is unalterable too; the work of God is indestructible: it is very encouraging to come to that. So he is wrapped in his mantle, and he said, "I have been very jealous for Jehovah the God of hosts; for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I am left, I alone, and they seek my life, to take it away". This is repeated now -- it had been said before. Well, he is not going to have any fellowship, he is going to be a poor isolated man all his life, on his own showing, whereas when God began at Horeb, one of the first things He spoke of there was the "*thousands* of them that love me". We must never forget that: not the thousands of those that *should* love Him, but the thousands of those that *do*. And apparently Elijah has no thought that there are any who do, so that he is going to be a lone man all his days! But that is not God's thought, there are those that "call upon the Lord out of a pure heart" (@2 Timothy 2: 22), those with whom we are to follow "righteousness, faith, love, peace". But Elijah says, "... I alone".
P.L. When a man has himself as his theme, vain repetition marks him, for he has not much to say;
{55}
whereas, if we have Christ as our theme with our brethren, we have like David many psalms -- there is great variety in the praise?
J.T. The Lord now has to say something definite: He says, "Go return on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus; and when thou comest anoint Hazael king over Syria; and Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint king over Israel; and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah shalt thou anoint prophet in thy stead". There are three persons anyway that are worthy of anointing, so that he is not alone! God has three persons, and seven thousand besides. It says, "Yet I have left myself seven thousand in Israel, all the knees that have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth that hath not kissed him".
W.H.M. Is that the same seven thousand as are spoken of in verse 15 of the next chapter?
J.T. Well, there is a link there, I think. They are seven thousand warriors there, but here they are to be reserved for God. Notice He takes account of their mouths.
P.L. Do these men use their mouths effectively; Naboth in relation to the inheritance, and Micah in relation to the throne?
J.T. Yes, that comes out. No one knows the number of christians in christendom; who can tell them, except God? But He knows them -- "The Lord knoweth them that are his". But God says, 'I will work in relation to them too, I am going to slay what is in the way: these three men will execute My judgment *here*'. The first who came into the account is Elisha, and he does not slay people, it is a question of grace; that is the position; instead of actual slaying, you have bringing people down in grace -- that is Elisha's ministry.
P.L. So that no one escapes him. With the other two the work is not complete, but the spirit of grace in the present dispensation brings everything to completion.
{56}
J.T. Quite so. God tells Elijah how to go back, "Go, return on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus", but, instead of that, "he departed thence, and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who was ploughing with twelve yokes before him". Here is a man who is doing something positive, there is going to be a crop out of all this. God always has that in mind; and, if we are to have a crop, we must plough. This man is ploughing; there are twelve yokes ploughing, and he is with the twelfth.
Rem. We do not usually connect with the wilderness ploughing with twelve yokes of oxen: he does not seem to have gone the way he was told, by the wilderness.
J.T. I think it is what he is doing himself; the man's recovery is now in view, 'I do not want to give up office', would express his feelings if he was not recovered -- 'I will go to Elisha last'. But he goes to Elisha first, he is ready to be displaced; and that is, I believe, the ground of the honour put on him later.
Rem. Actually Elijah never did anoint Hazael and Jehu.
J.T. No, we may say it was by Elisha. So I think his action was that of a recovered man, as he goes to the man who is to replace him, and he is ploughing with a crop in view -- that shows his moral greatness.
P.H. Are the twelve yokes of oxen suggestive of the whole thought of Israel?
J.T. That is the idea. They are all before him; he is with the last.
P.H. So the recovery of Elijah brings great thoughts into view, nothing less than the whole of Israel.
J.T. That is what I understand, the idea of a crop comes in. I think the recovery of Elijah is seen in the fact that the mantle comes into view again. It is what you are that affects another person; that is a question of what influence I have; and that is not a matter of light merely, but of what I am myself. So it says, "Elijah went over to him, and cast his mantle on him".
{57}
R.K.C. Do you connect that with Paul asking for the cloke? @2 Timothy 4: 13.
J.T. Yes, I would connect this mantle of Elijah's with Paul's cloke. Every step Timothy took with that cloke, he would say as it were, 'That suggests something greater than I' Such a thought keeps us right, it balances us.
H.B. Do you think this is a feature of the man of God throughout scripture? Moses and Joshua; Elijah and Elisha; Paul and Timothy: each would take care as to a successor.
J.T. I think that is right. The idea of someone coming in begins with @Genesis 3, with the Seed of the woman. So Eve says, "I have acquired a man with Jehovah" -- that is, someone to carry on. So right through Scripture, it is a question of someone to continue.
P.L. Does one often qualify for succession in an obscure locality like Abel-meholah? It is only mentioned elsewhere once. Would it suggest a brother in a meeting engaged in promoting the food supply, like Gideon?
J.T. Yes. One like that gives dignity to the place, "The village of Mary and Martha".
All this brings out the completeness of Elijah's recovery, that he looks for the man who is to replace him first; that is a very great test, for we naturally want to keep office as long as we can. David set Solomon on the throne alongside himself before he died. So we have to encourage the young brothers to come forward, to make room for them.
{58}
THE RIGHTS AND PATIENCE OF GOD IN TESTIMONY (4)
@1 Kings 20: 26 - 43; @1 Kings 21: 17 - 29; @1 Kings 22: 31 - 34
J.T. In these chapters we have the second phase of our subject; that is, the patient grace of God as witnessed in our own times in carrying on the service of grace in christendom; even employing persons who are not characteristically obedient, but who may at times come under the divine ordering; God thus giving victory after victory, but at the same time discriminating, so that, however much men may be used in the service of God, and through His patience, God "by no means clearing the guilty", @Exodus 34: 7. He gives good credit, but by no means clears the guilty, so the judgment of God finds out Ahab in the midst of the battle, protecting Jehoshaphat. We are told in Chronicles that Jehovah diverted the Syrians from Jehoshaphat, and the king of Israel is wounded, and dies afterwards, and is buried in Samaria, and the dogs licked his blood. It is this side of the truth that enters into these chapters. What would be seen in the passage read from chapter 20 is the use of the word "prophet" in verse 13, and again in verse 22; and in verse 28, "the man of God" -- this prophetic service attending on Ahab; that is, as representing the responsible element in the sphere of profession. God uses what there is in the way of prophetic ministry, to augment what is being done, so that every help in keeping with the divine mind is available, and yet He by no means clears the guilty. Although there are those in evil associations who are really the Lord's, like Jehoshaphat, they are saved only "as by fire".
H.B. These persons are unnamed. Do you take them to be Elijah, or others who are raised up?
J.T. I think others. It is more that kind of prophetic service, without distinguishing anyone, it is in whomsoever it may be seen. Then, besides that, there
{59}
is the man who values the inheritance, "Naboth the Jizreelite had a vineyard", and he valued it as the inheritance of his fathers.
H.B. Are these individuals from amongst the seven thousand who have not bowed the knee to Baal?
J.T. Quite so, they belong to the seven thousand. We do well to keep our eye on these features, the prophetic features, the man of God, and the man who values the inheritance; and finally, the man who is saved at the end so as by fire -- that is Jehoshaphat. We get Micaiah too -- another prophet named. Then we get in the last part of chapter 20 "a certain man of the sons of the prophets" acting for God. So that we have a remarkable range of divine agencies augmenting and supporting the responsible element; so that, if anything can be done, they have every facility for doing it, God helping them. Yet it all culminates in the complete destruction of Ahab and Jezebel, but the preservation of every bit that is for God, represented in Jehoshaphat.
Rem. You speak of victory after victory; what would those victories be in christendom?
J.T. There would be many such victories since the Reformation, during the past hundred years, in the sphere of profession; the Lord has not given up His rights in it, nor will He, while the Holy Spirit is here. Whatever is done has to be accredited to God working with poor instruments perhaps, but whatever is done, would have its value, and is to be noted. There has been much work carried on, souls have been saved, and the truth, in very large measure, has been maintained by certain agencies; but God is "by no means clearing the guilty", and the garment spotted by the flesh is always in view for judgment.
Ques. It says, in the address to Philadelphia, "I have set before thee an opened door, which no one can shut". Is that the resource for this day?
{60}
J.T. That goes a little beyond what we have in these chapters, but of course, it is always true.
P.L. Is it like Eldad and Medad in the camp, an agency Moses is thankful for?
J.T. Just so.
W.J.W. What is the thought of the sons of the prophets?
J.T. They are the product of an earlier generation which God owned. The prophets are formally recognised; but the sons of the prophets are very uncertain -- you may find a good one, and you may find others who divert from the truth.
W.J.W. So Elisha found them when they attempted to look for Elijah.
J.T. Yes, they were diverting from the truth of ascension. Although Elisha knew as well as they that the Lord had taken Elijah away, yet they even influenced Elisha in a wrong direction; so you cannot trust them, yet there may be a good one here and there. "A certain man of the sons of the prophets said to another by the word of Jehovah, Smite me, ..." -- that is a good one, that is a useful son of a prophet. "A man of God" is more than is conveyed by the term 'a son of a prophet'. The order is that, in verse 13, a prophet draws near to Ahab; in verse 22, a prophet drew near to the king of Israel; and in verse 28, the man of God drew near and spoke to the king of Israel: then, in verse 35, a certain man of the sons of the prophets. That is the order in which that subject stands. God has His hidden servants. If we keep our eye on divine territory, that in which God has rights and asserts them, we shall see that He uses whom He will, and we shall not quarrel with any whom God may use -- we just accept them. We let God act sovereignly in His own territory, and, as the Lord said to the disciples, "Forbid them not". They would have forbidden them to cast out demons because they did not walk with, or follow, them; but the Lord says, "Forbid them not".
{61}
J.F.C. Is "the man of God" a mature thought?
J.T. I think so; he stands in a crisis, he can be relied on. Elijah is pre-eminently 'the man of God' as was recognised by the widow in her house.
W.C.G. We have to recognise men like Wesley and Whitefield.
J.T. Yes. Such are not to be despised; but then the garment spotted by the flesh is to be hated, and that appears in all these great movements. God would help us so that the garment should *not* be spotted by the flesh.
J.C. In what way do you view Jehoshaphat here?
J.T. He represents, in this section, a christian in false associations -- and there are many of them, alas! But your eye is detained by the persons of these prophets: when we come to chapter 22 we have Micah, a very faithful prophet.
Rem. The prophet testifies to the responsible element, corresponding to the Lord Jesus addressing the "angel" in @Revelation 2 and 3.
J.T. Quite so. That illustrates what we are saying that even the last phase of the assembly is given counsel -- 'come and buy from Me'. Those in the systems around are ready to pay for many things; the Lord says, 'Why do you not buy from Me?' He has the best things. That is the position today. The Lord's attitude toward the professing system is still one of grace, but He will by no means clear the guilty; He has His eye on the guilty.
Ques. Do you look on the sons of the prophets as taking sides with the man of God? -- "And the man of God drew near, and spoke to the king of Israel".
J.T. The prophet or the man of God is serving Ahab: he tells him three times over what is to happen, and what to do. What we have to see first of all is the service of the prophet to Ahab, and that Ahab himself is to be the general of the army. 'You are to be the leader', the word was. Ahab says, "By whom? And he
{62}
said, Thus saith Jehovah: By the servants of the princes of the provinces". It would look as if there is an allusion to those in the country. Our times are city times, they are marked by cities, the growth of cities is remarkable in all countries. But the suggestion here is that success will attend the princes of the provinces, and then he said, "Who shall begin the battle? And he said, Thou. And he numbered the servants of the princes of the provinces, and they were two hundred and thirty-two; and after them he numbered all the people, all the children of Israel, Seven thousand". There is distinguishment here in the numbering of the servants of the princes of the provinces, the young men; and then the total number, which is perfect -- seven thousand.
Ques. Is it remarkable that it is the *servants* of the princes of the provinces?
J.T. Well, the servants are young men; they are not persons of distinction. We are living in times in which distinctions of learning and ability in the nominal service of God have all the place, but these people have no distinctions of learning or religious distinctions, or anything of that kind; they are just the young men, or servants, of the princes of the provinces.
P.L. There was a man who came up from the country in another crisis, and he was used -- Simon the Cyrenian, to carry the cross.
J.T. Quite so. He had a great honour: which he did not seek, but there was evidently a result, for his sons appear in the testimony.
Ques. Does it show that God can do His own work in His own wherever He has put them?
J.T. Just so, that is what the record shows. God is operating in His own territory. You may say, 'Well, the instrumentality is poor; the material is poor'; but then, God acts in spite of difficulties and obtains results; He shows that He discriminates, that He never loses sight of what is against Him -- that comes into judgment.
{63}
Rem. Why does it refer to the perfect number of seven thousand?
J.T. I think to bring out how God can rule and control things, and operate on His own principles in spite of the difficulties: He secures a perfect number.
Rem. Not one lost, in that way; all that is of God comes through.
J.T. Yes. As we were reminded this morning, there is no doubt a link between the divine answer to Elijah, and the seven thousand reserved, and this seven thousand under the Lord's hand.
Rem. The first reference to the seven thousand is, a negative one; they have not bowed the knee to Baal and their mouths have not kissed him: but here it is the positive side.
J.T. Yes. Ahab doubtless would not have chosen them: the Lord has such influence under these circumstances that Ahab takes on Jehovah's selection. I mean, it is the over-ruling influence of God, that He attains His end in spite of difficulties, and the difficulties are very great.
Rem. The Lord has all power in heaven and on earth.
J.T. That is right, and He shows it here. Ahab, the military man, would hardly have selected these; there is no evidence that they were military men specially, there are two hundred and thirty-two of them, they are distinguished by being numbered.
P.L. Would the fact that they are referred to as flocks of goats suggest an element of separation with them?
J.T. That comes in in the next battle. We have progression here. The first thing is, these men have no special distinction, yet they are the successful ones in the work of God.
F.I. Does it go to show that God is with the saints as a whole? Is that what sustains things here under the hand of God, rather than the administrative side? You
{64}
made a distinction between the provinces and the cities the cities are more on the administrative side.
J.T. You can see how that works out today. The administrative side, from the standpoint we are taking now, is the hierarchy; "the metropolitan", for instance, that is the administrative side; but God takes up something else, and that something else, has no outward distinction. It is composed of young persons in service, and they belong to the princes of the provinces, persons who are not specially related to the administrative side but belong to the company.
P.L. Would the persons named at Antioch be set off against Jerusalem, the metropolis?
J.T. Just so -- Niger and the others. They were drawn from very different parts of the earth.
P.H. These servants of the princes stand in contrast to the great company of Ben-hadad and the thirty-two kings.
J.T. Quite so. Think of the number of kings! that is the kind of thing in the world; it is the power of the world in royalty that Ben-hadad represents. But these young men are simple. Religious administrative leaders would not pay any attention to people who meet as we do.
Rem. As the apostle says in 1 Corinthians -- "things that are not, that he may annul the things that are" (chapter 1: 28).
Ques. Is this for the protection of the inheritance?
J.T. That is what we come to, the inheritance is in view, and the divine inheritance was being invaded: this is the great general territory of God which He still holds to, and Ben-hadad is invading that. God is going to meet him, notwithstanding the poor material He has. The general testimony God has in christendom -- it is all that God has, but the successful part lies with these young men, having no special distinction. We ought to get clear about these young men who have no status religiously. No doubt, in coming out of Samaria,
{65}
the thought is not exactly reproach, but rather that they are brought under administration; they are not without administration. They come out of the city, and then the king of Syria says, "Whether they be come out for peace, take them alive; or whether they be come out for war, take them alive. And these servants of the princes of the provinces came out of the city ..." -- which I apprehend to allude to the fact that they are not without administrative order. God has His eye on them. He has given them the service, and they are successful; so that it says, "they slew every one his man". They are in single combat, which, I understand, is the most testing of all features of war -- hand to hand combat, "And they slew every one his man; and the Syrians fled, and Israel pursued them". I understand what is brought out is that these are *men*, they are not only able to fight together, but they can fight singly. They were quitting themselves like men.
Rem. These are the moral qualities that were so desirable in Timothy's day. Like the faithful men to whom Timothy was to commit things.
J.T. Quite so, to faithful *men*.
H.C.L. It was the servants of the princes of the provinces who were to bring in deliverance, but these seven thousand referred to were Ahab's selection. Will you say a word as to that?
J.T. The people were numbered -- seven thousand, they were "the people" -- those that were there. That does not mean that all Israel was numbered, it means those that were available at the moment for war. I think the perfect number is to be noted; there is no credit to Ahab, it is what was there. It was God in His overruling power and influence, who brought all this about in spite of the most adverse conditions. So the victory was complete.
Now the next thing is the question of whether God can be limited. Read verses 22 - 24, "... take the kings away, every man out of his place, and put governors in
{66}
their stead". That corresponds to the modern removal of royalty and putting up of presidents and the like, persons of less note. But the issue was, Is He not a God of the valleys also? Does His power not extend to the valleys, the plateaux? And that brings in the question of the resurrection, for Jesus went down into the depths, the power of God is seen there: He is not only God above, He is God below. So that the whole truth as to God and His power is in question.
H.B. The power of the world in its democratic or republican phases is no greater against the testimony than in its royal form.
J.T. It seems as if they suggested a wise thing, but it did not avail anything against God. So it says, "The children of Israel were numbered and victualled, and they went against them; and the children of Israel encamped before them like two little flocks of goats" (chapter 20: 27).
Ques. Why two?
J.T. I suppose it would be the idea of testimony to the thought involved. Goats take an individual path -- it is the idea of separation. That is brought in in 2 Timothy. Timothy is the goat, he separates, but he does not remain separated, @2 Timothy 2: 19 gives us the goat -- let him "withdraw from iniquity"; he withdraws from the evil: he is isolated, but he does not remain isolated, he follows "righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart". I think that brings in the two little flocks of goats over against the enormous area of opposition -- "the Syrians filled the land", it says. Outside these two little flocks of goats there is not one to take God's side. I think God is narrowing things down, as it were, where He had been operating; the denominations are becoming of less and less account, they are becoming honeycombed with evil; apostasy is already there, and there is very little going on. But over against the country full of Syrians you have these two little flocks of goats.
{67}
Rem. It is not natural for goats to be in flocks.
J.T. No, they serve in the way of separation, but they do not remain separate.
P.L. So that before the bride in Canticles can be really united to Christ, 2 Timothy features have appeared. "Thy hair is as a flock of goats" (chapter 4: 1). Hair speaks of strength.
J.T. These two little flocks of goats are very striking. God gives the victory. Whatever is going on today for God, I believe the testimony is maintained in smallness, in little flocks, like these two flocks of goats, having no apparent power at all to cope with what is against them, but God is on their side.
Ques. Have the flocks individually to maintain the characteristics of separation?
J.T. I think so. We can understand it now in the light of the New Testament; all the Scriptures were written for us; we can see how the whole truth is being maintained by those who are in separation; you cannot trust any others.
Ques. Is that the result of the numbering and victualling?
J.T. That is very beautiful. They were numbered and victualled -- they are fed. You do not get that before; they are fully provided for from God's point of view, so that they are not overcome.
P.L. The Lord, in @John 17, speaks of "the men whom thou gavest me". Has He not numbered and victualled them?
J.T. Exactly. A century ago this little flock came to light; God numbered them and gave them great light. That light is for christendom: the *Collected Writings* by J. N. Darby are for christendom; the great victory was for every person in christendom; but what use do they make of it? Ben-hadad represents the responsible side of the opposition; but Ahab spared the world, and accepted it on its own terms. In the history of christendom
{68}
they have accepted the world on its own terms, which is what Ahab did here.
Ques. Does that emphasise what you have spoken of? God will by no means clear the guilty. The acceptance of such things will bring down God's judgment on it.
J.T. It will. All that light of the last hundred years will bring God's judgment on these men; every society and association will be brought into judgment. The question will be, 'Why did you not profit by all this light?' Instead of that, they accepted on its own terms the world which the light condemned.
P.H. Is the contrast to that, having the God of the valleys with you as seeking to walk in the path of separation?
J.T. Quite so, we ought to understand the God of the valleys -- Gethsemane, and how God came in in power there. The next thing is, Is Ahab, the responsible element in christendom, to be allowed to go without rebuke? That is the service rendered by "a certain man of the sons of the prophets": but, in order to render the service, to rebuke Ahab, he has to suffer himself. This is another matter. If I am to be of service in this way, I have to suffer myself; in other words, I have to bear in my body the brands of the Lord Jesus. He says to one, "Smite me, I pray thee". If I am a loose kind of brother, and not sympathetic with the testimony, I will not smite another in this sense; and if I follow that out fully, it would mean, Why should God smite Jesus? That is what that means, that is in the man's mind; yet he seems to be a nice kind of man. If I do not learn to smite people in the sense spoken of here, I am of no use to God. God smote Jesus -- "they persecute him whom thou hast smitten", @Psalm 69: 26, "Smite the Shepherd" -- Jesus had to be smitten.
P.L. God "hewed them by the prophets", @Hosea 6: 5. Is that the smiting?
J.T. Well, it is. The smiting of course is not with
{69}
literal swords now; it is by the word of God we smite people. Natural sentiment would say, 'No, you must not be so severe on people as that'.
P.L. "Pity thyself, Lord!"
Rem. You mean, you would tell a man that if he continues on his present path he will come into judgment.
J.T. I am to judge him by the word of God -- that is the principle.
F.I. Does being consistent with the Timothy principle bring in suffering, but at the same time you would stand out as one who condemned the systems around?
J.T. That is the way it stands. One has to bear in one's body, as Paul did, "the brands of the Lord Jesus", @Galatians 6: 17. If I am to be in the hands of God to minister rebuke to christendom, I must do that.
P.L. I must be in the hands of God to rebuke the offender if I am to be used of Him to recover the one who offended? Paul would have things committed to faithful men.
J.T. That is the idea, "A certain man of the sons of the prophets" is a faithful man. This brings out what has been before us, what God had, "He found another man" -- the first man would not do it, but there is another man -- and he says to him, "Smite me, I pray thee. And the man smote him violently, and wounded him". Now why did he do that? He did not ask him to smite him violently, but he represents the idea; God smote Christ violently in judgment when He took our place, so that we must not be easy on the flesh if we are to be of service to God.
Ques. Did Paul smite Peter when he said, "I withstood him to the face, because he was to be condemned", @Galatians 2: 11.
Rem. It says, "rebuke with all authority", @Titus 2: 15.
J.T. Quite so. So this man is to face the king of
{70}
Israel and he is to face him as a man smitten; that is the gospel. He is smitten himself -- the king of Israel is obliged to state the truth, he says, "So is thy judgment: thyself hast decided it", showing that he knew the truth; and these men *do* know the truth, but they do not obey it. So that the man of the sons of the prophets "hastily took the sash away from his face; and the king of Israel discerned him, that he was of the prophets". There it was, he was of the prophets, he belonged to that class. Instead of the king being convicted, it says, "the king of Israel went to his house sullen and vexed". He gets no good out of all this: he is drawing near to his end, he is not profiting by the testimony brought to him.
Ques. The psalmist says, "Let the righteous smite me, it is kindness; and let him reprove me, it is an excellent oil which my head shall not refuse". @Psalm 141: 5. Would that be the same principle?
J.T. Quite so. This man who smites violently is a man we have to reckon with.
H.B. An interesting word appears in these chapters, the word "found". He "*found* Elisha"; then this man "found" a man who would smite him. Is that a feature of the present day -- finding suitable persons?
J.T. I think so. In the first case, he "said to another ..." -- that is anyone; but this man who smites violently is a "found" man, as if he had to be found; it was not anybody in the street who would do this.
Rem. Would you link him with the man who knew something about the cake and the cruse of water? He could smite violently in relation to the official system that Ahab represented.
J.T. Exactly, the violent smiting had that in view. It was something very wrong, and this man who is smitten is in a vicarious position. But if Jesus had to suffer, smitten of God and afflicted, shall I escape if I continue in the path of self-will? That is what Ahab had to learn, that is the testimony. He "went to his
{71}
house sullen and vexed"; but then the bow at a venture reached him, the judgment of God reached him.
P.H. Were these the exercises that reached the Galatian saints as Paul came before them? He spoke of them as desiring to have a fair appearance in the flesh. Bearing in his body "the brands of the Lord Jesus" -- would that be his power to put them on different lines?
J.T. I thought that was why it was brought in there. It was a question of suffering, not the literal circumcision, but the suffering for Christ.
Ques. Would it connect with what we have in 2 Corinthians, chapters 4 and 5 -- "Always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus"?
J.T. That would fit in.
Ques. How would it be made practical in local circumstances?
J.T. You are brought into accord with Christ -- "Bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus".
H.B. Do you think the vineyard in the next chapter is a further thought?
J.T. It brings in a higher thought, as if God is generalising in this chapter, giving the responsible leaders in christendom every advantage, but now God is at issue with Ahab. There is an issue between the man who has the inheritance and values it, and these leaders. They want what you have.
P.L. Is the thought of their wanting your inheritance like Laodicea, the imitative system seeking to steal the Philadelphian features?
J.T. Yes, they would be glad to have what those have who are subject to God, who keep His commandments; such persons get wonderful things from God by the Spirit. These leaders would take all that without paying the price, without going through what is necessary to that end.
Ques. Would they not use the inheritance for their own fancies, making it a garden of herbs?
{72}
J.T. It is only recently I have seen a letter from a brother who has been much before us, in which he said he valued the fellowship, but was not prepared for the responsibilities entailed. There he is writing down his own condemnation. I mean one like that is doing so. The inheritance is something to be valued, and we are not to give it up on those lines.
W.C.G. Jacob was one who valued the inheritance.
J.T. Yes, he valued what came down to him, the birthright, and God values a man who appreciates the birthright.
W.C.G. So we ought to value our position.
Rem. Ahab would have turned the vineyard into a garden of herbs, thus he would limit it to his own use.
J.T. Just so. Then we get what Jezebel would do. She comes to the aid of the leading man and kills Naboth, puts him out of the way. We must not assume that such a spirit is not abroad today, for there is that murderous spirit; if it could only do what it would wish to do. So that all this brings out the position of the saints, those who value the inheritance; they are exposed to the bitter hostility of Jezebel.
Rem. We would value it more if we took account of the fact that it has been handed down to us by our fathers who went through the warfare.
J.T. Quite so. Naboth said to Ahab, "Jehovah forbid it me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers to thee!" God greatly values that. It is the finishing touch here; a man who values the inheritance and dies at the hand of Jezebel because he holds to it.
P.L. He has the tenacity of a Philadelphian -- holding fast.
J.T. That is the thought -- holding fast; you must not let anything go.
Rem. The false witnesses make an untruthful statement against the man who holds the inheritance; we find that today.
J.T. It is distressing that persons known as brethren
{73}
should descend to such untruthfulness as may be seen in current attacks on the truth. These men set up by Jezebel were deliberately untruthful.
Rem. Alexander the coppersmith greatly withstood the word of Paul, and we have men like that today.
J.T. I believe the enemy has sought to take away our inheritance by a very circuitous route recently; to take away the rich inheritance that has come down to us as to the principles of fellowship. The enemy has endeavoured to bring in false principles that have been fought against by those who have preceded us, and through whom we have handed down to us the principles that govern the house of God -- a rich inheritance. The enemy has by a very round-about way endeavoured to rob us of it, and to weaken the young amongst us who know little or nothing about the conflicts that have preceded in the maintenance of the truth governing the house of God; and there is a constant effort to lessen the value of these principles in our minds when we do know them. So that Naboth is an outstanding testimony and witness to those who value the inheritance and hold it fast. Naboth did not want to barter his inheritance at any price. We cannot surrender the inheritance, it is priceless.
P.H. Would the meeting for ministry be the way in which the Lord is seeking to establish us?
J.T. I think a meeting for ministry is good. It is for all the saints in a place gathered together; so the prophets have opportunity for ministering what they have, one after another. There is no doubt, if we are true in these meetings (for it really is a question of loyalty to one another, that we do not take advantage of one another) I believe the Lord will give a prophetic word, so that people will fall down and say, "God is indeed amongst you".
J.G. Is there any light in Scripture to regulate us as to when we should have such meetings?
{74}
J.T. Any convenient time. The order in 1 Corinthians is:-
Chapter 10, the great general thought of fellowship.
Chapter 11, the inclusive thought of the Lord's supper.
Chapter 12, the organism, the unity -- it is called "the Christ", in verse 12, it is dignified, which would mean that the flesh is not allowed, we "have all been given to drink of one Spirit", that is, we are all satisfied, we are satisfied in the position.
Chapter 13, love, the way of surpassing excellence, love amongst ourselves.
Chapter 14, the ministry of the gifts -- prophecy is especially commended, and it is, when "the *whole assembly* come together in one place".
In chapter 11, it is not the whole assembly, it is "when ye come together in assembly" -- it is in function there, and may include several subdivisions in a city, as you have here; but chapter 14, is when *all* the saints are together, the *whole assembly* is together in one place; not exactly in assembly, but in one place. All the saints may be there, and there is room there for ministry; however many the saints may be, they should be there.
P.L. So that the Lord's voice to the city as such may be heard assemblywise.
J.T. Yes, however many there are in the city they are to be there -- the whole assembly in one place.
H.C.L. It does not exclude any. If, for instance, I was in such a meeting here, having come from another locality, would it be open for me to take part?
J.T. Surely; the truth of the body would cover that. As coming together in this way an unbeliever may come in and be so affected by the presence of God through prophetic ministry, that he falls down and acknowledges -- not simply his guilt, but -- that God is there. That is the point -- God is in the assembly.
A.E.L. The secrets of his heart are manifested.
{75}
J.T. Quite so, but the point is that God is recognised to be there through ministry.
P.L. Should it be part of the temple services, on the local assembly calendar, as you might say, and be comparatively regular?
J.T. I think it is mentioned as though it were regular.
Ques. Should two cities come together?
J.T. It should always be local; it never loses its local setting. If others come in, it does not lose that character.
Ques. What would you call a district?
J.T. A district would be County Down as this whole district, including Holywood. Bangor, etc. Scripture does not warrant that for administrative purposes. Paul speaks to the assemblies in Galatia to rebuke and correct them, but he does not constitute the province of Galatia an administrative area.
{76}
THE RIGHTS AND PATIENCE OF GOD IN TESTIMONY (5)
@2 Kings 1: 1 - 18; @2 Kings 2: 1 - 14
J.T. What we see in these chapters is that one man falls and another ascends. Ahaziah fell down through a lattice and was sick. I suppose the general position is that the responsible element in the sphere of profession is marked in this way by fall and sickness, whereas the coming of the Lord, in the minds of the saints, involves ascent -- the thought of the ascent of our Lord Jesus. These chapters afford a climax to the subject under consideration, as corresponding with current conditions in the profession. There is a fall in the responsible element in chapter 1, and in chapter 2 we have the formal statement that Jehovah would take up Elijah into the heavens. What is of God is to *go up*, and is going up morally now, in the testimony being rendered. The one is moral descent, and the other moral elevation.
J.M. What do you mean by the fall as applying it to present conditions?
J.T. There has been moral descent in recent years in the sphere of profession; the authority of the Scriptures, and the relative godliness and fear of God that marked the leaders earlier, have almost disappeared.
Ques. Do you take Rome to represent the outward position in the profession at the present day, the others being states in that?
J.T. Yes, but the responsible element seen in Ahaziah or Ahab includes more than what is in Rome. Rome is always in evidence, that is Jezebel, the state is typified in her, but I think the responsible element represented in Ahab and Ahaziah here includes more than Rome. She still exists in this part of the history, although she is not mentioned until later in 2 Kings, when she comes in for formal destruction. The responsible element, represented in Ahab and Ahaziah, comes
{77}
rather under the providential dealings of God. Ahab's death was, so to speak, providential; although he died under the judgment of God, it happened in an unusual way, through "a bow at a venture".
Rem. He was not directly smitten of God -- there are those who are smitten.
J.T. Yes, it was a bow at a venture, although the judgment of God had been announced, but it was modified in that he humbled himself. All that comes under the providential dealings of God. Things are happening every day in that way, that faith discerns; but when Jezebel is destroyed she is not allowed to fall, she is cast down, she is destroyed in the street, and the dogs eat her -- a terrible thought!
Ques. Would the public side of it culminate in @Revelation 18 -- "Babylon has fallen"? Are these to be taken as warnings to the public profession?
J.T. Yes, "Babylon has fallen" is a great general thought: she is not yet destroyed in @Revelation 18, it is in chapter 19 she is destroyed -- she "has fallen, and has become the habitation of demons, and a hold of every unclean spirit, and a hold of every unclean and hated bird" (chapter 18: 2).
Ques. Is your point that this is a statement of consequences that exist and are present, prior to the actual cutting off?
J.T. Yes, the book of Revelation contemplates things happening under the ordinary providence of God; faith discerns they are His judgment; but later there are direct dealings in judgment that are not merely providential, but direct.
Ques. Alongside of that are you thinking there should be moral elevation?
J.T. That is what is going on. The moral declension, or degradation, and the moral elevation are going on at the same time. What is of God is being morally elevated, recovery has proceeded on those lines; God is bringing out the heavenly calling of the assembly,
{78}
and what becomes her now, and that is proceeding constantly; but the moral degradation of the general profession is proceeding also.
A.E.L. Without hope of recovery?
J.T. No, for the word to Ahaziah is, "Thou shalt not come down from the bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt certainly die" -- that is the end of it.
A.W.R. "Going up" is a characteristic expression in @2 Kings 2 -- would it suggest the moral elevation? Paul comes by the upper coasts to Ephesus -- is it from that line that the assembly is fallen?
J.T. I think so. That enters into the present testimony, the calling of God and all that goes with that involving literal elevation presently. Ephesians contemplates literal elevation -- He "has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2: 6. That is not resurrection, but *elevation* from the earth, which, of course, will become actual when the assembly is taken up, but already the principle is there, spiritually, and should enter into our view of things and our formation now, so that we are morally elevated. Ahaziah had an upper chamber, but he fell nevertheless: the assembly is marked by an upper chamber; she began with that, and she will finish with that, I believe. It appears in @Acts 1, and @Acts 20 also.
P.L. Would you have this principle in the Acts? Judas fell and went to his own place, and the brethren are found in the upper room. Then you find Herod eaten of worms, and immediately the assembly is introduced in its elevation at Antioch.
J.T. Yes, I think that is good; it enters into this chapter.
J.P. Would Baalzebub, the god of Ekron, represent the teaching of today? The judgment was because Ahaziah sent to enquire of that source -- it is the authority of darkness.
{79}
P.L. Like spiritism today; that sort of thing, the authority of darkness -- Baal is authority.
J.P. They wanted to know if Ahaziah would recover, and they seek there as a source of information.
J.T. Yes, quite so, seeking elsewhere instead of from God. We see that all around in the profession, the turning away from God in the apostate state of things; their grossest forms may be in spiritism, christian science and all that, but, whatever the gross form may be, the thing is there, and permeates the whole profession.
Rem. The very one they enquired of will fall from heaven.
J.T. Yes, it is the general idea of falling which comes into evidence towards the end, the fall of what is unfaithful. The idea began with Ephesus, she is to remember from whence she had *fallen*; an element that enters into the profession. The rapidity of the fall after apostolic times, is one of the saddest features in the history of the assembly. After the apostles had left, you get hardly anything of value in that particular era.
L.D.F. What would you say of Jehovah sending Elijah to meet the messengers?
J.T. That brings out God's faithfulness as we have been considering it, and His patience. How patiently God testifies; instead of letting the messengers go and get into greater darkness, and the king die without any further testimony, he gets this faithful word. We get a sidelight on it, as to the kind of man Elijah was; the king knew him by the description; he had already known the external appearance of the prophet, an appearance that was in keeping with the moment -- God was not ashamed to be called his God. His clothing and manner were known well to the king, it is none other than the Elijah whom God had accredited publicly, and still wearing the same clothing, he has not fallen or degenerated, he is preserved.
Rem. John the baptist was girded.
{80}
J.T. Yes, the Lord says John the baptist was Elijah -- "Elias has already come, and they have not known him" (@Matthew 17: 12) -- he came in that character.
Rem. So apostasy developed in spite of repeated warnings.
J.T. That is what we shall see in this enquiry, I think; the patience of God in the presence of all this degeneration.
W.J. Do the garments represent a separate man?
J.T. I think they do: it is not only what a man says, but what he is. Elijah retains his external appearance; it is the new man, the measure of the man, the kind of clothes he wears. So that it is a voice to us as to how we do appear publicly, what one *is*, one's clothes. The description is, "He was a man in a hairy garment" (or as it may read, 'a hairy man') "and girt with a girdle of leather about his loins". Hair would allude, I think, to strength.
Ques. Would it suggest Nazariteship?
J.T. I think it would: Nazariteship underlies all this. The hairy garment and the girdle of leather about his loins all speak of strength.
Rem. He is not a false prophet in a hairy garment to deceive as in @Zechariah 13: 4.
J.T. No, he is the real prophet, the same man who had been accredited by God, as the king well recognised; so there is no excuse for the king, and out of his own mouth he is condemned. Instead of recognising the moral authority with Elijah, the king is asserting his own authority, he is sending a captain of fifty to tell him to come down. Why should he go down? The word is, "he went up to him, and behold, he sat on the top of the mount. And he spoke to him: Man of God, the king says, Come down!" Why should he give up his moral advantage?
Ques. Does that show how completely he is restored in the favour of God? showing the greatest moral elevation before actual translation?
{81}
J.T. Yes, it is a known experience, a position in Elijah showing moral elevation.
P.L. There is calm dignity in it -- "he sat". In the presence of all the uncertainty and strife of tongues in christendom, is he not hidden in the pavilion, like the psalmist, from the strife of tongues? (@Psalm 31: 20). The Lord sits so much in Matthew. It says He *sat* over against the treasury, and He spoke of those who *sit* in Moses seat.
J.T. And, as He *sat* on the mount, His disciples came to Him.
Ques. Was this command to come down a command to surrender the moral elevation that marked him?
J.T. That is what it means. Had he come down, he would have become subservient to the king's authority, whereas moral authority belonged to Elijah. The voice in it for us is not to surrender the advantage God gives in a moral sense. Separation involves moral advantage, withdrawal from the ordinary religious level.
Ques. "Hold fast what thou hast, that no one take thy crown", @Revelation 3: 11. Is that the thought?
J.T. Quite so. Then he says to him, "Man of God". That is a very dignified appellation applied to any man, but does this captain really mean it? I think this is an abuse of the most exalted title, without any sense of what is meant.
Ques. Is that why he says, "if I be a man of God ..."?
J.T. Yes, he says it over and over again. There is something attached to that. There is moral authority in his position on the hill, but that is to be supported from heaven; heaven is behind this title where it is properly applied. This is a voice to us as to retaining the advantage God gives. The enemy would come in to induce us to give it up. It seemed reasonable enough for the king to send a message like this. Why should he not come down? But he is a man of God. Elijah is retaining his advantage.
{82}
Rem. The enemy saw the matter was urgent, for the second captain says, "Come down quickly!"
J.T. Quite so, the second one is adding to the insult. The third discerns the position; God is with the third one, but the not giving up of things is important. Naboth refuses to give up his inheritance, and Elijah refuses to give up the advantage God had given him of moral authority. He had the advantage, not the king; he is telling the king what is going to happen. We do not want to give up any advantage God gives us that is founded on separation.
F.I. Elijah would represent a fixed principle, and departure from that would mean death. It is what is fixed, and any lowering of it means death, as it did with this captain and his host.
J.T. Quite so. Then there was the usage of an appellation that in itself meant spirituality. A man of God is *morally* the greatest title you can get; a man of God is a man who is with God, and has partaken of His character, and to use that title merely formally is most obnoxious. God asserts through Elijah the power that lies behind the title. Every appellation in spiritual things taken on by the profession and degraded accordingly, God takes back by showing His power behind them. It is like the spoiling of the Egyptians. These things belong to God, and God asserts His right to them, by showing His power in them.
Ques. Are we not in danger of using the names of divine Persons too easily?
J.T. I think we should be careful in using divine terms, or names of divine things, to use them in power, with some idea of what they mean. The word 'church' has become degraded in unbelieving lips. Faith alone can rightly use these terms; the terms in christianity have become degraded, and in that sense lost; but God would rescue them all. This title, 'man of God', is used remarkably sparingly in the New Testament, but it is used frequently in these books.
{83}
Ques. The fire that descended is called "the fire of God"; does that mean that God is asserting still more powerfully His thought as to the man of God?
J.T. I think so. It runs into the New Testament -- "our God is a consuming fire", @Hebrews 12: 29. Whether it be literal or spiritual, it is behind the man of God.
P.L. Does @Revelation 1 answer to that? "His eyes as a flame of fire": then falling at His feet as dead, and the Lord's right hand laid on John, saying, "Fear not". Is that what the third captain does? If you stand by the principle as Elijah did, will not God see to the people? In a certain sense did He not give Elijah these fifty men who understood the position?
J.T. Quite so, and these men are saved. He "fell on his knees", that is very different to falling through the lattice. A man falling on his knees means he is in the presence of the power whereby he can get relief.
Ques. Would you say a little more as to the term "man of God" being frequent in the Old Testament and scarce in the New?
J.T. Well, it is one of the suggestions we have of the present value of the Old Testament, like the term "Son of man"; this latter term is used about eighty-four times in the New Testament by the Lord Himself, and it is used very frequently in Ezekiel. This is a picture of current circumstances to which 2 Timothy applies; this section brings out the value of the man of God. It is not an official thought, it is what a man *is*, and sometimes you do not get his name; the thought would be to emphasise the idea of the man *of God*.
Ques. Would the captain with the third fifty represent those who are following righteousness, faith, love and peace?
J.T. First, you recognise what the judgment of God is. The third captain and his fifty bowed to the judgment and cleared themselves. The man who names the name of the Lord and separates from iniquity is establishing a testimony; he is forming a judgment which
{84}
God never overlooks; and that judgment is to be executed in due course. *He* is executing it morally in separating from iniquity, and *God* will come in later and execute it publicly -- but it is *his* judgment. This man is falling on his knees before the real power (compare @Numbers 16).
A.E.L. He is crying for mercy.
J.T. Yes. Morally he has left Ahaziah's system altogether, he is with Elijah.
Ques. Is the idea of the man of God one who has moral substance?
J.T. Quite so. There is something there to show that he is a man of God.
Ques. You called our attention to what the widow of Sarepta recognised by the resurrection of her son -- that Elijah was a man of God and she knew that the Lord was with him. It took her a little time to learn that?
J.T. Just so. She did not learn it easily. So if the Spirit of God uses a term there is substance behind it.
{85}
THE RIGHTS AND PATIENCE OF GOD IN TESTIMONY (6)
@2 Kings 2: 1 - 25
J.T. As was pointed out this morning, in chapter 1 one man falls; and in chapter 2, another is taken up to the heavens. The first, that is the king of Israel, representing in our own times the responsible element in the sphere of profession, falls through the lattice, which could not afford great support, nor is it intended for this, and he becomes sick. The responsible element is thus marked by moral disease, and is fallen; the full expression of it will be in Babylon -- "Great Babylon has fallen". Indeed the book of Revelation is marked, in a sense, by certain things falling, and others being elevated. We are to consider now the thought of what is taken *up*, and what will be observed is not only the fact of Elijah's translation to heaven but the *time* of it; it says, "*when* Jehovah would take up Elijah into the heavens ..."; the time of the rapture of the assembly is, we may say, *now*: that is, since the revival of the truth, the thought of the Lord's coming, the rapture of the assembly, was regarded and rightly so, as just pending, as imminent. What follows is in view of the rapture of the saints, and, in order that the significance of the chapter may be clear, we should see that it is not only the rapture of the assembly, it is a type of Christ's ascension too, and this enters into the ascension of the assembly: because undoubtedly the man child caught up to God and His throne, includes His body, the assembly (@Revelation 12: 5). So that it is "*when*" Jehovah would take him up -- *the time of it*, and what follows in view of that.
P.L. You get the idea of time with the Lord in the gospel of Luke -- the time of His receiving up, before He actually went.
J.T. That corresponds; you get that in @Luke 9,
{86}
but historically it did not take place until after He was risen from the dead, as recorded in the last chapter of Luke, but much intervened. @Luke 9 also gives us the transfiguration of Christ, and the word from the Father, "This is my beloved Son: hear him". Moses and Elijah spoke with Him of His decease which He should accomplish at Jerusalem, and, what should intervene was that He should be heard.
Ques. You referred to what followed in view of Elijah's translation: had you in mind the different places to which he had to go?
J.T. That is right, and you will observe that Elijah went with Elisha. It is a credit to Elisha that it is not said, 'Elisha went with Elijah', but that "Elijah went with Elisha"; there was already a move in Elisha's soul in that direction. Resurrection and ascension are by the way of death; we must go that way. There are many who talk much about the coming of the Lord, but who have no thought of moving to Gilgal. The word is that "when Jehovah would take up Elijah into the heavens by a whirlwind, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal", so Elisha is already moving in his mind from the place of death.
Ques. Do you think the prophet is instructing Elisha here, as to the way the moral end is to be reached before translation is actually effectuated?
J.T. I think that is the thought, that we should not only have the doctrine of the coming of the Lord, but be ready for it; so that the movement is from Gilgal to Bethel, from Bethel to Jericho, from Jericho to the Jordan: that is the moral way to ascension.
Ques. Perhaps you would tell us what those features mean?
J.T. There is much there to occupy us. I should like the brethren to get clear as to the *time* of the ascension, when Jehovah would do it -- for it is not simply that He would do it, but *when* He would do it. Then the state of Elisha is such that Elijah goes with him,
{87}
for he is already in movement in his mind. It says "Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal" -- that is the starting-point; the place of circumcision where the flesh is set aside in its energy: it is disallowed. Bethel is, of course, as no doubt most of us know, the house of God, an important feature of the truth to visit in the company of such a man as Elijah. How Elisha would be impressed! The great spirituality of Elijah would be felt in those surroundings.
Rem. The fact of their coming from Gilgal would make them ready for Bethel.
J.T. I thought that was the moral starting point. If people talk about the coming of the Lord, then you would enquire what are their living associations. It is somewhat noxious to be talking about things and ignoring the circumstances to which they apply morally. Ascension properly belongs to people who are residing at Gilgal; God will not take up the flesh in any way whatever. It is a question, therefore, of where we are in the state of our souls. That is the point in it -- "circumcised with circumcision not done by hand, in the putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of the Christ", @Colossians 2: 11.
Ques. You spoke of the time. Do you imply that it is a question of the condition of the saints?
J.T. I thought the time synchronises with the Lord's coming. The Lord says, "I am the root and offspring of David". "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". It is a question of state, and that state belongs to Gilgal, where the reproach of Egypt is rolled away, and the flesh judged unsparingly. It is "when Jehovah would take up Elijah into the heavens by a whirlwind". The times and seasons the Father reserves. "Of that day or of that hour no one knows, neither the angels who are in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father", @Mark 13: 32. A remarkable statement! a statement that we ought to well weigh just now, as to the place that a divine Person took in saying, "... nor the Son, but the
{88}
Father". But the state of the saints synchronises with that time -- I think that is the way the scripture puts it.
Rem. "And every one that has this hope in him purifies himself, even as he is pure", @1 John 3: 3. That is your thought, and you would look for a revival of affections before the Lord's shout is heard.
J.T. Yes. Then you would become conversant with what God has here, that is, His house. We are going to heaven to the Father's house. People talk of that very much who have never had a thought of the house down here; the house down here is the point now, that is Bethel. That was the great issue in the days of the Bethesda conflict; it was a question of the house of God and the order of it. That is really what this alludes to. I mean the saints are directed by the teaching here to Bethel, and under the greatest advantage. That is, Elijah is going himself with Elisha to Bethel: it is not like reading ministry about the house of God. It is the Lord going with you; He is so intent on your going, that He goes with you, to make sure that you get some idea of the house, that God has a place down here in which He resides, where His love is known, where Christ as Son is over it and orders it. He is very intent on that, that saints should get from Himself a true idea of the house. The Lord says, "the bondman abides not in the house for ever"; the idea of the bondman is not continuous in the house, but "the son abides for ever. If therefore the Son shall set you free, ye shall be really free", @John 8: 35 - 36. As Elijah went with Elisha to Bethel, what thoughts would come in! Elijah full of the thoughts of God, alluding back to Jacob's time. It says in chapter 18: 31 of the previous book, "the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom the word of Jehovah came saying, Israel shall be thy name" -- Elijah would impress Elisha with all that enters into this place, Bethel.
Rem. Paul in his letter to Timothy emphasises the house of God -- "that thou mayest know how one
{89}
ought to conduct oneself in God's house", @1 Timothy 3: 15.
Rem. Hiel, who built Jericho, is said to be a Bethelite: he did not stop at Gilgal.
J.T. That is a serious matter. He is professedly a churchman, as we may say, yet he is building Jericho, building up the world; but Elisha will never do that! Elijah would impress him with what the house is. When Jacob went up to Bethel he had to put away all the idols, and he commanded his house to do it.
Ques. Why is Jericho the next step?
J.T. I think it is that we may be imbued with the power that overthrows the world. Luke says that the Lord entered Jericho and passed through. What thoughts would enter the Lord's heart as He passed through the city, reverting back in mind to the 6th of Joshua! The Lord would be full of the thought, and as he passed through it Zacchaeus was there, a man who wanted to see the Lord, who He was -- a Man that "passed through" Jericho. The believer is to be imbued with the power of God in the overthrow of the world.
Ques. When you spoke of going from Gilgal, did you mean one should go through this world with the death of Christ upon him?
J.T. That is right, the idea is circumcision, something rolled away -- the reproach of Egypt, that would be the world, is rolled away, and the house of God brings in another world, another order of things. It is there that you get disclosures. Jacob went there, and God says, "I am the God of Bethel", He made known to Jacob who *He* was.
Ques. Would you say the truth of baptism and of the Son of God would be before them?
J.T. Quite so. At Peniel, the "man" refuses to tell him his name, but Jehovah told him His name in His house.
Rem. Elijah calls him Elisha here at Bethel, not before. It was there that God said to Jacob, "Thy
{90}
name shall not henceforth be called Jacob, but Israel", -- a prince, @Genesis 32: 28.
J.T. Yes, we are ennobled as God discloses things to us; we are made fit for the place.
Ques. What is the thought as to Elisha being challenged from time to time to remain at each spot?
J.T. Well, it is a challenge to you as to whether you are satisfied with the point reached? Many are satisfied with an acquired reputation; we might stop there; but we miss the mind of God if we do. Satan would keep us there, but I suppose Elijah knew -- the Lord knows anyway, what is in us, and He challenges our hearts at each point as to what is there -- and what comes out is that Elisha will not leave Elijah.
Rem. The Lord had moral elevation before Him in Philippians, but it was through death -- "let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus"; He "becoming obedient even unto death, and that the death of the cross".
J.T. Yes. I think the idea of getting a name in the place is a test. Someone gives me a reputation, that is, my name becomes known among the brethren, and I stop there; I, so to speak, make that my little home. That will not do! That is the end of my growth till I judge it. Elisha shows he is equal to all this: he seeks no reputation -- "I will not leave *thee*", he says.
P.L. Is not movement with Paul accentuated after he gets his name changed?
J.T. Yes, that is good -- in @Acts 13 you mean. He got a name in most extraordinary circumstances. He and Barnabas went from Antioch and took ship and set out for Cyprus. They went the length of the island, and apparently got no converts; then they met a man called Bar-jesus, who is a son of the devil -- there is not much encouragement in him -- but Saul deals with him, and is then called Paul -- "who also is Paul". He always kept to that, a reputation that would mean "less than the least" of all. So God gives him the
{91}
distinction of having a company immediately; a man who has no reputation is owned of God -- "Paul and his company".
Rem. King Saul was told by Samuel to go to Gilgal and wait, but instead of doing that, he acted to secure his own position (@1 Samuel 13: 11). We see the contrast there.
J.T. Just so. What he did was right in his own eyes, and in doing so he writes himself down as unspiritual.
Ques. In regard to what you said about stopping at some of these places, would it encourage us to go on if we remembered we carry with us from each stage something with which to go on to the next, so that we leave nothing behind, but rather accumulate substance?
J.T. I think that is right. Going down to Jericho would be the next point after Bethel where we have proved the reality of the house -- but can that stand in the presence of the world? How will you get on? Men say, 'You are nobodies; you have no organisation, no means to carry this on. Look what *we* have got!' Well, I think that going to Jericho would remind us of the power of God against the world, that we can cope with all that, by the power of God.
P.L. Do all these things come before us in John's gospel? The Son of man lifted up -- Gilgal. Then you have all the privileges and secrets of the house in those chapters that follow chapter 12. Then "be of good courage: I have overcome the world" -- is that Jericho?
J.T. That is right, "Now is the judgment of this world; now shall the prince of this world be cast out" (@John 12: 31), then, "be of good courage: I have overcome the world", @John 16: 33.
Ques. Is the power known through attachment to the Person?
J.T. Quite so. What you get over Jordan is the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof. They do not go up to heaven; it is a mistake to think Elijah
{92}
went up in them -- "Elijah went up by a whirlwind into the heavens", that is what was native there; the chariot of Israel remains here, it is the power for the overthrow of Jericho, that is the idea.
P.L. Does that power multiply as the exigencies of the testimony demand it? So the young man, the servant of Elisha, in chapter 6: 17, sees a great number of these chariots.
J.T. That is the idea, so even the king of Israel, when he saw Elisha for the last time, when he was dying, said, "the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof!" (@2 Kings 13: 14). That was Elisha's gift and it entered into his ministry.
Rem. You could not understand Jericho if you had not been through Gilgal and Bethel.
J.T. The point is, Bethel is secured in your mind; the principles of the house must be carried through. The principles in themselves are needed as light, but the support is in the power of God; it is by the Spirit of God we are sustained, not only by light. The power is the Spirit and the Spirit of God is in the house, and it is the same power that overthrew Jericho that is with us.
Ques. It says in John's epistle, "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" @1 John 5: 5. Would the knowledge of the Son of God be connected with Bethel?
J.T. Yes. He is over the house.
Ques. Would it be correct to say that in the measure in which we are in the enjoyment and practical gain of the house of God, we are conscious of the power of God? I was thinking of @Psalm 36 and 37. They are abundantly satisfied with the fatness of God's house, and then they trust in the Lord, delight in Him, commit their way to Him, and rest in Him. The soul seems to be conscious of the power and victory of God.
{93}
J.T. Yes, and then we take account of the kind of way it comes. The people of God march round Jericho morning by morning -- a most unheard of procedure in military matters, ridicule attached to it: but it is the manner of the power of God in overthrowing the world. They march round day by day blowing with the trumpets, "That the surpassingness of the power may be of God, and not from us", @2 Corinthians 4: 7. Had they used dynamite, as men do, or battering rams, and all that paraphernalia, the excellency of the power would have been of themselves. There is nothing to exalt the flesh in God's procedure. The walls fall down flat, through the power of God. That is the lesson of Jericho; but that is not all. Death has to be overcome. Not only have we to understand the overthrow of the world: many of us may have left the world, and perhaps overcome it -- but we are afraid of death. Colossians meets that: "ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead", @Colossians 2: 12. That is another lesson.
Rem. Jezebel is not in view here, but she is not dead yet; this conflict is deeper.
J.T. Yes, she is in the distance, so to speak. This is a matter that comes in when the time of ascension is in view, it is a deeper thing than we have had before. The chapters of the first book which we have had before us, relate more to what is public in christendom, the great sphere of profession that belongs to God, and in which He is operating through most extraordinary instruments. But here we come to the *inner* thing, to what is wholly spiritual, seen in Elisha, and all is in the light of the ascension, to fit us for it; and not simply that, but to fit us to hold the ground here pending that time, so that there might be a testimony, however short, whether it be days or months or years. God is set on the testimony. The enemy flourishes himself, but seeing the Lord in the assembly is open to us. Elisha is with Elijah and cleaving to him, as it says, of
{94}
the believers at Antioch, that "with purpose of heart to abide with the Lord".
Ques. Is faith more characteristic of Colossians than power, and power more connected with Ephesians?
J.T. The people went over Jordan on dry ground. The type in Joshua, of @Colossians 2, is to show the power of Christ in death, that He is concerned about your going over; that is the thought in that type. The people were in the land *before* the ark, which is a remarkable thing. The point being, not that Christ goes to heaven, but that He holds back the forces of death till *we* go over. The ark is in the bed of the Jordan, till all the saints go over. This passage enters into that, but Elijah is going the reverse way here, he is going out of the land.
Ques. What would be the thought in Elisha re-crossing the Jordan?
J.T. The first crossing is Christ Himself taking us over.
Rem. For Jordan is our death with Him.
J.T. But you cross Jordan by yourself. Elijah wrapped his mantle together. I think it is the whole power entirely used: the mantle denotes the person, what he is; that is, of course what Christ is. Christ is not a formation, the believer is a formation, but Christ is a divine Person, He is the Son of God. The power is all there, "the exceeding greatness" of the divine power is there. The wrapping together accentuates the force. Elisha does not do that, he just uses the mantle, without anything being said about wrapping it together. In fact, it would have been unseemly for him to have done that. Elijah wraps it together, that is, he gives it all its force -- the figure is of a divine Person coming into death.
Ques. Why does Elijah say constantly, "Abide here"?
J.T. It is to test the heart. You might say, 'The Lord told me to stay'. Sometimes circumstances indicate
{95}
that you may legitimately take a certain course, and accordingly you justify yourself in taking it, whereas undivided consideration for the Lord and His interests would lead otherwise. Thus your heart is exposed. For instance, Balaam made a pretentious speech, he would not go without the Lord's commandment; but all the time he *wanted* to go, he "loved the reward of unrighteousness", and God knew that. He would go, and so God said, "Go", and he went; but God met him and sought to slay him. So Elisha's saying, "I will not leave thee" means he would not be diverted; he goes the whole way, and he gets the fullest blessing.
Ques. Is that why at the Jordan we get three times over, "They two"? How that emphasises the identification of Elijah with Elisha!
J.T. Yes, and "they went on, and talked", a most beautiful thought growing out of determination to be with the Lord.
P.L. Do you get the thought in "part with me", and then the wonderful talking afterwards in @John 13 and onward?
J.T. Yes. They "went on, and talked". What holy converse! It is well worth while going the whole way!
Rem. Three times Elisha states he will not leave Elijah, then in verse 9, Elijah says he will be taken away from him, not that he will leave him: then there are the chariot and horses of fire that part them asunder.
J.T. Yes. "Ask what I shall do for thee, before I am taken away from thee". I think that the difficulty generally, and one might almost say, always, is, that we do not go all the way, we do not go on to perfection. We stop at Bethel perhaps, or some place where there is a bit of distinction. Going over Jordan takes me out of the world altogether.
Ques. If we go the whole way, we are confirmed so that Elijah can go with Elisha?
J.T. Yes; and as we get over Jordan there is holy
{96}
converse; as we might say, communing on equal terms. It is the Colossian position really. "I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me". That is a fine thought, "A double portion of *thy* spirit", not "*the* Spirit". Of course typically it is the Holy Spirit, but it is "*thy* spirit"; he says, "Let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me". He says, 'I am so taken up with that Person, I want His spirit' -- it is "the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ". I want His spirit, but a double portion of it. It brings out the great appreciation Elisha had of his master, of Elijah; that typifies the great appreciation the saint has who has come to know Jesus, as of Him and of His Spirit. You want the Spirit of that Man, you want it in abundance -- a double portion -- and where that is, no power can resist you.
Ques. Would it be right to connect @Philippians 3 with this? When Paul speaks of suffering the loss of all things, he passed through Jericho. Then he speaks of pursuing, if by any means he might "arrive at the resurrection from among the dead".
J.T. That is the point -- to attain to it in your soul, not simply to hold the doctrine of it, but to know it "through faith of the working of God, who raised him from among the dead" -- it is that power.
Ques. "The excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord". Is that the double portion of His spirit?
J.T. Quite so, "Not I, but Christ". But then he would come out in the spirit of Christ, and that is what the Lord had in mind in breathing into His disciples. They valued the Lord, they were glad when they saw Him: then He says, "Receive the Holy Spirit".
Ques. It says, "if any one has not the Spirit of Christ he is not of him", @Romans 8: 9. Is that the same Spirit, not the Holy Spirit exactly?
J.T. I think so, it is the Spirit of Christ. His Spirit would be the Holy Spirit for us, but it is more the character that is in view. This is the great type here of the coming down of the Spirit as establishing
{97}
christianity, but I think it is important to see that Elisha is a man who is taken up with his master -- he says, "*thy* spirit".
Rem. In the conversation, you have the ministry of one who is with the Lord, then the double portion of the Spirit would give force to the application.
J.T. Quite so. You want to come out in this spirit. Philippians is full of the filling out of this -- "the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ", @Philippians 1: 19.
Ques. Do you not think we help each other more by the kind of spirit that governs us than by what we say?
J.T. I think so, so you have the idea of showing -- "Show thyself to Ahab". This is the kind of thing he saw.
Rem. I was thinking of what he says to Philemon, "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit".
J.T. Yes. Then verse 11 says, "And it came to pass as they went on, and talked, that behold, a chariot of fire and horses of fire; and they parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into the heavens". They did not want to part, the position is, they are talking, they were in holy converse! It was the power of God that separated them; it is what God is doing, it is very suitable. God had come in here, it is the rights of God in this setting -- He was parted -- it was not his own action, it was a question of the power of God.
P.L. So with Paul and the disciples, in one instance they tore themselves away.
J.T. Quite so, they did not want to be parted. Nor did the saints at Antioch wish Paul and Barnabas to leave -- they "let them go". It is a question of God, it is right that God should always come in in regard to Christ, and the lovers of God allow that. It is a question of what God does.
Ques. In connection with verse 12, is the double
{98}
portion of Elijah's spirit known in our getting an apprehension of the chariot of fire and the horsemen thereof as they marked Elijah's ministry?
J.T. "If thou see *me* when I am taken from thee ..." It is a matter of seeing him in the manner in which he is taken from him. In the Lord's case they saw Him go up, and the men said to them, "This Jesus, who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven", @Acts 1: 11. I suppose the seeing Him go, seeing Him parted and going, involves light as to the manner of ascension: the message through Mary was, "I ascend". We get the idea in our souls of going up -- the manner of it.
{99}
THE ASSEMBLY, GOD'S OWN SPHERE
@1 Corinthians 1: 1 - 3; @Exodus 19: 16; @Exodus 40: 34, 35
J.T. What was in one's mind was that the assembly, according to the verses in 1 Corinthians, is an area which God claims -- "the assembly of God". The verses in Exodus were suggested to confirm the principle -- God covering the mount with a cloud, as if He would use it for the time, as His territory. Then He covers the tabernacle with a cloud, thus carrying on the thought, and fills the tabernacle with His glory. It seems as if that thought ought to engage us profitably.
H.B. That is the sphere where God has rights.
J.T. That is what I thought, and where man, as such, cannot intrude with impunity. The idea was asserted as the Lord was about to introduce His supper at the last passover. He sent His disciples into the city to prepare the passover, and a man was to meet them, and they were to say to the master of the house, "The teacher says to thee, Where is the guest-chamber where I may eat the passover with my disciples? And *he* will shew you a large upper room furnished", @Luke 22: 11 - 12. That is, the Lord's right is owned there, which is the thought that runs through these Scriptures. Later, as He arose from the dead, He entered where the disciples were, without any question as to His rights -- He entered as having rights there -- and found conditions suitable (at least as John gives us the facts), so that He could fill the sphere.
H.B. Would you say one of the earliest assembly features on our part would be the recognition of His rights, as with the master in that house?
J.T. I think that is right. It works out in various ways, but particularly now, we might say, in the exclusion of man's thoughts and doings in the assembly.
{100}
P.L. Does Mark emphasise that -- "my guest-chamber", chapter 14: 14?
J.T. I thought of that; that the Lord stresses, according to Mark's account, His rights in the place. There must have been some basis in the man's mind in his knowledge of the Lord, from the Lord's assertion that the guest-chamber was His; and we know well enough through the gospel the basis of the Lord's assertion of His rights to us; the epistle to the Romans is to bring out the divine rights in believers, laying the basis for 1 Corinthians.
W.C.G. Would the guest-chamber suggest the tabernacle rather than the mount?
J.T. Yes. The whole circumstances on the mount were in keeping with what was then in mind. We have that noted in Hebrews, the kind of mount it was; it was not the mount we come to as stated there, but nevertheless there were principles in it that apply. It is the mount of God's rights, and He asserts, by the presence of the cloud covering it, that it is His area which is not to be interfered with.
P.L. Would you attribute importance to the fact that it was on the third day when it was morning? Does that refer to resurrection? Moses said to the people, "be ready for the third day".
J.T. Just so. In the earlier part of the chapter before we get this, it is mentioned that it was the third month after they left Egypt, and after they had passed Rephidim. The battle of Rephidim means the conflict that enters into a believer's soul as he recognises the Spirit. So that the idea of Rephidim enters into this chapter peculiarly, referring to a believer's experience with God; and morning, of course, would bear on it too. Then "it came to pass on the third day, when it was morning, that there were thunders and lightnings and a heavy cloud on the mountain, and the sound of the trumpet exceeding loud". God was asserting His rights, and man should not interfere.
{101}
P.L. Does that promote exclusiveness in relation to those who are in the light of the assembly?
J.T. That is what I thought we might get to. If it is God's sphere, He must rule in it and determine the principles that are to govern it, and the stranger that comes nigh, must be put to death, so to speak. That is, God refuses man's will and thoughts, in the assembly.
P.L. King Uzziah presumed on the sphere of God's rights; but in the year that he died Isaiah saw the Lord in His holy temple, taking possession of it in His rights (@Isaiah 6).
J.T. Quite so, the seraphim asserting God's holiness. Then the prophet's acknowledgment of his lips being unclean. If we went through the process of @Isaiah 6, we should not presume in the assembly, with our own thoughts.
Ques. It would perhaps help us if you would say in a few words what you understand the assembly to be. Some of us know the term well, but we may not understand its true meaning.
J.T. 1 Corinthians has its own way of speaking of it; that is what is in mind at the moment. It is the assembly in a town or city, the aggregate of all believers in any given place, coming under the authority of God and recognising the Spirit. That is how it is viewed in 1 Corinthians; and it is called in verse 2 "the assembly of God"; that in which He has His rights, and in which they are acknowledged too. In another view, the assembly is the aggregate of all believers on the earth at any given time: and still another view is, that it is the aggregate of all believers from Pentecost until the coming of the Lord: this last is seen in the heavenly city (@Revelation 21).
E.G. In connection with the bread, would you include all believers on the earth at a certain time? "We being many, are one loaf", @1 Corinthians 10: 17.
{102}
J.T. That is right. The "we" is general in Corinthians: "ye" is usually local.
Ques. What is involved in the thought of "temple" -- "ye are temple"? Is that what we are in the light of the assembly?
J.T. Yes, and it involves that we have the Spirit. "Do ye not know that ye are temple of God" which applies, without any pretension as to it, to a meeting like this. For it is not "*the* temple" -- it is the character of the thing, as without the article. That is the view in 1 Corinthians.
W.C.G. The verses you read in 1 Corinthians are the antitype of the trumpet call. Is not that the force of it?
J.T. You are referring to @Numbers 10?
W.C.G. Yes. We are often so submerged in natural things that we forget the higher calling, so the trumpet call wakes us up to the fact that we belong to God's assembly.
J.T. Yes. The trumpets were made of beaten silver, which would suggest the rights of Christ in love, in redemption; and that ought to appeal to every christian, so that 1 Corinthians is a trumpet appeal to every christian, as to the divine rights over his soul. What follows in the earlier verses of @1 Corinthians 1, verses 4 - 9, is the furnishings with which God has furnished the assembly, so that it should be independent of man's natural ability; and then that God is faithful, verse 9, so that, if it is thought that we must depend on some official organisation, God assures us that He is faithful and will sustain us, and hence, that we are not obliged to leave the ground of the assembly for support under any circumstances -- for the Lord is able to "confirm you to the end, unimpeachable".
P.H. Would the faithfulness of God be seen in the pillar of the cloud in Exodus -- linking on with what you have in mind? At the end of chapter 13 it says, "And Jehovah went before their face by day in a pillar
{103}
of a cloud" Then, in chapter 14 He moved and went between the people and the Egyptians. Are those suggestions to give our hearts confidence in God as appearing in this way?
J.T. I thought that. As soon as they began to move, the pillar of cloud appears. I think it corresponds with the statement here -- "God is faithful, by whom ye have been called ...". He called Israel out of Egypt, but then they would encounter serious difficulties in moving out, so that the cloud appears as soon as they move, and, according to Exodus, it is always the guide. The ark is not mentioned as guiding, in Exodus; it is only in Numbers we get the ark; as they began to move from Sinai, the ark moves out as additional to the cloud, but the great general principle is the presence of God in the cloud, He will stand by it. So that we do not need a paid minister or a ruling convention or a hierarchy; we are independent, however poor we may seem to be, for "God is faithful, by whom ye have been called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord". Even before they were baptised unto Moses, they were baptised in the cloud; for the cloud was there, before they came to the Red Sea. That is to say, they had experience of its movements, firstly as going from before them, then to their rear to divide and separate the Egyptians from them; a beautiful movement of divine faithfulness and thoughtfulness. Well, they had that experience before they are asked to enter the sea: Entering the sea was a serious matter, as it appeared, but the cloud was there: they experienced the cloud before the sea, that is, they had the presence of God before death. So in the gospels, the presence of God is like the cloud; men could experience the presence of God in Jesus. Is it worth while, as knowing God in the cloud in His faithfulness, to accept death in that One in whom it is set out? That is the incentive -- so that they were all "baptised unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea", that is the positive thing -- it is worth
{104}
your while. Then, when He spreads over Sinai a thick cloud, you feel it is worth while: it is not really against us; it is prohibitive, but prohibitive in love.
A.W.R. Is the faithfulness of God seen in the thousands of those who love Him?
J.T. Exactly: we get that in the next chapter; which is one of the finest touches in Exodus, and should warn us not to minimise the numbers of the saints; there are the "thousands of Israel", but properly, the thousands of Israel are "the thousands of them that love God"; they understand the cloud. The power in the camp really lay in those who loved God. The lovers of God keep the commandments practically, they express the commandments. If we can only bring saints, or persons, into an enjoyment of the cloud, that is to say, of the presence of God, it would become worth their while to go into death, to accept the fellowship and the consequences of it.
P.L. Would you say that is prefigured in the transfiguration cloud overshadowing them, and then the voice out of the cloud saying, "This is my beloved Son: hear him"? Is that the assembly setting?
J.T. Exactly. Think of what the voice meant, and what relationships were involved in that cloud! Peter, after he got the Spirit, calls it the "excellent glory". That is really what it is; it is the presence of God. It is worth our while to accept baptism and fellowship in the presence of that, and as tasting it. A man falls down on his face in Corinth, for instance, and owns that "God is indeed amongst you" (@1 Corinthians 14: 25). That is what the cloud means -- it is the presence of God. Our position is not merely a question of light or special truth, but of the presence of God.
P.L. So, does Peter leave it to "our beloved brother Paul", to whom he affectionately refers, to enlarge on the meaning of that cloud and that voice?
J.T. I think so. Paul brings out the great principles of fellowship and the assembly.
{105}
Ques. The Lord calls it "my assembly" in @Matthew 16 -- would you enlarge on that a little?
J.T. That enters into what we are saying. We may view it as God's assembly locally; that is, that in which God's rights are owned and asserted in any locality: we may also view it as Christ's assembly -- what will He not do with it as He has it in full control? What will He do with it, for instance, as we are together in assembly? What will He do with it if it is *His*? Let us recognise that it is His. Chapters 13 to 17 of John indicate to us what He will do with it: He will lead it to the Father, and He will sing praise in it. I suppose that is how He would regard it especially, as that in which He praises the Father.
E.G. How wonderful to see the way He praises the Father in the midst of the assembly!
J.T. Yes, that would be its chief value in His mind, that He could lead it in praise to the Father. We want to let the Lord have His way in it. So these verses in the last chapter of Exodus indicate that, when the glory enters, it fills the place, and that is exclusive, not only in the way of authority, but substantially; it is substantially filled, and authority, even, is shut out for the moment -- Moses could not enter, it says. The way things go on amongst us at times as we are together normally, in assembly, would incline us to ask the Lord to come and regulate and control us; because often we take the thing out of His hands and carry on as if the assembly were not His, but ours.
F.I. What you refer to in @John 20 is the setting. The Lord did all that was done there.
J.T. Yes. Luke shows us, in his account, the mixed thoughts we may have, and, to that extent, we hinder the Lord; but John's account omits that -- the doors were shut, so the Lord had a free hand.
Ques. Is not the Lord asserting His claims in the assembly in Revelation, where it would seem He was not allowed His rights?
{106}
J.T. That is right. He is asserting that He has power to deal with what is contrary to us, and He does so.
W.C.G. Does Moses fill the place typically as Son over God's house in Exodus?
J.T. I think he may be so regarded, but I think it is more authority there.
W.C.G. In verse 9 the Lord says, "Lo, I will come to thee in the cloud's thick darkness, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe *thee* also for ever". I thought Moses would have a special place.
J.T. He has, as the mediator. It is a question of subjection, they should be subject to Moses. It is not to be assumed, of course, that the exclusion of Moses by the glory in chapter 40 would have any personal reference, but rather that the glory is asserting its rights. This whole domain is God's, and all else for the moment is in abeyance.
W.H.M. Is the thought of the tabernacle greater than the thought of the house? The glory of the Lord fills the tabernacle. You were speaking of the mount being a wider thought than the upper room. Is the thought of the tabernacle the greatest thought?
J.T. I suppose it is; it is that which enters into eternity; "the tabernacle of God is with men", @Revelation 21: 3. It is a movable state, that is to say, it is a thought that love can employ; it is a movable suggestion, it is not fixed. Love may take up a fixed position, as in Solomon's temple, but I think this refers to movableness. It begins, as we have already noted, in the cloud, with the movement from the front of Israel to the rear: it is the free hand that love would have in moving.
H.E.F. If the Lord got His place, would that lead to the bringing in of the glory, and would He then appear in a different character to us, and lead us into something further?
{107}
J.T. What you find in @Exodus 40 is that everything is done according to commandment. That is to say, that firstly that side of things is completed; that enters into the order of the assembly as convened. We come together in the wilderness, where it becomes apparent that there is something there that belongs to the Lord and to God; and, I think we might say, the glory covers it from the outset. I think the position in the wilderness implies that it is according to God, and the glory covers it. There is that attaching to the assembly in the wilderness, that is, as the saints come together in assembly, that warrants the glory covering the position, and faith understands that. But then there is the additional thought in the chapter of the glory entering and filling, and that is an exclusive thought; that is, there is no room for anything else. It is God asserting His rights to the whole place, and love will say, 'Well, we will have a good time and God is to have a free hand, filling the place'. So that you are careful not to intrude with anything out of accord with that. The difficulty in our meetings is that a brother has a hymn on his mind, or he would like to say something to the Lord, but that means that I am heard, not the Lord. The thought is the Lord is to be heard, and the glory fills the place. What you find in Exodus is, the glory is the leading thought, not the ark, although the ark is there; it is in its place in chapter 40. Its function there was to contain the testimony, not yet to go forward and seek out a resting-place. The glory is the guiding thought in Exodus, the cloud. So that what should engage us, as following the Lord's supper, is the glory, the glory of the covenant, the love of God; not yet the Father, but the glory of God. The ark is not yet seen as moving, that comes in later, but the glory is the great guiding principle here, and I think there should be room made for that side. That is 2 Corinthians, where, more particularly, full scope is given for the thought of the glory, as in Exodus.
{108}
W.H.M. Every whit uttering glory in His temple -- that is your thought?
J.T. Quite so. That goes a little further, I think, for it is in the temple, but still the idea is there, the temple is not a guiding thought, it is what is inside. The glory in Exodus is not always filling the tabernacle, but it is always there as a guiding principle. So that we are contemplated at the Lord's supper in that position, before the ark is mentioned as moving at all. It is the glory that is the guiding principle.
O.G. It says "the cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle". Would the glory filling be the tabernacle -- the *inside* thought, and its covering the tent of meeting the external position as what is of God?
J.T. That is right. The cloud is needed, for God, for the Deity, is there; *God* was there but *enshrined* in that. The believer knows He is there; and, you will notice, the movements were to be according to that. It goes on to say, "And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of Israel journeyed in all their journeys". There is nothing about the ark here, and that is to be understood; the ark comes in later as excess, there is no prescription from the Lord as to the movements of the ark in @Numbers 10 -- it is His own action, typically, His own love acting.
P.H. Will you say a little more about the glory of the covenant?
J.T. It is a wonderful thing! God has come in in Christ there, as having you in mind, as having me in mind -- that we might know His love and be in relationship with Him *on that basis*. That is to say, there are covenant relations, and family relations. The covenant relations enter into Exodus; the family relations are properly in the land. Now Exodus is the great starting point for the christian; whatever way you look at him in his beginnings. Exodus is his starting-point in the types. Even if it be the Lord's supper, Exodus is his
{109}
lesson-book, for the covenant, what Christ is personally, is in chapter 21. He loves His Master, and His wife, and His children. He will not go free -- that is chapter 21. Chapter 24 speaks of the voluminous character of the blood of the covenant -- the scene is full of the testimony to the love of God in Christ, the covenant love. The blood was put into basins to call attention to the volume of it. Then the blood is sprinkled on the people and on the book. So that you have the idea of covenant in great volume in chapter 24, and this is in relation to their assembling. Then in chapter 34 Moses, having gone up the second time, comes down with the glory in his face: So that Exodus is the great book for the believer in his beginnings, no matter how he is taken account of.
W.C.G. So that Exodus, like Romans, is to magnify God in our eyes -- nothing can "separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord".
J.T. Yes, so that we might move. In Joseph's time he secured all the people for Pharaoh: Romans secures the saints entirely for God, so that we have no rights over ourselves -- we are bought with a price. Unless young believers come to that, they are never in the assembly according to God.
Ques. Is that @Romans 12?
J.T. Yes, it works out there.
Ques. Would you connect that with "sanctified in Christ Jesus"?
J.T. Yes, saints are viewed in that light.
Ques. What are we to learn from the fact that Moses could not enter when the glory filled the tabernacle?
J.T. It is God's way of asserting that the place belongs to *Him*. There is no reflection on Moses; he represents authority, but we do not need authority there; the glory is enough to control us.
H.B. Would you say, in that connection, we come together at the Supper in the light of authority and it
{110}
has its place at first; but there should come a time, if things are right and suitable, when the effects of authority are seen, but it is not in exercise, and then the glory fills the company?
J.T. That is the lesson to be learnt from this, but I am afraid we are very slow in it. The Lord says, 'This is My sphere', and, not only so, but He is there in power -- the glory is filling the place.
Ques. Is that on the line of our brother's question about the entering -- the Lord coming into the midst?
J.T. Well, I think the glory is in Christ, the assembling glory, but He is said to be the glory of God and the power of God, as the ark; but here, the glory is in His face, that is how it works out in @Exodus 34, but then a change comes in; the idea of Moses as representing authority ceases, and the Lord is apprehended in another way. Properly speaking, if you link on Exodus with Chronicles, you get the full thought; David and Solomon fill out Exodus. You get another thought also -- you come into the idea of the Father and the Son, instead of God and Christ; and then you have all the instruction that enters into the service of God in 1 and 2 Chronicles. When you come to @2 Chronicles 5, it is not authority as in lordship, but even the priests cannot enter, all that is merely official comes to an end; that is what the presence of God entails. The glory is there, it wants full liberty, and the more I understand it, the more I am at liberty, and as the thought of officialism ceases, the liberty of the family ensues. It is delightful, if we only lay hold of it, to give the glory full scope, and let it have its way, to know the presence of God in that light.
H.E.F. Should we pass over at that point to what you refer to as family relationships?
J.T. I think if we apprehend the thought, and get to the Lord and seek to learn how to arrive at the assembly, we shall come to family relationships and enjoyment, that is what is meant; if God has full scope
{111}
in the assembly, that is what ensues, the official thought drops.
Ques. Do you think the contemplation of the Lord in @John 13 to 17 will help us?
J.T. The synoptic gospels give us very little of what occurred at the institution of the Supper, they give us rather the bare facts governing the Supper, but John fills out the thing, so as to detach us from what is merely official (right in its place), and set us down with the Father. John quotes the Lord as saying, "my Father is greater than I" -- that is to give you confidence, you take your place by His side.
P.H. Do you get the suggestion of this in @Exodus 33 in Joshua the son of Nun being the attendant on Moses, and then, when Moses returns to the camp, Joshua abiding in the tent? Was he, as having come under the instruction of Moses, in the good of what you are speaking of?
J.T. I think so. Joshua is there without official capacity, but he is in the tent; pretty much like Timothy in Corinth, he is a suggestion in his spirit there of what Christ is, so as to establish confidence in the saints. Joshua is presented as "a young man" who abode in the tent. That is not merely incidental, it is something laid down to be referred to later. I may find myself perfectly free in the presence of the glory without official capacity.
P.L. So we get the expression, "If Timotheus come, see that he may be with you without fear", @1 Corinthians 16: 10.
J.T. Yes. What a blessed time they would have had if they had allowed Timothy his place in the assembly, as he came from Paul!
Ques. Is the family setting in the Father's house the highest point we can reach?
J.T. Yes, that is the counsel of God. We touch Ephesians, where He has "marked us out beforehand for adoption through Jesus Christ to himself". There
{112}
is nothing overpowering in that, and Corinthians, and Exodus, and Romans, lead us to it. So that we are to be perfectly free and at home there, without any official place; we do not need it, love does not require it; it is a family thought, and the youngest in the family may enjoy it as well as the oldest.
F.I. Is the family condition the highest, as enabling us to take up the full thought of relationship in sonship? Is it necessary for us to be at home in family conditions before we can take up the dignity of sonship in the Father's presence?
J.T. Quite so. I believe those chapters in John are leading on to that thought, that we might be fully able to take our place with the Father: so He says, "the *men* whom thou gavest me". God did not give Him babes, He gave Him men; that is the full thought of sonship.
Ques. At what time in our history do we first enter, or take our place in, the assembly?
J.T. I suppose you might tell that from @Acts 2, "They persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers". The two first thoughts are authoritative, but breaking of bread and prayers are matters of your own; these come in in their places normally; but the first great thing is to submit to authority, that *I* am subject.
Ques. Is that seen in the generation of the righteous? God is our righteousness, involving subjection on our part.
J.McR. There are thousands of believers who do not know there is such a thing as the assembly; are they not in it?
J.T. That is an abnormal state of things.
J.McR. But it exists.
J.T. But we have to get a right view of the truth first, and then see how 2 Timothy helps us to get into @Acts 2, where we have the great outstanding position of the assembly, they "said to Peter and the other
{113}
apostles, What shall we do?" verse 37. He tells them what to do. They spoke, not only to Peter, but to the others as well, showing that the work of God in people's souls leads them to recognise authority in whomsoever it may be found. Peter is the spokesman, and tells them what to do, "and there were added in that day ..." It does not say who added them, or to what they were added; it was the normal effect of persons recognising authority. The principle is brought in of addition under certain conditions. Then it goes on to say, they persevered in that, and they were all together. There were no thousands of people who belonged to the assembly and did not know it. They knew it; they were in it by virtue of their state as recognising what was there already; for the word "added" means that what is there is recognised. Now today, as you say, there are thousands of God's people who perhaps have not heard of the assembly in the true sense, so we have to come to 2 Timothy and see how believers get out of dark and evil associations, and "pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart". That is simple enough to see, and, as calling upon the Lord in this way, and following these things with them, the assembly soon comes to light in their souls.
J.McR. They would be there intelligently in the assembly, not as a congregation.
J.T. That is right. I think 2 Timothy is intended for that; to help believers today out of the authority of darkness into the realm of light.
Ques. Do we enter the assembly at new birth, or is it when we come into fellowship?
J.T. Abstractly, every believer who has the Spirit is in the assembly, but to take his place in relation to it in 2 Timothy days is another thing, and fellowship is where we touch it.
Ques. Before the movement of the ark, as guiding in @Numbers 10, when the cloud is guiding in chapter 9,
{114}
the movement is connected with the commandment of the Lord.
J.T. Everything in @Numbers 9 is a question of the commandment, but in @Numbers 10 we have something for which there is no commandment; and that is what we are dealing with now. Love goes beyond commandment, and that is what I believe is in mind when the glory fills the place. We cannot compass that; we can compass the commandment, that is within our range; but we cannot compass the glory; the Lord is there and He is beyond us, we cannot limit *Him* to commandment. The more we know of God, the more free we shall be in the assembly.
Ques. The glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ (@2 Corinthians 4). Would that be in line with this?
J.T. That is where it begins. Exodus is the great starting-point, but then the ark comes in as holding back the forces of death, He is apprehended there. The ark is generally the more militant side, holding back the forces of death; for @Numbers 10 really culminates in @Joshua 3. The last stronghold of the enemy is death, and the ark is seen there in the bed of Jordan. The people are in the land *before* the ark leaves the bed of Jordan, for that is what is in mind, to get the people in, to get us in, and what comes into prominence after that is the old corn of the land, that is to say, not Christ as the ark, but as the One who is indigenous to heaven. You apprehend Him as belonging to heaven, as in His own realm; that is how the truth stands in the type -- "the Son of man who is in heaven".
Rem. Joshua calls it "a very, very good land" in @Numbers 14.
J.T. That is gospel to us (@Hebrews 4) and Joshua now shows that what would hinder my entering in is held back till I get in; so the people are over Jordan before the ark, "Following the ark" is only correct to a point; the idea is rather that the ark holds back the forces of death; and that is the position today, that we
{115}
are able to be in the assembly *in spite of* death -- for death still exists.
Ques. Would that be seen in @John 12, where there is the filling of the house from our side? Death is rolled back, as seen in chapter 11 and every heart is centred on Christ in chapter 12. Would that be an introduction to what is expressed in the following chapters -- 13 to 17?
J.T. It is a sort of basis for the teaching that follows.
J.B. The Lord says, "A new commandment I give to you, that ye love one another", @John 13: 34. How does that stand in relation to the Lord taking a basin and washing the disciples feet?
J.T. It is a question of love among ourselves.
P.L. The Lord says "God ... shall glorify him immediately". That refers to the assembly as the residence of the glory; and then immediately it follows "Children, yet a little while ..."
J.T. Just so, the Lord would set them at liberty, "The Father himself has affection for you, because ye have had affection for me" -- that is the setting.
{116}
THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE SON OF GOD
@Romans 1: 4; @Ezekiel 39: 11 - 16; @Ezekiel 37: 1 - 14; @John 9: 34 (last sentence), 35 - 38
From these scriptures I intend, by the Lord's help, to say something about His sonship, having in mind to point out that the knowledge of Him as the Son is dependent on our being in the circumstances in connection with which that knowledge is disclosed. It will be found in the Scriptures, and by experience, that, in the unfolding of the truth, each part has its own setting, and the clear apprehension of it depends on our being in that setting. Defectiveness as to the truth is largely accountable to the fact that we do not get into the circumstances in which any particular truth is disclosed.
One would illustrate this important principle by pointing out that the light of the purpose of God was disclosed to Abraham as he was in the land, not in Mesopotamia; and so the light as to God and His name was disclosed to Jacob when he was in Bethel, not in Padan; and the light as to the divine dwelling in the tabernacle was not disclosed to Israel until they were in the circumstances of it, that is, in the wilderness. One could multiply illustrations of this principle; and the principle is intended to test us as to whether, if we apprehend any truth, we are ready to move into the circumstances in which it was primarily disclosed. Christianity is not an armchair matter, it requires movement, and sometimes movement involving the most humiliating and painful experiences, but we shall always prove that these experiences and these sacrifices are worth while.
Now this principle applies peculiarly to the knowledge of the Son of God; and I have read these passages to show how the first scripture works out. It is stated there, that the Lord Jesus is "marked out Son of God
{117}
in power, ... by resurrection of the dead". Inasmuch as death is on us all, and that physical death will take place -- except the Lord comes, when what corresponds to resurrection will be necessary -- it is evident that, to reach the knowledge of Him as Son of God, it is worth one's while to accept definitely the place of death and burial. If I am to apprehend the Son of God, it is essential that I should come to death in my mind. Indeed, one might say that in a practical way the word of the psalmist, especially to those of us who are advanced in years, is always important: that we should be taught to "number our days". Where a thing has to be taught, the suggestion is that it is not taken in very readily, and people do not take in very readily the nearness of dissolution. The tendency is to put it off, whereas we are to be taught to so "number our days, that we may acquire a wise heart" (@Psalm 90: 12); and the greatest gain in this, I believe, is that it places us in circumstances in which, and in view of which, the Son of God was manifested.
As I learn to number my days, the thought of resurrection becomes more and more important. I do not know of anything that I desire more than to arrive at the resurrection from among the dead -- that is what the apostle had in his mind. It settles a thousand difficulties if one arrives definitely in one's soul at the resurrection from the dead: but for this one has to be, as it were, where the dead are. If one is to be taken out from among the dead, one has to be in one's mind, at least, where the dead are, and that is what I had in mind in reading from Ezekiel.
I hope to show, from @John 9, that there is another side, that is, that being an outcast in this world religiously places me in circumstances to which the light of the Son of God especially applies; but if I prefer to stay with the Pharisees, the accredited religionists of the day, I shall not come into this light. I may be orthodox, and I may be taking issue with those who
{118}
have the light of the Son of God, but I shall not come into it, for it is the outcasts religiously who come into it.
The circumstances, beloved brethren, of absolute Deity are beyond our range; God makes that plain, so that to carry back the circumstances of revelation into the circumstances of absolute Deity is flying in the teeth of Scripture. The circumstances into which divine Persons have come in revelation must be left as they are presented in Scripture. We are brought into these circumstances, and I hope in a little while to show you how we are brought into them: that is, consciously brought into them; they abide, and we abide in them, as in the Son of God. But we are not introduced into the circumstances of absolute Deity: these are beyond our understanding, as it is said, "which in its own time the blessed and only Ruler shall shew, the King of those that reign, and Lord of those that exercise lordship; who only has immortality, dwelling in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see; to whom be honour and eternal might. Amen", @1 Timothy 6: 15 - 16. But then divine Persons have come into circumstances that are within our range, and the Scriptures open up to us the way into these circumstances, and no one can afford to be outside of them.
The Son of God is "marked out" we are told. This does not allude to the voice from heaven at the Jordan; it alludes to what comes into evidence in death, where death is, and where burial is, for death involves burial. So this land of Israel, spoken of in @Ezekiel 39, is a territory in which unburied people are peculiarly obnoxious, even an unburied bone. It is a scripture that challenges us as to our position in a land of privilege. I am not now alluding to what it may mean prophetically; in this respect, these that were buried came from the far north. But everyone in the land of privilege has come a long way in a moral sense, and he had better go the whole way, that is to say, *burial must take place*.
{119}
If I am to be in the light of the knowledge of the Son of God, I must take this position, it is imperative. It is imperative for other reasons too, reasons of common decency, that I should not intrude my unburied flesh in such a sphere. It is the land of Israel here. How much uncovered flesh stalks about in the great religious area called christendom! In a certain sense, it is divine territory; there is what is more specially divine territory indeed, but, in a certain sense, the whole area of christendom is divine territory, and it is to this territory that the Apocalypse refers; God takes up His rights in regard to it in the Apocalypse. Hence the voice to us of these verses in @Ezekiel 39, is to see to it that we are buried, and it is the business of each of us to see that others who profess to be christians are buried. You will all observe how minute the instruction is in this chapter: "And all the people of the land shall bury" (the "them" in verse 13, should not be there) -- it involves that all the people of the land are buriers. And then it says, "it shall be to them for renown in the day that I shall be glorified, saith the Lord Jehovah". This is an occupation that God would lay upon us, and it enters into the divine glory, that this service of burial should proceed. It goes on to say, "And they shall sever out men of continual employment to go through the land, who, with the passers-by, shall bury those that remain upon the face of the land, to cleanse it: at the end of seven months shall they make a search". This is not a pleasant service, but it is a most essential service, and one that God would put upon us, a service that is required, if we are to come into the clear knowledge of the Son of God. It is a service that is needed if we are to come to "the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ", @Ephesians 4: 13. It is not the measure of the stature of the Son of God; the knowledge of the Son of God enters into the thought of full-growth, it is the great element in it, but then, there is what is knowable of the Son of God, and there
{120}
is the unknowable. It is the knowledge of what is knowable of the Son of God that enters into the full-grown thought, but if I am to come to this knowledge I must have part in these burials -- this service of burial.
I have no doubt that Joseph of Arimathaea and Nicodemus are, in a sense, models for us; they come into view at a given time for a needed service. They were not employed by the saints as undertakers to bury the blessed body of our Lord Jesus; Joseph and Nicodemus come in at the end of @John 19, and they bury the Lord Jesus. While maintaining what is due to the Lord personally, I have no doubt they set out this great principle of which I am speaking, for it is as having been buried that He was raised. They are at His grave in the evening, and Mary Magdalene is at His grave in the morning, and Peter and John -- representing two phases of the believer's position. There must be the burial if I am to come into the full knowledge of the Son of God, just as all the people of the land were enjoined to bury, according to this chapter.
Now, dear brethren, as we look round in our localities, are all the saints buried? Am *I* buried? -- that is the way it comes to me. I am certainly in the land of Israel, the land of privilege, but I am offensive if I am not buried. I may be nice and amiable naturally, but I am offensive spiritually if I am not buried; and moreover I am not in the light of the knowledge of the Son of God, however orthodox I may be, for it applies to me as having died and been buried. It applied to Christ too, in that sense -- "marked out Son of God in power ... by resurrection of the dead". I do not say it was His own resurrection necessarily, although that is included; it says "dead" here applying to such as Lazarus. So that, dear brethren, you can see how this applies in our localities. If I am buried myself, the next thing is to bury the brethren who are not buried. You may say, 'How can I do it?' Well, it is a
{121}
question of accepting the obligation; the acceptance of the obligation is, in a way, half the work. A man who loved his wife, said of her, "That I may bury my dead from before me" -- that was spoken of Sarah. Abraham buried her to be raised; he buried her in the cave of Machpelah; and when she is raised, there will never again be a thought of her being put out of his sight. But at the present time, there is much among us that is obnoxious. And so the details of the instruction go on here: "And the passers-by shall pass through the land, and when any seeth a man's bone, he shall set up a sign by it". I should not like to be a man labelled by the brethren as having one of my bones unburied -- maybe my head, or my feet, or my hands. A saint loyal to Christ, if he sees that, will put it out of sight; such an one is known by the spiritual, and when one comes to a locality one sees the sign -- that brother is not buried, or is only partly buried. You see how this applies in this great matter of the knowledge of the Son of God, that the real difficulty lies in the state of the brethren, in not getting into the circumstances to which this blessed truth applies.
In chapter 37 which contemplates burial, that is to say, the national burial of Israel, we see how they come into the quickening power of the Son of God. For we have two thoughts in @John 5: the first is that "the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that have heard shall live" (verse 25); the second is, "all who are in the tombs shall hear his voice". The dead hearing the voice of the Son of God refers to men and women living here in this world, dead in their sins, dead God-ward, and they hear the voice of the Son of God and live. As soon as they do that, they bury themselves, that is the force of baptism -- they begin to feel things, and that is what you get here, "Our bones are dried", they say in verse 11, that is, they are feeling the state of things -- the circumstances are felt. It says, "And he said unto me, Son of man, these
{122}
bones are the whole house of Israel. Behold, they say, Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost: we are cut off!" That is the feeling. One feels, dear brethren, there is a want of depth in the saints, a want of feeling about things; there is shallowness. Hezekiah turned his face to the wall, he says, as it were, 'I have come to an impassable point, I can get no further', and he wept sore, and God heard him and saw his tears. It is in coming into the circumstances to which the truth applies, that I come into the truth. And so here, "Our bones are dried", they said, "we are cut off!"; but God says, 'I have got power', it is the power of the Son of God.
And so the prophet is taken round about: an important service to go all round the saints in the localities, if one may speak simply. One comes to a well-known city, and one questions in one's heart, 'Is there any movement here? Is there any progress at all? How are the saints progressing?' The prophet is to go all round the bones -- 'Oh', he says, 'these bones are *very dry*'. You find that often in meetings: the saints are very dry. Well, what is needed now is power in the ministry, "Prophesy over these bones". The brethren may be dry, but then they are ready to listen, and that is a great matter -- the numbers who so often come together now show that the brethren *are* ready to listen. So he prophesied to the bones, and presently there is a rustling and the bones come together, *bone to its bone*. One saint lives in fine circumstances; another lives in poor circumstances: how will bone come to bone? "The bones came together", it says, "bone to its bone". I am speaking now very simply and plainly -- bone comes to its bone, none is out of place; there are no malformations in this great operation of God. You have one whole -- the idea of the framework of the bones gives a whole idea; like the passover lamb, a bone of which was not to be broken; that is, it is a whole idea.
{123}
But then, the valley of dry bones is a conglomerate idea, it is not the divine thought; it shows the terrible devastation of death; but in such a devastation, which makes the accomplishment of the counsels of God a necessity, He can call bone to its bone. The knowledge of resurrection is a wonderful thing! it is a question of the power of God, that He can bring bone to bone. No bone will be out of place. Then the sinews and the flesh came on them; sinews will be needed as means of action, concerted action; and the flesh comes on them to give form and fulness; and then skin, that is to say, the basis of beautification. How can we reach this point aside from taking the place of death and burial? It is that that gives God a free hand to bring bone to his bone, and to give sinews, and to bring up the flesh, and all the beautification that clothes the skin for God. Applying it to ourselves, we arrive by the power of God at the most wonderful formation in the universe, that is, the assembly. So that you see the importance of what I am saying, if we are to arrive at the knowledge of the Son of God; we must accept in our minds the place of death and burial, which implies the removal of all that would hinder bone coming to bone so that the whole thought of God should be reached, then the sinews and the flesh and skin coming upon them, involving form and general beautification: there is something pleasing to God by His own power.
Having said all that about death and resurrection, one can dwell on the thought of the Son of God, how He is in the minds of the saints marked out in power by resurrection of the dead. I believe that is where the testimony lies, where the truth of the assembly is reached in the knowledge of the Son of God -- His person. Orthodoxy has no certainty in it, for the certainty is in the thing being brought to our attention in a marked way in the Lord's Person, *He* has done it, we have heard His voice, He has made us to live; He is in our souls in that way; He is thus known in our
{124}
souls as the Son of God. It is a certainty, nobody can take it away from us. He is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead".
The other side of this matter is excommunication from the religious organisations of this world. @John 9 brings out that faithful testimony rendered, as one has light, leads to one's being cast out. If I remain in the religious system, it is just by accommodation; if I am there as a christian, I am accommodating error. The parents of this man knew that, if they confessed Jesus to be the Christ, they would be excommunicated. It is poor loyalty to Christ to stay where He is rejected; loyalty is in being faithful to the light you have, to testify to it clearly, and you will have either to withdraw or they will force you out. Here the man is forced out, they excommunicated him; and all such excommunications are recorded in heaven! Excommunications of this kind, because of faithfulness to Christ, are items of the greatest interest in heaven. And the Lord heard it; it was no accident that He heard it; it is put as if it were a matter of course -- "Jesus heard that they had cast him out". His excommunication brought the man into accord with Christ, for He is viewed in John's gospel as rejected from the outset. The Lord would say to him in effect, 'I know well the feelings you have, but you are now in circumstances to which the truth relative to Me as the Son of God applies. You will now come into that truth, you will now enjoy it: you will know more than the ancients; you will know more about it than the theologians: you will know what it is as in My company'. Believers like this man are those who understand the truth of the Son of God.
It is to be noted that Peter had the knowledge of Christ as Son of God before Paul was converted, but you never hear of him speaking of it in his preaching. Peter thus illustrates how the early servants of God could keep a feature of the truth until the *time for it*
{125}
*arrives*. It applied to a certain condition; the saints being cut off from their national moorings and the acceptance of death and burial were necessary. The fulness of all these thoughts awaited Israel's complete rejection of the early believers; and Peter kept this precious light in his soul, as far as the record goes, that Jesus was the Son of God; saying nothing about it in his public addresses, but when Paul comes in, he begins to speak about it at once. Peter was not commissioned to preach that Jesus was the Son of God: Paul was. He says, God who "called me by his grace, was pleased to reveal his Son in me, that I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations". That was the thought of God; but it awaited the suitable circumstances in the history of the testimony, and a suitable vessel to announce it. So that we learn from the apostles how to keep things hidden in our souls, to learn from Mary, the mother of our Lord, how to become *treasuries*. In the pattern David had of the house, there were treasuries, that is to say, persons who can keep things and bring them forth at the suited time, so that they shine in their own splendour. The idea of a jewel is not only what it is in itself, but in its setting; and the setting of the truth of the Son of God is seen in Paul.
In order to have that precious truth, the knowledge of the Son of God, it is worth while accepting death, accepting burial, and accepting excommunication, so that you might be in it, and as in it, you know it, and it cannot be taken away from you! There are knowable things about that Person, and there are unknowable things, and you will not attempt to intrude on what is unknowable, but you will seek to understand fully what *is* knowable. What is knowable about the Son of God enters, as I have said, into my arriving at "the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ".
May God bless the thoughts to us.
{126}
FRIENDSHIP TO CHRIST
@Luke 8: 38, 39; @2 Samuel 15: 31 - 37
These scriptures serve to instruct us as to how the Lord disposes of us in view of His testimony and service; how He disposes of each of us, and how He disposes of us as viewed collectively; for it is to be remembered that the saints are what He has under His hand now. Whatever there is, small or great, the Lord will dispose of it wisely; in doing so He takes full account of the apparent overwhelming odds against us, such odds as would tend to terrify us and render us helpless, aside from faith. But obedience in the believer qualifies him as available to the Lord; he is, as it were, one of those numbered according to the book of Numbers, being "twenty years and upward, all that go forth to military service".
What I have to say this evening is about military service, and the Lord, whether we be few or many, disposes of us with infinite wisdom, and with *certainty of success*. Nothing is more stimulating in warfare than the certainty of success, of victory, as it is said, "thanks to God", not, who *has* given us the victory, or who *will give us* the victory, but, "who *gives* us the victory", @1 Corinthians 15: 57. It is characteristic. So that no one need be faint-hearted in relation to the warfare. The type provides for any faint-hearted people; they are to go home, because they tend to interfere with the courage of the others (@Deuteronomy 20: 8). Then again, in the case of Gideon's army (@Judges 7), it was reduced from thirty-three thousand to three hundred according to the test given of the lapping of the water, and the three hundred who did so were assured of victory. "Victory", indeed, ought to be on the banner of the christian. There is nothing else in mind. Faith knows nothing else. But still, there are the throes of anxiety, and the Lord would have it so, lest we might become
{127}
self-confident: self-confidence makes for defeat. You will remember that in the wilderness after Israel declined to go into the land -- they despised the pleasant land -- they said, "Here are we, and we will go up". They would attempt it in their own strength, but they were defeated.
The man in Luke, in the country of the Gadarenes, is a type of what I am speaking of. The Lord had been there and had healed that man, it was a most remarkable case, and yet the inhabitants of the place urged the Lord to leave. The man, too, out of whom the demons were gone "besought him that he might be with him", and were we to consult our own natural hearts we would say, 'Let the man go, too. Such people do not deserve to have him stay amongst them, he would be overwhelmed by them'. But the Lord knew his capabilities, and instead of allowing him to cross the sea the Lord instructs him to go back to his house, and tell what great things God had done for him. He begged Jesus to let him go with Him, not that he dreaded being left behind, but rather because He so loved Jesus. If it were because he dreaded to remain, doubtless the Lord would have allowed him to go with Him, but there is no suggestion of cowardice in the man; he represents a man occupying an outpost, a lone man. There is not the slightest evidence that he was at any disadvantage as left there; he testified alone in that apparently barren soil, among a community so hostile to Jesus that they would prefer the man with the demons in him to Jesus.
Now, from the passage in 2 Samuel, I want to show you how, typically, the Lord disposes of His forces, not one man alone, but a number of persons, but I want particularly to dwell upon Hushai, for the reason that he is specifically called "David's friend". He is said to be that when David was in power, before there was any thought of his ejection from his capital by his son Absalom. It might be assumed that it would pay to be a friend of David when he was in power, no
{128}
doubt it did, but a true friend is not looking for material gain; he is looking for company, for companionship, that is what a friend seeks. And that was Hushai. He was as true a friend to David when he ascended Olivet in rejection, as when he was in power on his throne. And now is the time, beloved brethren, for this kind of friendship. All will assume, no doubt, to be friends of Christ by and by when He comes forth out of heaven; as it is said, in @Revelation 19, "behold a white horse, and one sitting on it", with the armies of heaven following Him, with every mark of power, and whose name is called "The Word of God". His enemies then will have been put under His feet. He will reign universally. There will, doubtless, be secret enemies even then, because some will feign obedience to Christ, but, generally, all will profess friendship to Jesus.
Now is the time, therefore, for the kind of friendship that we see in Hushai in @2 Samuel 15. He is specifically called "David's friend", and he came into the city as Absalom came in: "and Hushai David's friend came into the city, and Absalom came into Jerusalem", verse 37. It may be that there is someone here who has not as yet taken up his place in the city as Hushai did. You may have been thinking about it, and you may have weighed the possible consequences. You may have thought, as it were, Absalom will have a large army there; he will be king and dominate the city; David will be outside in rejection. That is just the position today. Fellowship implies that Christ is rejected in this world; that is what it means. It may be there is somebody that says, 'Well, I cannot quite face that, the odds seem too great'. To join Absalom, and to be on his side, is, of course, another matter; but to be there in loyalty of heart to David is a most dangerous undertaking. That is how many regard it, and they hold back.
The Lord is in heaven and, though He is rejected here, there is not the faintest thought of defeat in regard
{129}
of any undertaking of His. David says to Zadok, "Carry back the ark of God into the city". You say, 'That is a most dangerous thing, to put the ark within the range of Absalom'. But no, the ark had been in even worse hands before; it had been in Philistine hands; the five lords had it, and without any protection at all, with not a priest to look after it, not a levite to carry it! But victory marked it! It returned to its own land. You will remember the most touching incident of those milch kine drawing the cart with that ark upon it. Dagon had fallen before it, and now the power of the Philistine nation was brought down; they had to send it away. The presence of the ark here is the guarantee of the overthrow of this world. Let us understand that. You say the ark is in heaven. No, it is not in heaven; that is not the idea. It will appear in heaven by and by (@Revelation 11: 19), but the present position of it is *here*. It is a question of the testimony, it is the ark of the testimony. That is to say, it is Christ here in the hearts of His people, and the presence of Christ in His people is the guarantee for the overthrow of this world. Let no one make any mistake; it is sure victory! So the Philistine lords had to send away the ark, and send it away with sacrifice too. It is the power of God.
David sends the ark back again into the city, and presently he is at the summit in his rejection. Well, you say, what are these poor people anyway? They have neither creed nor priest, nor cathedral. Who are they, and what have they? Well, I will tell you what they have. They have moral superiority, as keeping the commandments of God and cherishing the ark of God, feeling things as they are in this world, as David did, for he wept and went up barefoot upon the sides of Olivet; but when he got to the summit he was able to worship. There was no failing in his strength. He was in moral superiority, and he worshipped God. That is the position. And presently Hushai comes to
{130}
him in a like state; he is according to David. Every true friend of David, every true friend of Christ, seeks to be according to Christ. He says to the disciples, "Ye are my friends if ye practise whatever I command you"; and Hushai was one of these; he made no complaint when David sent him back into the city.
David had just heard that Ahithophel had joined the conspirators. That is to say, the man of greatest repute for wisdom had taken sides against David. Is there not today such a situation as that? The great sources of human wisdom are all against Christ, every one of them. The most renowned of the universities are against Him, and the Lord is not indifferent to this. They have great power. Modernism is the product of these institutions, and it is in direct opposition to Christ. That is what Ahithophel represents; he was renowned for his wisdom. At one time Ahithophel was amongst David's officers as his counsellor; but he is not that now, he has altered his position, and that makes the difference. It is just then that Hushai comes into view. Who is Hushai? The simplest christian, if he loves Christ; the weakest, or the youngest, or the oldest, if he is a friend of Christ; that is the one. The Lord would enlist you. He has a right to you. He has a right to conscript you, for that is the principle of service, it is conscription. So David says, 'If you go with me you will be a burden; if you go back to the city, you will serve me'. You will understand, it is not that he was not with David in spirit, for he was. He was a lover of David, but his position was to be in the city.
Now, in speaking thus, if I may refer to the conditions of the brethren in this State, what Absalom represents is peculiarly seen here. There is the most ancient and renowned religious institution predominant, and the saints have to do with it. It is a question of whether we are friends of Christ. It is no question of taking a sword now, but it is a question of friendship to Christ, and the friends of Christ are wise, for "the
{131}
foolishness of God is wiser than men", and this is seen in the saints. See how foolish that sister is! She might have shone in this world. Well, suppose she declines to shine in this world for a few years, and then she seems to go down like the setting sun -- the sun rises again, it "hasteth to its place where it ariseth", to shine again. The sun rises to shine again, if the christian goes down in the testimony, in loyalty to Christ, he hastens back to his place to shine; the Lord will bring him back again to shine where he suffered. Look at that young man. What is he going to be? He could have shone in the law, or in politics, or in the church, even in the religious world, but look where he is! Hidden away! That is how matters stand outwardly. But the Lord is saying to you, I want to place you in a certain position. The wisdom that is shining in you is regarded as folly in this world: God's wisdom is foolishness to men. The world says, it is the height of folly for you to pursue that course. But you are a friend of Christ, and He says, *I* have a place for you, a place in the counsels of God, also a place here in the testimony.
I am speaking of the latter particularly, and if you take up that position, you will tend to upset the whole scheme of Absalom. You say, That is impossible; but it is not impossible. You are necessary to the Lord's organisation, for that is what you get in this scripture. David set up an organisation in the midst of Jerusalem which was the undoing and overthrow of Absalom. Just a handful, two priests and Hushai, and two young men in the city of Jerusalem, Hushai, the special man amongst them, the friend of David, I urge that on you. John says, in writing to Gaius, "Greet the friends by name", @3 John 14. Every friend has a name. They are most valuable. Only one of these men is called a friend of David, but all those mentioned come under that head. Hushai is a wise man. The friendship of Christ works out in wisdom. And so David says to him here, "If thou passest on with me, thou wilt be a burden to
{132}
me; but if thou return to the city, and say to Absalom, I will be thy servant, O king; as I have been thy father's servant hitherto, so now will I be thy servant, then mayest thou for me defeat the counsel of Ahithophel", (verses 33, 34).
When the Lord entered Gethsemane the greatest conflict ever entered into by man took place. Satan approached with all his forces, and the Lord disposes of His disciples; He says to them, "Sit here until I go away and pray yonder". He disposes of what was under His hand. And the Lord was facing the greatest combination of forces that could be against Him; Satan himself was there; as the Lord says, "the ruler of the world comes"; he was coming, and the Lord disposes of His forces. Well now, where am I in this disposing of the forces? Am I going to say, Lord, I am not equal to this, or, Am I going to stand by? Now is the hour; there will never be another like it. We are in the closing moments, and the Lord is disposing of His forces, and in doing so He is taking account of what we have to contend with; and we have to contend with forces such as did not exist earlier, we are in perilous times.
David knew that Ahithophel would give such counsel to Absalom as might damage him. And so here in this city, there are peculiar forces, and the Lord would prepare us for them. Hushai would defeat Ahithophel's counsel as in the city. He went back, and as he entered the city Absalom entered it. That is to say, the battle is on! Why should the Spirit of God record it in this way? Hushai enters the city before Absalom. He has got an advantage. The Lord will never allow the enemy to get any advantage over His own. You may say, 'My circumstances hinder me, my family relations or my business relations, for I have to earn my living -- they seem to be against me'. Well, the question is, Are they God's ordering, or are they your own choice? If they are God's ordering, they are defeating the devil: that is the position. If I am in the position assigned to me
{133}
by God's will, however it may seem to be against me, it will turn out to be *for* me. Indeed, the apostle says, "all things work together for good to those who love God", @Romans 8: 28. It may be you do not think you love God. It is very comforting to me that at the foot of Sinai God speaks about the "thousands of them that love" Him -- the *thousands* of them! Some of them might say, I do not know that I love God. Well, the test is, Are you doing the will of God? Are you disposed to do the will of God? Are you resolved to do the will of God? That is the test. The Lord says, "If ye love me, keep my commandments", and again, "he that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me". So that any disposition to keep the commandments of God, to be obedient, is an evidence of love; you are amongst the thousands of them that love God. Outward conditions may seem against you, but in due course you will look back on your history and say, God helped me by this or in that, I see this now, but I did not see it then, and I did this because I loved Him. There is not a doubt that every item is recorded, debited or credited, in the book of God, and the lovers of Christ will all come out victorious, the credit balance will always be there. God knows how to value what is done for Him. He gives us credit for much that we do not value. I say this for your comfort. But then the point is the disposition to take orders from the Lord, and to occupy the position assigned to me without questioning. That is what the man, out of whom the demons had been cast, did; he made no objection to the Lord's directions; nor did Hushai here.
But then Hushai was not to be alone in Jerusalem, he was to have companionship. What was their bond? Their bond was love for David. That is our bond. I do not know of anything really more precious than that -- the bond of christians in love for Christ. If I love the Lord and you love the Lord, and we are set here in this dark world, we have a common bond, the
{134}
bond of perfectness -- love. However few we are, we have the bond of perfectness.
So the time comes when Absalom calls for a counsellor, and Ahithophel was asked to give counsel, and from a military point of view his counsel was good, from a human point of view it was right, but it did not prevail. It was rejected, and Ahithophel hanged himself. That indicates what is going to happen to all that he stands for, in the way of worldly wisdom and worldly combination, at the present time. It will come to an ignominious end; whereas the simplest christian, who has taken sides with Christ as one of His friends, will come out victoriously, will come out gloriously. Now, is there not a call from the Lord to us now, beloved, to come into the city in the sense in which I am speaking of it? In truth it turned out to be a city within a city. Absalom had the outer, external thing, as the religious world has today, dominated by what he represents, but within that, hidden away, there was another city, and this inner city overthrows the external city. That is what is going to happen, dear brethren.
When the Lord converted Saul, He said to him, "enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do", @Acts 9: 6. You say, Is He sending him to the mayor of the city, or to the aldermen of Damascus? He is not sending him to any such persons. No, they are not in the Lord's reckoning at all in that sense, but He is, nevertheless, sending him into the city, "Enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do". The "city" I may liken to the great religious area today; but there is a city within it, hidden away, which is allowed to be its undoing.
What was in Damascus? Well, there is a man named Ananias in that city. The Lord knew where he lived. He was not a great man in Damascus, he had no part whatever in the government of Damascus. There was another man who lived in a street called Straight, and
{135}
the Lord knew the name of that street, and the number. He knows where His people reside. This man, and those like him in the city, were the inner thing, just as Hushai and Abiathar and Zadok and the young men were, in the city of Jerusalem. There was an inner thing in Jerusalem that was really an organisation of David, as much as any organisation under him had been. And so there is today an inner thing, the secret organisation of Christ; it is a city within a city. And so Saul is led into the city -- blind. He is led to the spot where he can get light, instruction and general furnishings, where he can be qualified to go out into the outer city and bear witness. That is the position; the Lord had an organisation. Ananias was part of it, and the man in the street called Straight was part of it, and many others, and these men furnished Paul with what he needed so that he might go into the outer city, into Absalom's city, as it were, and bear testimony. And he did. His eyes were opened, and he took food and got strength, and he was baptised and got the Holy Spirit, and preached Jesus as the Son of God. That was in the public city, in the synagogue. That is, we bear testimony publicly as we are furnished secretly.
Elijah, if you will remember, took a journey with Elisha, before Elijah was caught up into heaven. They started from Gilgal, and went to Bethel, and from Bethel to Jericho, and from Jericho to Jordan. They crossed the Jordan, the power of God drove it back and they went over; and they talked and walked on the other side of the Jordan. Then Elijah is caught up to heaven, and as he went up to heaven his mantle fell, and Elisha takes that mantle. He had asked Elijah for a double portion of his spirit, and he got it, and he makes the return journey. All this is secret; Samaria knew nothing of it. That is what some of us here have to do now -- to make the return journey. We have been on the one line, getting objective truth, but now we want to make the return journey, to prove the power
{136}
of God over the world -- to go to Bethel and go to Carmel; Elisha went from Bethel to Carmel. That was not in the first journey, it was in his return journey. Carmel was where Elijah gained his great victory over the prophets of Baal; one of the most signal victories recorded by one man; it was what one man did against eight hundred and fifty, for there were two companies of false prophets. Elisha would fill his lungs, as we ought to, with the atmosphere of Carmel. There is a lesson to be learned in mount Carmel that you do not learn elsewhere. But from Carmel he goes into Samaria; that is where Ahab was, and where Jezebel was, I am not going to speak of Jezebel now. You know about her. We have to bear testimony where she is, and she represents all the wisdom of the world. As I was saying, there is no institution like that which she represents. It is the most ancient now, and in all its ramifications it is augmented in every possible way by the wisdom of this world, and that is where we have to serve, especially in this country. Elisha went deliberately from Carmel down to Samaria, and that is where he testified, and that is where we are called to testify; and he was eminently successful.
Hushai was eminently successful in a similar position; he gave counsel that overthrew the counsel of the wisest man of his day; the man with the greatest reputation for wisdom was overthrown. And so may the weakest of us, for I would say to the youngest present, the foolishness of God in you -- for that is where it is seen -- is said to be wiser than men, and the weakness of God, which is in you, is stronger than men. As Paul says, "When I am weak, then I am powerful". So that there is every encouragement to come into the city, as it were, however hostile it seems to be, or however impossible the position appears, for certain victory awaits us. The Lord would call upon us, as His friends, "Ye are my friends", He says, "if ye practise whatever I command you". We cannot afford
{137}
to be wanting in friendship to Christ. The Lord grant that we may be here as His companions, to know what He is to us, and to know what we can be in friendship to Him.
{138}
VESSELS OF MERCY
@Jeremiah 18: 1 - 6; @Romans 9: 23, 24; @2 Corinthians 4: 7
We closed our meeting this afternoon with a reference to the service of the levitical family, the Merarites, noting that their service had to do, typically, with the saints. They had to do with the pillars, and bars, and doors, and so forth, of the tabernacle; these representing the people of God, for the tabernacle in its earthly form as in testimony here is composed of saints -- of persons. It is said to be a figurative representation of things in the heavens (@Hebrews 9: 23). It is not of this creation, it is not formed of such material as is used in the wilderness. It is a great moral system in which God shines, in which God resides; which for the moment has its expression here on earth in the people of God, as set up in divine skill in relation to Christ, and in relation to one another. Hence the people of God become of peculiar interest; and the believer can see, however weak and feeble he may be, that the word for him is, "The Lord has need of it". He has a place for you, that cannot be filled by another, and so He *must* have you. You are of great importance in His eye.
The Scriptures are full of that thought, the Old Testament as well as the New; and the Spirit of God would engage us with it, so that we might rightly value each other; that we might not despise or disregard in any way the feeblest, the weakest, the most insignificant of God's people, even the weak brother, for whom as the apostle Paul says, "Christ died", @Romans 14: 15. John's gospel may be cited as setting out this thought as much as any other. Not that it is exclusive to John, but he has a way of speaking of the saints that is stimulating to love. He speaks of one "whom Jesus loved". You would like to meet that one, would you not?
{139}
You say, 'He loves us all'; well, He does, but John does not mean that when he speaks of "the disciple whom Jesus loved": he means that a certain one is singled out by the Lord as being peculiarly lovable.
John is not here now, but the Lord is not without someone like him. For instance, the Lord takes a little child and sets him by Him. Never did that little child look so beautiful as when he was set beside the Lord Jesus! You might say that the glory of Christ would eclipse whatever glory there was in the child, but no, the glory of the feeblest of us, and we are "vessels of mercy ... before prepared for glory", will not be eclipsed by the glory of Christ. We reflect His glory, in fact. So that the little child is set *by* the Lord, and He refers to him. In @Matthew 18: 2 it says, "Jesus having called a little child to him", meaning that the child was amenable to the Lord's will; he was not a wayward child, that is, not a wayward saint. He says to the disciples, "Unless ye are converted and become as little children ..." And then in verse 4 He says, "as *this* little child". So that the Lord has someone at all times amenable to His will, and suitable for any specific purpose that He may have in mind, so that He can point to him. Now, I can understand that every lover of Christ would aspire to that -- to be in such a state of subjection and moral beauty that the Lord can say of him, as He did in the Pharisee's house -- "Seest thou" this person? You might say, Well, if I were in other circumstances I could shine better, and be more for Christ. But here is a woman, in the most withering circumstances as far as she was concerned, a woman of the city, but the Lord turns to her, and says to Simon, "Seest thou this woman?" There was something there as corresponding to Himself that the Lord could call attention to. She illustrates a feature of the personnel of the assembly; that is, of that vessel in which God sets out His testimony at the present time. There are many features among these persons; she is one to whom
{140}
the Lord can turn and say, "Seest thou this woman?" And then He goes over the details of her service.
I mention all this, so that there might be an appeal as to it, that one might not complain of one's circumstances or assume that one could shine better in others. It is an utter mistake. If the Lord has placed you in circumstances that appear to be adverse, He intends to enhance your glory. If He has placed you in them, He will cause you to shine in them; as it is said, "Among whom ye appear as lights in the world", @Philippians 2: 15. "Ye appear as lights"; the allusion is to the stars. The Lord could use one star to illuminate the whole scene! How great that is! If I were to go over the ground, through Scripture, that speaks of shining, you would be affected by what is presented. For instance, Deborah says, "let them that love him be as the rising of the sun in its might", @Judges 5: 31. What a fine thought that is, and it is within the range of all the lovers of God! It is really a prayer, and the prayer of a woman, too. And again, it is said in Daniel, "they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the expanse", @Daniel 12: 3. Now, the firmament holds the great body of luminaries, the stars. What a conception that is! That wise and righteous persons shall shine thus! You can see what enters into the personnel of the vessel of testimony, what one person may be, what a wise brother or sister may be. And then the Lord says in @Matthew 13: 43, "Then the righteous shall shine forth as the sun".
You can see therefore, how a few saints in a place may be very effective in their testimony, say in this city. Jehovah says to Moses, "five of you shall chase a hundred", @Leviticus 26: 8. That is, a few of His people under conditions suitable to Him. Now, you can see, dear brethren, what a power a few saints may be. It is a question of power there, "A hundred of you shall put ten thousand to flight". Now, as you proceed on the principle of multiplication, see how comparatively few saints are needed to cope with the opposition of
{141}
a million people! As soon as we begin to reckon thus our difficulties begin to diminish, and the power and influence of the saints increases enormously. If you reckon according to that rule, if the ratio runs on like that, see what a hundred saints in a city means; for that is what God has in His mind. And if it be a question of prayer, the Lord says, "if two of you shall agree on earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens", @Matthew 18: 19. You thus can see what two praying people may accomplish.
I say all these things so as to encourage the brethren, especially in this city and State, that there may be no feeling of disheartenment, or discouragement, but a feeling of stimulation, in humble dependence, of course, but still a definite stimulation as to what God may do with us. It is a question of what we are. The great principle underlying all this, as I understand it, is in these verses in Jeremiah. Jehovah directs the prophet to go down to the potter's house; and here we have a principle of great importance as to understanding things; that is, that we are to get into the circumstances to which the things apply. The word of the Lord regarding the thing in question is to be given to the prophet in the circumstances which are in keeping with the matter, that is, in the potter's house. So we must learn what it is to go to the potter's house.
The idea of the potter's house, if we may reverently apply it to God, began very early in the history of this creation with which we have to do. We have it in the first chapter of the first book of the Bible, and the word to Jeremiah is to go to that house. It is where God began to make vessels. He made one. The Spirit of God makes much of it, but in the third chapter of the book we learn how it was marred. It says here, "the vessel ... was marred". We have not to go far, dear brethren, for that marred vessel. We can find it by the thousand in this country, and in every country. We are
{142}
conversant with it in our own experience, we know how marred we became by sin, how shapen in it. But then, Jehovah says, the potter made "another vessel".
This vessel is specially to be noted. It is also made in the potter's house. That is to say, the Lord says, "My Father worketh hitherto and I work", @John 5: 17. God's hands were not let down as the first vessel was marred; He made another vessel. That *other vessel* began to take form in Abel. I do not doubt but that it took form in Adam and Eve, but they must suffer in the government of God: the other vessel must not be either of them. It must be another vessel. That other vessel began to take form in Abel, and so, right down the line of faith, as we get it in @Hebrews 11, we have the formation of that vessel. And it says here, that it "seemed good to the potter". The second vessel pleased the potter, and we have not to wait long to find out what God thinks of the new vessel. Abel offers a more acceptable sacrifice than Cain. Enoch, we are told, "walked with God" by faith, and he was translated so that he should not see death, but "before his translation he has the testimony that he had pleased God". If we are to understand this new vessel, we must read down the line, and see the different features of it, for each of these men of faith in @Hebrews 11 represents a certain feature of the vessel that pleases God. They all anticipated Christ, taking character from Him by faith.
As soon as faith begins to appear, Jesus is discerned; He is in view. Faith is laying hold of the divine conception, it was not yet visible to the naked eye, but it was visible to faith; and that visibility must begin with some operation of God. And what was the first operation of God? Well, we are told that He made coats of skin for Adam and Eve; that was a divine operation. The divine movement is that of which faith lays hold; faith is thus doing something that pleases God. As God is doing something that pleases Himself, faith discerns it
{143}
and appropriates it. We have to look at these suits of clothes -- these coats of skin. God is the first clothes-maker. And faith discerned that there was something in mind; someone had to suffer before those clothes could be made. You know, a great deal more occurred than is written down since God intervened in testimony. Who was that Sufferer? Abel laid hold of the thought that God gave expression to, that someone had to *suffer* if God was to be pleased. God was pleased to make these clothes to cover His erring creatures, but for this, someone had to suffer. Someone *had* suffered, and Abel saw that by faith, and that is where the new vessel began. It may have been seen very dimly in his day, but there was the idea there that faith laid hold of: that God had to be met by sacrifice, and if there is to be a sacrifice, someone has to suffer. We know that that Sufferer was Jesus.
A study of @Hebrews 11 brings out to the intelligent believer the great features that go to the formation of the vessel that pleased God. The potter "made it again another vessel, as seemed good" to him. *That* vessel is not broken nor marred; and this leads me to Romans, where we get the vessel that God was pleased to make out of the lump; it says, "that he might make known the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared for glory, us, whom he has also called", @Romans 9: 23, 24. Will we put it beyond *us*? Is there anyone here that would put this beyond him, and say it does not include him? The apostle says, "us, whom he has also called" (verse 24). And what is that vessel? It is a vessel of mercy, fitted for glory. If I begin to look at the saints in this way, my view of them is pretty sure to be greatly altered. Their histories really antedate Adam and Abel. It says here, "that he might make known the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy, which *he had before prepared for glory*". That is a question of counsel.
Think, dear brethren, of the distance back that this
{144}
conception goes as to us! It is, "before prepared for glory", and then, even "us, whom he hath called". One would love to be able to lead the brethren to look at the saints in this way. Jehovah took great pains to give Balaam a view of them. He had recourse to enchantments in his efforts to curse Israel, but he saw that God was standing athwart his purpose (see @Numbers 23 and 24). You cannot curse Israel. Israel is fixed for blessing in the purpose of God, and that fixedness is unalterable. When Balaam saw this he cast aside his enchantments. It would be well if we learned what that means; to look at the saints with an open, transparent, discriminating mind; and the more you see them from the standpoint of the vision of the Almighty, the more they will bear discrimination. It will be seen that they can bear the closest, keenest scrutiny. The nearer you get, the greater the view, and the greater the glory you will see. It was God who stood firmly by Balaam, and refused to allow him to say one word against His people. A word spoken against the saints is abomination to heaven! And God was so concerned that He would not allow one of the wickedest men spoken of in scripture to say a single word against His people. Instead of that, He causes him to say the most wonderful things about them. "The man of opened eye", the man who "seeth the vision of the Almighty", the man who, from the top of the rocks, saw them as God would have him to see them. God would say, 'Come here, and see them from this angle' -- and there they are, abiding in their tents, *according to their tribes*, that is, their place according to eternal purpose as formed in love. They are beautiful, they are glorious -- they are "vessels of mercy ... before prepared for glory". They include *ourselves* -- "us" as the apostle says, that is, all christians.
Thus, dear brethren, you can see how important it is to have a right view of each other. First, as to what even one of us may do, or two of us may do, and then
{145}
how we please God; because we are His own handiwork; and then how He delights in us, and how He would force the wickedest man to see us as *He* sees us. So that Balaam is forced to say the most beautiful things about Israel. Instead of cursing them as Balak intended him to do, he is blessing every time. "They *are* blessed", he says, @Numbers 22: 12. There is no repentance with God. The saints are what they are in His eternal counsels, and they will come to His thought exactly. He is the Potter and He will make them just as He pleases, and He is doing this even now.
The verses in 2 Corinthians are to bring out what the saints are in the hands of God now, to contain the most precious thing, called a "treasure": that is to say, the testimony of God by the Spirit in regard of Christ; it is really the shining out of God, what God is, in Christ. It is a question of the Person of Christ, "the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ". It is a question of His personality, because the face discloses what He is *personally*, and that is available to God for the shining out of His glory. And that glory is to be in every Christian's heart; it is the greatest treasure of which you can conceive. We are very slow. I am speaking of this because I have in mind that the saints should advance on the line of excellency, that they should "judge of and approve the things that are more excellent", @Philippians 1: 10. That treasure is all that God is, shining out in the face of a Man, in testimony, and that is to be reflected, to be carried about in this world, in vessels such as we are here, in flesh and blood conditions.
It is not the saints yet viewed in their absolute state as formed of God for eternity in heaven, although that has already begun, but we are still here -- fragile things, and the word "earthen" signifies what is breakable -- that God has put the most precious thing into you and me. You might say, But an automobile may strike me as I am crossing the street, and kill me.
{146}
But then, you see, it does *not* strike you, if you see what I mean, you are preserved of God. I do not say that these things do not happen, I am only speaking of how we are situated, that we are here in fragility; every moment we are dependent on God. Not only because your life is precious -- it is precious to God -- but because this treasure is in you. The treasure is the testimony; what we are in relation to God here; so that God watches over the saints as they cross the street. One always feels the need nowadays of saying to God as one goes out, "Preserve me, O God". I am thinking of the physical preservation. That should be the prayer of the heart, even if not spoken; it is the attitude of heart of a fragile vessel, not only because your life is precious, which it is, but because of the treasure that God has put into you.
In the pattern of the house that David had by the Spirit we have "treasuries" (@1 Chronicles 28: 12). The things that he had by the Spirit included not only one treasury, it is in the plural, "treasuries". I conceive that the thought includes all the saints, that every saint is a treasury. And as soon as I see that, I begin to look at myself somewhat differently: my life is precious, it may be, to my family, or to the saints; but there is something in me as I stand here, or in you as you sit there, that is *of God*. It is a treasure. No angel ever had it, nor ever will have it! It is a treasure we have in earthen vessels. I quite admit that was peculiarly true of Paul, but it is true in measure of every one who has the Spirit, and it is particularly seen in those who are concerned about the testimony.
The Lord, speaking of a scribe who was discipled into the kingdom of the heavens, said he would bring out of his treasure things new and old. It is important not only to have things, but to bring them out and to show them: not to cast pearls before swine, indeed, but to show them to appreciative eyes: "things new and old". How God values a man who has such things!
{147}
In the upper room in Jerusalem, we have the eleven apostles and several women; it says, "and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren", each one had this treasure. Take Peter, for instance, what did he have in his heart? Not only the training that he had from the Lord for his service, but what he knew of Jesus and of God in Him. There were certain things that were peculiar to himself. Then John, and so all the apostles, for each had his own view of Christ. It is not only that each apostle was a believer, and that he was quite competent to preach and to teach, but he had a view of Christ that was peculiar to himself. And so it is with every saint; he has something peculiar, and that is a treasure. The aggregate of these peculiar features that are distributed amongst the saints makes up Christ as presented in testimony; "so also is the Christ", as is said in @1 Corinthians 12.
And then, Mary, the Lord's mother -- think of what she had! You would speak of her with peculiar respect; not with superstitious reverence, as is common today, that is idolatry -- for she was just a saint like ourselves. But I would say to her with respect, 'You have things that I have not, no one else has what you have'. 'Yes', she would say, 'that is true'. And I would say to John, 'You have the Lord's mother in your house'. The Lord said at the cross to her, "Woman, behold thy son". That, you will understand, does not refer to Himself. He did not ask her to look at Him there; He referred to John; that is, He constituted her in that word a mother to John, so that John would have her in his house in that relation. Hence she would open up to John things about Jesus that John would never otherwise have known. How tenderly John would regard her!
Mary would not talk lightly or to satisfy natural curiosity about these things; they were pearls which she would not cast "before swine"; she would not satisfy the curious enquiries of ungodly people about
{148}
the Lord Jesus; no. She would treasure them within her heart. She was in this sense a treasury of God. She would speak of Jesus with feelings of holiness. She was being formed in this respect as early as the beginning of Luke. We are told in @Luke 2 that she "kept all these things in her mind, pondering them in her heart". And so it is with every christian in his measure; as he takes in the thoughts of God as revealed in Jesus, by the Spirit, he values them. I am persuaded that we do not value them enough, that we deal with them too lightly. We are constituted holy vessels -- vessels of mercy, as it says, competent to receive these things, and to cherish them, and to keep them, as mysterious things to be unfolded only to appreciative eyes and ears.
That is what I had in mind. May the Lord open our eyes, so that we might see the value of each one saint, what he can do, what he may *be*. Whether as viewed militarily, or as a star shining, or as a praying man: what one man may do, as we get in James, for James represents this side in his epistle; the Lord appeared to him by himself (@1 Corinthians 15: 7). He speaks of Elijah. He says Elijah was a man of like passions with ourselves; but he prayed with prayer, and the heavens were shut up for three years and six months. That is what *one* believer can do. And he prayed again, "and the heaven gave rain, and the earth caused its fruit to spring forth", @James 5: 18. May the Lord give us opened eyes; that we may have the vision of the Almighty, and see the saints in their true value; that each may hold himself as "a vessel to honour, sanctified, serviceable to the Master".
{149}
*Pages 149 - 268 -- "Christ's Sonship in Matthew's Gospel". London 1934 (Volume 119)*
CHRIST'S SONSHIP IN MATTHEW'S GOSPEL (1)
@Matthew 1: 17 - 25; @Matthew 2: 13 - 15
J.T. It was thought that we might consider the sonship of Christ as seen in the gospel of Matthew, as found in six settings. The first in chapter 2; the second in chapters 3 and 4; the third in chapter 11; the fourth in chapter 16; the fifth in chapter 17 -- the mount of transfiguration; and the sixth in chapter 28. There are other references to sonship in the gospel, but these are the main passages, and I believe the Lord will help us in looking at them as affording a subject which, needless to say, is of immense moment at the present time.
The object in mind is not only that we might get the truth by itself as presented in these passages -- that is, the truth abstractly, and perfectly presented in Christ -- but that we might see the bearing of it on our own present position, because what may be remarked as to Matthew's gospel as a whole is that it bears on the assembly, not only as seen at Pentecost, or even as Paul presents it at Corinth and Ephesus, but right through to the present time. It contemplates the whole history or sojourn of the assembly here on earth, and views it as being the vessel of the testimony and the object of incessant opposition; therefore we may look in Matthew's gospel for provision to meet this opposition with the kind of endurance that is needed for it. With this in view, it may be further remarked that chapter 1 bears on our present position as regards the question of its *legality*: whether the ground taken today by the saints who are seeking to do the will of God is legal, that is, right according to divine requirements as before
{150}
God and men; whether the position is tenable from that standpoint. This is the point of view in chapter 1 in regard of the position of Christ, as it is said, "Jesus, who is *called* Christ" (verse 16). He had acquired that name rightfully -- given to Him, of course -- but He was *called* Christ. The genealogy and the whole of the chapter are to establish incontestably the position thus taken up by those who called Him Christ. It was necessary that this should be established, not only as needed to meet current exigencies, but to prove the link with the outset of God's intervention sovereignly in Abraham. I think the brethren will see the bearing of this as we proceed, for the effort of the enemy is to discredit what God is supporting. External circumstances are so beclouding that the position occupied by those who seek to do the will of God is peculiarly exposed to attacks.
H.E.S. Have we here the setting forth of what is available for maintaining what is of God at any moment?
J.T. Yes, at any given time from the outset, and right through. That is, Matthew has no fear as to meeting the enemy; Luke, being the gospel of grace, has more consideration for opposers. Matthew has no compunction about speaking out and exposing that from which the saints had to separate in his day; but obviously it is important that the position taken in separating should be established as legal, or in other words, as accredited, as supported by Scripture; and not only that, but that there are evidences on the line of generation. So, as most of us know, certain of the kings which had sprung from Jezebel are omitted from the genealogy, this corresponding with the history of the assembly; reproach is attached to these spiritually, as we may say, and hence, Jezebel and all she stands for are in principle eliminated, as having no part in this evidence of the legality of the position, she has no voice in it.
P.L. Do we get something similar to this in Nehemiah,
{151}
where they had to establish purity in relation to the genealogy?
J.T. That bears on the chapter, so that the position is not only scriptural, but the evidence of the line is present in its moral features, and hence much is made of Joseph. It is said he was "the husband of Mary", he is called a righteous man, and he is one amenable to divine direction, which is a very important character to bear in the presence of current attacks.
P.L. Does he suggest a combination of firmness in regard of what is due to God's throne, and at the same time, of tenderness in regard to Mary, the one mentioned -- "unwilling to expose her publicly"?
J.T. Yes. Matthew's account makes the birth of the Lord much more vulnerable to attack than Luke's, and Joseph's attitude is suggestive of what is needed. He was characteristically a righteous man, a tender, feeling man, a sacrificing man -- all necessary features, so that the position should be secured and the enemy have no advantage. Righteousness, therefore, and feeling are of great importance at the present time in view of the efforts to discredit what is well known to be supported of God.
H.H. Would you make anything of the dreams? Joseph was encouraged by them to pursue the right course.
J.T. We shall see later in our inquiry the part revelation has in the present position when we come to chapter 16. It is not only that our position is to be legal, that is, as set out plainly in Scripture, but there are immediate communications from God. Such are given to those who are in the position of Joseph, those marked off as doing the will of God and following righteousness. The dreams here are of that character; God coming in to fortify us against giving way to darkness in our minds. We shall find the principle throughout Scripture, that God anticipates the danger that may arise in the conflict owing to ignorance, or
{152}
darkness, or weakness, it may be. As in the case of Ananias in Damascus, the Lord anticipated that he could not meet the situation, and so He came to him and instructed him, so that he could meet the requirements of the moment. If we are righteous, the Lord will not leave us in the dark about anything. Joseph was a righteous man, that is the point, and he had no preconceived thoughts; he was amenable to divine adjustment.
R.G.H. As a righteous man he was careful not to jeopardise the testimony in any way; he "pondered on these things".
J.T. Quite so. He was a righteous man, and that is what is needed. Righteous men are ready for adjustment, they have no preconceived thoughts, so that Joseph here was amenable to adjustment.
Ques. Is that why it emphasises the thought of righteousness as the first principle we have to follow in @2 Timothy 2: 22?
J.T. Yes, righteousness is the first principle involved. This is a matter of the greatest practical importance today because of what has occurred in many parts among the brethren in the way of inability to meet obligations. Then there is righteousness in other ways as to whether we have wills, motives or fleshly aspirations in the things of God; these all interfere, so that Joseph is an excellent example for us to begin with -- a righteous man amenable to adjustment.
M.W.B. In what way would you distinguish between the righteousness of Zacharias and Elizabeth referred to in Luke, and that referred to here?
J.T. I do not think the righteousness of Zacharias equals that of Joseph. Whilst Zacharias was a righteous man, he was not a believing man; he had prayed for things, but did not expect answers; and when the answers were proposed, he was unbelieving. There is nothing of that kind with Joseph.
M.W.B. Then have you in mind the external side
{153}
in connection with the defence of the testimony? Why do you emphasise the legal side?
J.T. It is legal in that the Jewish law confirmed what Jesus was called. He was "called Christ"; He was the Anointed; so that the genealogy was according to the law governing these matters, in accrediting the thing to Him as the Christ. I do not use the word 'legal' in any common or religious sense, but rather as what is scripturally required.
Eu.R. How does that bear on the thought of sonship in @Romans 1? It says, "his Son (come of David's seed according to flesh, marked out Son of God ... )". How do they link together?
J.T. Well, sonship is a matter of power: "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead". We get it in @Matthew 2, not as a matter of power, but as carrying forward the Old Testament thought: "Out of Egypt have I called my son". That is to say, Matthew builds us up in the truth of sonship, as I may say, *informally*, which is the most effective way; the thing is brought in as I am ready for it. So also as regards the deity of the Lord, which *His* sonship implies. You have it introduced here in an informal yet emphatic way: "*he* shall save his people from their sins". A spiritually exercised person will say the "he" and the "his" refer to Jehovah, to none other. Then again, "they shall call his name Emmanuel", and we have the interpretation, "God with us". All this becomes an element in the soul, according to Matthew's way of presenting the truth, and this will abide.
Ques. Is this condition of righteousness with Joseph a moral necessity on our part as making us ready for this further light?
J.T. That is what I thought. God did not take up merely any man; He took up a man who was betrothed to a woman, the man being righteous. That was not accidental; it was important in view of the legality of
{154}
the position, that he was truly the son of David and bearing the character of David. So we have much more about Joseph here than elsewhere; he is called the "son of David".
H.D'A.C. It does not say that Emmanuel means 'God with him', but "God with us", which would surely involve that He is God.
J.T. "God with us" is a great fundamental element in the soul, brought in informally, as one might say. As we read Matthew in a spiritual way we are prepared for all that may be said informally about the deity of Christ in such statements as this. God was truly with Him, as Peter says (@Acts 10: 38), but His presence here is "God with us", and that runs right through the gospel: "behold, *I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age". He is no less than God.
S.J.B.C. Jesus is the Greek name for Joshua, which means Jehovah the Saviour; He is a divine Person.
J.T. The original word Joshua is somewhat enlarged upon by Moses in @Numbers 13: 16, to bring out this point. It is "Jehovah [is] Saviour": that could never be said of Joshua himself. So here, only God Himself could be in mind where the "he" and the "his" are brought in in this way.
S.J.B.C. That would emphasise His essential deity.
H.F.N. Would you say a word in regard to the contrast between the way in which John presents the Lord's sonship and the way it is presented in Matthew?
J.T. As has often been remarked. John gives us the history of His Person, not informally as in Matthew, but abstractly, in view, no doubt, of meeting later conditions. I apprehend Matthew wrote for earlier conditions, with a view to the extrication of the saints from judaism; but the Spirit of God in John had the early part of the second century more in mind, the early introduction of Greek and Jewish philosophy, and the introduction of false thoughts about Christ almost immediately after apostolic times. That was anticipated
{155}
in John's gospel, and so, of course, it is the great foundation gospel as regards the Person of the Lord. Matthew builds up his gospel more from the Old Testament -- John does not do that -- so that the first formal reference to sonship in Matthew is from the Old Testament: "Out of Egypt have I called my son".
H.M.S. Why is it that the divinely given title Emmanuel in this chapter is not again used in Scripture? We might have thought the very quotation from Isaiah would have greatly supported the truth of sonship.
J.T. I suppose the Spirit of God considered that the quotation was so well known, and brought in here so definitely, that it would stand throughout. The title Emmanuel has a peculiar place in the minds of the saints, and its interpretation, "God with us", has a searching effect, too; Corinthians works out the thought that "God is indeed amongst you", @1 Corinthians 14: 25. It is a question of whether God is indeed with us, and I believe Matthew has in mind to work out in our souls what that means. So the position is not only accredited by Scripture, but accredited, that is, proved to be legal by the presence of "God with us". What can overthrow that?
P.L. "Behold, I am with you all the days".
J.T. That is really Emmanuel. Every day in the history of the testimony God is with us in Christ.
M.W.B. In verse 23 it says, "*they* shall call his name Emmanuel". It does not say, 'thou shalt call his name Emmanuel'. Does it imply that they would reach that in their experience as realising His support?
J.T. It is a known thing; He is called Emmanuel because it is known; *they* do it. It is general, you might say, and left open in that way.
W.C. Does the passage in @Isaiah 8 bear upon it? "Rage, ye peoples ... ! And give ear, all ye distant parts of the earth: Gird yourselves, and be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and be broken in pieces! Settle
{156}
a plan, and it shall come to nought; speak a word, and it shall not stand: for God is with us" (verses 9, 10).
J.T. "God is with us" -- there is Emmanuel, and if God be with us, who can overcome us? Opposers are only dashing themselves against a wall if God be with His people.
E.J.McB. Is there not a great deal in the fact that it says, "being interpreted, God with us"? Does not the thing need to be brought as light into the soul?
J.T. That is good. The first "being interpreted" is literal, but you have in mind that the Spirit of God makes things consciously known amongst us. It is very largely a question of ministry, but certainly the word Emmanuel may be taken up in a very wide sense. The point is that God is indeed with His people, and where the spirit of prophecy is in action, a man falls down and owns it. So that Gamaliel said, "if it be from God, ye will not be able to put them down" (@Acts 5: 39), nor can they. The point therefore is to prove that God is with us.
A.M. Is that borne out in @Genesis 21 in regard to Abraham, when Abimelech and Phichol had to say that God was with him?
J.T. That is right, and so too with Isaac (@Genesis 26). Abimelech brought his captain with him to see Isaac and made a show of his power, as people do, but they had to bow to the fact that God was with Isaac; it was that very fact that ensured peace.
H.F.N. Is one great evidence that God is with us seen in the presence of prophetic ministry on the line of @1 Corinthians 14?
J.T. Well, that is how it is stated, that if prophecy is proceeding and a man comes into the Christian company, he falls down and says, "God is indeed amongst you". It is not mere profession; the presence of God in the assembly is brought to bear on the man's conscience by the ministry alluded to.
{157}
H.F.N. Would you say a word in regard of that kind of meeting, as bearing upon God being with us?
J.T. Well, it has often been remarked that @1 Corinthians 11 contemplates the saints together "*in assembly*" -- not in *the* assembly, but "in assembly". It refers to our attitude as together, without stating that all are there, although this also is alluded to in the chapter; but the first reference to our being together is "in assembly" (verse 18), and the truth connected with that position is the Lord's supper, which also opens up the service of God. In chapter 14, it is not the saints come together "in assembly", but "*the whole assembly come together in one place*", however many. That is for ministry, so that the meeting is not properly an assembly meeting; it is rather all the assembly, those who are recognised as of it, and the truth of the temple would be known there. But it is for ministry clearly.
P.L. Is such a meeting part of the normal furnishing of any local company?
J.T. It seems to be. The epistle to the Corinthians is addressed to "all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ", and is instruction for every local company. "Thus I ordain in all the assemblies", @1 Corinthians 7: 17.
M.W.B. Would you say just a word or two more about @1 Corinthians 14 not being an assembly meeting? Does not verse 19 of that chapter almost imply an assembly meeting: "but in the assembly I desire to speak five words with my understanding ..."?
J.T. That is a very general statement. He is speaking of how a person should participate in the assembly, and as there, whether it is in the Spirit that he sings or ministers or prays. "In assembly", in that connection would be very largely a question of the temple -- but as regards praying and singing, of course it would be general -- what may be done according to chapter 11; but the passage that I am alluding to as having ministry
{158}
particularly in view, is verse 23: "If therefore the whole assembly come together in one place ..."
Eu.R. In verse 35 he uses the expression "in assembly" again.
J.T. Yes, as to women. That would be a question of order; it does not touch what has been remarked as to chapter 11 where the saints come together "in assembly". In chapter 14 it is simply the character of the thing, that you are together with the saints.
Eu.R. How do you distinguish between that and chapter 11?
J.T. I think the context helps. In chapter 11 the apostle immediately alludes to the Lord's Supper as introductory.
H.H. The scripture says, "If therefore the whole assembly come together in one place". Would that mean that we should only have that one meeting at that time?
J.T. I think we ought to recognise the word "*if*". It is not a direct word that all the saints *should* come together, but *if* they do it. It seems however that the kind of meeting contemplated includes all the saints in any given city. The great thing is prophecy. So that consciences should be reached, and all that follows has that in mind.
Eu.R. Is it your thought that @1 Corinthians 11 is the assembly meeting, and that would give tone and character to the meeting of chapter 14?
J.T. Properly speaking, the assembly is a weekly matter.
Eu.R. So the first day of the week bears on each occasion, even the prayer meeting.
J.T. I think so. We may come together in assembly for the execution of discipline. In Matthew the assembly is identified with the testimony as taking the place of Israel. We have also to bear in mind what it is God-ward as the vessel of praise.
{159}
Eu.R. In chapter 14 of 1 Corinthians it takes on temple character.
J.T. Exactly. We never lose sight of the assembly, but chapter 11 is the great thought belonging to the first day of the week.
H.M.S. Referring to Emmanuel, it is said, "they shall call his name Emmanuel", and it was said to Joseph, "thou shalt call his name Jesus", but in the chapter in Isaiah it seems to be the virgin herself who should call His name Immanuel (chapter 7: 14). Does that bear in any way on the point of sonship?
J.T. It does. The passage read earlier -- @Isaiah 8: 9, 10 -- shows that the thing had extended. It would imply that the remnant would take it on, that the Jewish remnant learn to say "God is with us", and will say it, by and by. Well, we ought to learn to say it, and with meaning, that God is indeed with us; the brethren in different meetings ought to learn to say that God is with them, that is, as knowing and realising it. For in @Isaiah 8 it is to meet the Assyrian -- the name is a challenge to that nation.
Eu.R. Is it not very important to regard the saints in any locality as being His people? I was thinking of what the Lord said to Paul, "I have much people in this city" (@Acts 8: 10); they belonged to Him.
J.T. Quite so. We shall see when we come to chapter 18 of this gospel that "where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them" (verse 20). That is the same thought -- God is there.
F.S.M. Referring to verse 24: "But Joseph, having awoke up from his sleep, did as the angel of the Lord had enjoined him". Coupled with righteousness, would there not be implicit and ready obedience in view of apprehending the Lord's Person -- is not that involved in it?
J.T. Exactly. He is entirely governed by what is told him, which points to a man entirely under self-control,
{160}
which is a fruit of the Spirit. "He called his name Jesus", notice; that is the last word in the chapter.
Ques. What would be the evidence that God is with us, for there are other companies who claim that God is with them?
J.T. That is a very important question, and has really been anticipated to some extent. The spirit of prophecy amongst us, ministry in the power of the Spirit of God is one evidence. If people claim to have God with them, there surely should be some evidence in that connection, something in the way of spiritual ministry. There are other evidences, of course. We cannot say very much in a practical way, but I think there is ground for assuming that there is evidence of the presence of God in the midst of His people who are seeking to walk in the truth at the present time.
Ques. Does that maintain the people of God in a spirit of humility, so that He should continue to be with them? It says that He inhabits eternity (@Isaiah 57: 15), but He dwells with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit. I was thinking of Joseph as having no fleshly aspirations, content to be connected with the work of God, small or great, wherever it was.
J.T. And the work of God which was very exposed to public criticism. The statement is: "Now the birth of Jesus Christ was thus: His mother, Mary, that is, having been betrothed to Joseph, before they came together, she was found to be with child of the Holy Spirit". What God was doing was exposed to the enemy's attack peculiarly, and it is a great matter that there are those who will come forward, whom God can use in such circumstances, to protect the position. What God is doing is under reproach, but a man like Joseph is of immense value for the moment to protect that position.
J.J. Would the principle of reproach be seen in the four gentile women in the genealogy?
J.T. Quite so. It says, "Joseph ... being a righteous
{161}
man, and unwilling to expose her publicly, purposed to have put her away secretly; but while he pondered on these things ..." He was not a wilful man, he was a thoughtful man, and God came in for him, and for the testimony.
H.E.S. As the assembly is in view, I would like to ask why there are these frequent quotations from the prophets in Matthew.
J.T. The thought is to build up the truth from the Old Testament in Matthew, so that it is one whole. Beginning with Abraham, we are in the presence of the sovereign selection of God, as seen also in the careful selection of the genealogy, in which is omitted the corrupting element which came in through Jezebel, so that the legal position is incontestably established, and then in the actual qualities found in Joseph, the Son of David, we have practical proof that the line is there.
The next thing is, "Jesus having been born in Bethlehem" (chapter 2: 1). We have now the historical position, one also accredited, for the enemies themselves have to admit by their information that that is where the Messiah should be born. The historical position is now in view, because the passage should read, "Jesus *having been* born in Bethlehem of Judaea", and the presence of the wise men leads to an enquiry which shows that Scripture calls for the birth of the Messiah, naming the place where Jesus was to be born. The historical position is thus accredited, but then the next thing is, what heaven is doing. The angel had communicated to Joseph in a vision, but now heaven is moving. Chapter 2 brings in heaven, that is the star, and the persons who saw it are moved by seeing it; they are persons of feeling. It has been enquired, what are the evidences of the presence of God? Well, these are the evidences, men coming from afar, enquiring for the Child born, and calling Him "king of the Jews". Who told them that He was "king of the Jews"? *Heaven* is acting now, and this leads us
{162}
to the passage in Hosea: "out of Egypt I called my son". I think the brethren will see that the testimony of the magi from the East has some corresponding feature now in persons who are guided by what is heavenly. We have the Scriptures in chapter 1, and the character of Joseph, all bearing on the name Emmanuel, the presence of God amongst His people, and now we have the heavenly testimony aside from the Scriptures.
A.M.P. Why is the expression "little child" used seven times here?
J.T. I think it is to bring out the weakness of the outward position. He is not called a babe; a little child is a development on a babe, I am speaking now of the bearing of the truth on our own position. Things are small, but it is a "little child". The little Child is always put before the mother, showing that the spiritual element is now obtaining. The wise men, it says, having come into the house, "saw the little child with Mary his mother". Being a divine Person, He has of course a place before His mother. Then we have the direction to depart into their own country another way. That is, the spiritual matter is now in evidence; these men represent the spiritual side. There is increase in that way. Not only are the legal and historical positions established, but men are moving now spiritually in relation to all this. The wise men see the little Child in the house with His mother and they depart "another way", which is a sure way of escaping from what is at Jerusalem, that is, the established religious system at Jerusalem. All this makes way for the introduction of @Hosea 11: 1: "out of Egypt I called my son".
Ques. Would you say that wise men find on earth what is in perfect correspondence with the light in heaven, untainted by the flesh or the theology of man? It was a small light in heaven, and there was perfect correspondence in smallness on earth, untouched by man.
{163}
J.T. That involves volumes as to the present position: as regards the testimony, where is He at this moment? Here He is with His mother in the house; and the spiritual instincts marking these men lead them to worship Him, small Child though He was; they then departed to their own country another way.
P.L. Does it suggest the activity of heaven with exercised souls, whereby they can locate what is of God in a locality? It is the fruit of a journey of exercise under the guidance of heaven.
J.T. That is the thing. God is working in accord with the dispensation; the dispensation involving the voice and guidance of heaven which are peculiar to it, bringing out the thought of the kingdom of the heavens; then the work of God in these men involving instinct, seen in the way they move in departing another way, corresponding, we may say, to what marked Rahab, the particular element that was in her. She sent the spies out another way -- not the ordinary way.
Ques. What are we to learn from that -- another way?
J.T. It is not on the common level, not the current religious way. Many christians are governed by the ordinary way; they have not departed from judaism in principle; whereas heaven's way is another way. It is the spiritual side that is stressed in these men.
Rem. If you are divinely instructed you do not follow the beaten track of theology.
J.T. It is not an independent way, but the heavenly way -- another way in the sense of not being current.
P.L. "The proud beasts have not trodden it, nor the fierce lion passed over it", @Job 28: 8.
J.T. Herod did not see where they went.
Eu.R. In referring to the mother in the house, have you in mind that there is a suggestion of the assembly, as to where these features are centred?
J.T. There is just a suggestion of it; the little Child is with His mother. It is what was *normal* for the
{164}
moment, and under these circumstances we have Hosea quoted. It says, "Now, they having departed ..." The wise men are in evidence as to what they do; they represent the spiritual feature: and then it says, "behold, an angel of the Lord appears in a dream to Joseph, saying, Arise, take to thee the little child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be there until I shall tell thee; for Herod will seek the little child to destroy it". We see here that Joseph comes in still in the service. He gets no such distinction anywhere else; it is only in Matthew. It is the responsible side amongst us. He is owned of God as righteous, and can now be trusted with the little Child to go into Egypt, showing what must have developed in this man, a carpenter, as he was, that he should be taken on for an extensive service; to go into Egypt with the little Child and His mother. What a charge he had! There is in that the suggestion of God taking up unlikely persons, persons of no religious status at all, and entrusting them with the greatest things. For what could be greater than this charge -- the little Child and His mother to be carried into Egypt?
P.L. Would there be spiritual instinct with him in that he went by night?
J.T. "Having arisen, he took to him the little child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt". Notice the "*to thee*" of verse 13; and "he took *to him*" (verse 14), meaning personal interest in the great charge. Applying it to ourselves, see what a charge we have, what there is to be looked after in the way of the testimony! "He took to him the little child and his mother". It was not a burden taken by anyone, but by one genuinely affected and interested, having relations with God, and valuing what he had.
Ques. Would that emphasise the importance of righteousness?
J.T. What is said about Joseph sets forth the great recognition by God of righteousness in any of us.
{165}
H.E.S. Are we brought to care for the spiritual features that we have appreciated in the little Child?
J.T. God has brought the sonship of Christ before us and helped us as to it. Well now, the question is, What am I doing with it? "Take to thee". I have to take the thing to myself. The truth of the Person of Christ is a wonderful thing -- "Take to thee the little child and his mother". He was going to an unknown territory, as far as he was concerned; it was a long way off literally; the journey was extended and exposed. What exercises are required when we consider what God has graciously given to us! Have I taken the thing to myself? And am I carrying it as Joseph did?
E.J.McB. It is rather remarkable that Hosea, referring to this, says that when Israel was a child Jehovah loved him (chapter 11: 1), indicating how precious he was to Jehovah's heart.
J.T. Was ever a child loved more than this "little child"? "Out of Egypt have I called my son". Called out of Egypt, He was a Son. What He was as a Child under God's eye, who can say? What an incentive to draw out divine affections!
J.T.S. I suppose there would be no careless exposure in this journey. He took the Child by night.
J.T. That is very good. In dealing with holy things we are apt to expose them. We are enjoined to "Give not that which is holy to the dogs, nor cast your pearls before the swine", @Matthew 7: 6. The things are to be kept secret and cherished.
{166}
CHRIST'S SONSHIP IN MATTHEW'S GOSPEL (2)
@Matthew 3: 1 - 4, 13 - 17; @Matthew 4: 1 - 17
J.T. We shall do well to pay attention to Joseph as seen in these early chapters, 1 and 2, as representative of the responsible element particularly. Of course, all are responsible, and the Lord addresses the assemblies severally as inclusive of all the saints in each, but there are those who are specially responsible in localities in which the saints are, and I believe the Lord would direct our attention to Joseph as presented in this gospel in that respect. Firstly, we see his consideration for Mary; then, his adjustment by divine intervention; and then, his reliableness as entrusted with the little Child and His mother -- the most precious charge that could be committed to anyone -- then, his attention to the directions given him; even as to proceeding to Nazareth, as we learn from the end of chapter 2, where it says, "having heard that 'Archelaus reigns over Judaea, instead of Herod his father', he was afraid to go there; and having been divinely instructed in a dream, he went away into the parts of Galilee, and came and dwelt in a town called Nazareth; so that that should be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophets, He shall be called a Nazaraean". So that Joseph is seen as acting fully up to the requirements of the moment, a matter of great consequence as regards responsibility in gatherings, if we are considering for God and desire to be amenable to His influence and direction.
Ques. In looking at Joseph in this way as a kind of pattern churchman, should we note his feelings in regard to what he thought was a case of evil? He was "unwilling to expose her publicly". I should like to ask as to the bearing of this on the question of making announcements in a public way about cases of discipline -- as to whether it should come before those breaking
{167}
bread or before all the persons who attend the meeting.
J.T. I should say that the announcement should be made in the presence of those in fellowship only, according to the directions in @1 Corinthians 5: "when ye are gathered together, and my spirit" -- that refers to the saints -- "put away from among *yourselves*". What have you to say yourself?
Rem. Well, it is sometimes made public on the plea of clearing the Lord's name in a public way. I wondered if the presence of righteous persons, as indicated in Joseph, would be a kind of warrant for those who look on, that the meeting is not going on with evil.
J.T. I do not see any warrant for making any announcement other than to the assembly. It is "ye" and "yourselves" in @1 Corinthians 5.
W.C. Would there be any objection to an announcement that we were no longer walking with such a person?
J.T. That would be a matter of information for those to whom the information should be given. I do not see that we are called upon to notify any others than those who in principle belong to the assembly.
M.W.B. If that be the case, is there need for more than the announcement at the assembly meeting, where the judgment has been arrived at? Is it necessary again to announce it on the Lord's day morning?
J.T. There is nothing in 1 Corinthians about announcing the discipline; the judgment is simply executed according to @1 Corinthians 5. There is no suggestion of a further need of announcing it, the assembly having already been gathered together for the purpose. Of course, all should be brought into it; the principle of casting stones is that all should be brought into it, but it does not seem as if any other should be notified publicly.
H.M.G. Would you exclude from the assembly meeting the person who was the cause of the discipline?
J.T. No, he should be there, if he is willing to be there. Alas! some are not willing to be there. For
{168}
instance, "Those that sin convict before all", @1 Timothy 5: 20. It suggests that he should be present. The word is "convict". The sins of God's people of old are recorded for us. The Lord would draw a veil over them were it not that He wishes us to learn from them. The things that happened were examples for us; they were written for our learning.
J.J. In this case it is what an individual does -- what Joseph himself does. Can an individual act in that way in connection with a case in the assembly?
J.T. The suggestion here is that he represents the responsible element. If a man like Joseph were in your meeting, he would be disposed to keep the evil as private as possible. There is no gain in spreading it; it is a matter for the judgment of the assembly. Of course the judgment is there; and if anybody enquires he can find out. The judgment is executed.
W.W. Does it not involve an act in righteousness? A righteous person always does that which is right because he is acting in love; it was love that led Joseph to act thus towards Mary.
J.T. Yes, if we love one another and anything happens, we shall be very slow to spread the evil abroad. Still, it has to be dealt with, but it does not seem that we should go beyond the instructions in 1 Corinthians.
Rem. It does say there that the sin was universally reported.
J.T. I should think that @1 Corinthians 5: 1 would primarily allude to the saints; it was known and spoken of definitely among the brethren. Of course, if it were some flagrant conduct known among all, it would be well that all should know it is judged, but then we would not go outside to tell people. If any one enquired, he could find out.
Rem. In connection with the fall of Saul upon mount Gilboa, David says, "Tell it not in Gath, carry not the tidings in the streets of Ashkelon", @2 Samuel 1: 20.
J.T. Quite so; that has a great bearing on what we
{169}
are saying. As was remarked, what is said of Joseph here is of very great importance now, as regards responsibility in our gatherings. The result of his course is that the Scriptures are confirmed.
Ques. Would the case of Ananias and Sapphira be helpful? It says, "great fear came upon all the assembly, and upon all who heard these things". Would those immediately concerned be the assembly, but would the report go wider -- "all who heard these things"?
J.T. That was a very special case, of course, and you will observe that, after the execution of that judgment, "great fear came upon all the assembly, and upon all who heard these things. And by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders done among the people; (and they were all with one accord in Solomon's porch, but of the rest durst no man join them, but the people magnified them; and believers were more than ever added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women)", @Acts 5: 11 - 14. The resort was to Solomon's porch, which suggests judgment. It is quite to be expected that if anything serious happens in the locality it should become known, and it becomes known by enquiry. But it is not the idea of a medium of information; the judgment becomes known in the divinely appointed way: "all who heard these things", it says.
Ques. Does not Joseph represent somebody waiting for the Lord's mind in regard of something, because it says, "while he pondered on these things"?
J.T. Quite so. It was remarked this morning that he was a thoughtful man, and therefore he represents what was required. He is a person who thinks things over, and God takes account of him and adjusts him, and prepares him for what he has to face.
H.F.N. How does the thought of the ministry of John the baptist stand in relation to what we started with? What is the link in your mind?
J.T. We may see in John the baptist the part ministry has in relation to this great subject. Mary is the subjective
{170}
feature; there is little said about her beyond that the Child is begotten in her. And Joseph names the Child, not she -- Mary was to name the Child according to Luke -- so that it is a question of responsibility with Joseph right through. Mary being the subjective element, Joseph is the responsible element, which is general, of course, but having its expression in certain ones in each meeting; and then John the baptist in this setting is just the ministry. We have nothing of him earlier, but how befitting was his part -- his garment and his nourishment -- and how ready he was to humble himself in the presence of Christ!
H.E.S. Is your thought that the responsible element being already present, suitable ministry will follow?
J.T. Yes. The chapters challenge us all as to our part in the testimony, involving the Son of God, "God with us"; then as to our behaviour as responsible in our localities; and then as to the ministry.
Ques. Do you think God would graciously give preparatory ministry, in view of light that He may give? Is it not a fact that those who do not follow up the ministry are not able to take in the light when it comes?
J.T. John is introduced here as representative of suitable ministry for any given time. God gives ministry as it is needed, and John represents the needed ministry for this particular time. It says, "Now in those days comes John the baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judaea, and saying, Repent, for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn nigh".
H.D'A.C. It was penetrating, prophetic ministry.
J.T. Exactly. That is what comes out -- a fearless announcement of the truth. It was preparatory; John has always in view something to come: "prepare ye", he says, "the way of the Lord".
Eu.R. You spoke this morning of what was historical. Have you in mind that the testimony at any given time bears on God's public ways with men? That is, it stands in relation to the sphere where that testimony
{171}
is being rendered, the territory, so to speak, of His dealings with men generally.
J.T. Yes. Any testimony would take account of the current course of things in the world. We have to do with a much more difficult state of things than our brethren did twenty years ago, for instance; changes in the world are taking place with great rapidity, one feature being the great growth of cities. All these things are taken account of by God, and He fits His servants to meet them.
Eu.R. Chapter 2 is all very small and insignificant in the eyes of men, and yet really it was of the greatest possible import in relation to them. Would that not encourage us today in relation to the outward littleness of the testimony?
J.T. Then John's ministry takes account of conditions as they were. But first, "John himself had his garment of camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins, and his nourishment was locusts and wild honey"; he is an example for us. The ministry is exacting, and if we are to be effective, we have to accept the consequences of it. So that the effect of it was widespread, affecting, as it says, "Jerusalem, and all Judaea, and all the country round the Jordan". We are reminded that a ministry raised up of God is always effective and in keeping with what is needed. God did not appeal to Galilee through John; the testimony through John affected Jerusalem, the very centre of religious zeal. The Lord going to Galilee discredits the religious system, but John appealed to it. For instance, the revival of a hundred years ago made a powerful appeal to the whole of the accredited religious systems of the world.
Ques. What have you in mind as to his clothing and nourishment?
J.T. They are not such as anyone with worldly tastes would seek, or would be satisfied with. It says, "John himself", as if the person is stressed, "had his
{172}
garment of camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins, and his nourishment was locusts and wild honey". Obviously it was such clothing and nourishment as would hardly appeal to anyone with cultivated natural tastes, so that it becomes challenging to us. The need for ministry is urgent, there is a loud call for it, but then it must be such as can be divinely approved. Unless, in undertaking the ministry, we learn to disallow natural tastes, we shall become tested later, and exposed. Here we have a result immediately: "Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judaea, and all the country round the Jordan, and were baptised by him in the Jordan, confessing their sins". All this is to bring out the power of the ministry.
H.D'A.C. And the line of the ministry is, "Let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach", @Hebrews 13: 13.
J.T. Exactly, and making no terms. You will observe that Jerusalem and Judaea made no terms; they accepted John's terms, showing what great moral power he had.
P.L. Could anyone ever profit by the mind of God at any given moment unless he were marked as making no terms?
J.T. The principle is, that things must be on God's terms, so that the servant is on the side of God. The twelve, of course had a peculiar place. The apostle John says, "our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ" (@1 John 1: 3), but the statement indicates how God takes account of His servants; that they are, as it were, alongside of Him, they are representative and they will not compromise. What is built up in Christendom, as it is today, is on the principle of compromise. John did not compromise, nor was it demanded of him.
H.F.N. In @Acts 1 the one who was to take the place of Judas was to have "assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out
{173}
among us, beginning from the baptism of John" (verses 21, 22). Has it in view really the securing of assembly material as standing in relation to the Son of God?
J.T. You can see here how preparatory it was, that is, all this pointed to Christ, and John's disciples were ready to leave him for Christ. That is a great feature in ministry, that no one seeks to attach anyone to himself.
H.E.S. Is it the principle of 2 Corinthians that the minister is altogether in accord with his ministry?
J.T. That is what comes out here, and then the discrimination of persons will come in. "Seeing many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them, Offspring of vipers, who has forewarned you to flee from the coming wrath? Produce therefore fruit worthy of repentance ...". There is the power of discrimination, that you are not satisfied simply because people come and hear and seem to be interested, but you discern there is something there that has to be dealt with specially -- because persons of this kind, coming under the influence of the truth outwardly, unless there is genuine repentance, become material for the enemy to work through later.
Ques. Is Peter an example of that discernment in connection with Simon the sorcerer in @Acts 8?
J.T. You can see how Philip failed to discern him. Apparently he was accepted in a general way by Philip, which is a thing to be noted; but there is the discernment with Peter as to the man's state. But I only refer to all this to show, first, how the sense of responsibility to God, and righteousness characterising it, becomes available for the protection of the testimony; and then, how ministry prepares for Christ's incoming in the full thought of His Person; for the knowledge of the Son of God is implied in the fulness of Christianity. So that what comes in in relation to John, is not a little child, but Jesus in full manhood.
H.H. Ministry in that way would provide conditions
{174}
for the coming in of Christ amongst the saints at the present time.
J.T. That is what I thought. There is so much, to be cleared away in all of us. You can see how John's ministry was preparatory to the bringing in of Christ in the fulness of His Person.
Rem. The twelve men at Ephesus were baptised to John's baptism, but, when they heard what Paul said, they were baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus.
J.T. They were in keeping with the two that heard John speak at the beginning, who left him and followed Jesus, so that the essence of John's ministry was to direct persons to Christ: so too with Paul. It is very fine when one's ministry has only that effect, of directing souls to Christ, making way for the Lord in the fulness of His Person, for God is aiming at that, that Christ should have His full place amongst the saints. John anticipates His coming, saying, "I indeed baptise you with water to repentance, but he that comes after me is mightier than I, whose sandals I am not fit to bear; *he* shall baptise you with the Holy Spirit and fire; whose winnowing fan is in his hand, and he shall thoroughly purge his threshing-floor, and shall gather his wheat into the garner, but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable", so that his listeners were prepared for this great Person. Then it says in verse 13, "Then comes Jesus from Galilee". He is not from Judaea.
J.J. Would you say a little about the last verse of chapter 2 in this connection? This quotation, "He shall be called a Nazaraean", does not seem to be found in the Old Testament.
J.T. Not as to its literality, but the Old Testament certainly touches on the fact that Jesus should be such an one as this. It is the tenor of the prophets. So too the quotation, "out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water" (@John 7: 38) -- you do not get that literally, but it is in Scripture. I think the remark at the end of chapter 2 is suggestive of intelligence amongst
{175}
us, that we do not regard the Old Testament as secondary, but that it is necessary to be conversant with it. To understand this quotation it is necessary to understand the prophets.
M.W.B. Would you say something as to the link between the verse in chapter 2: "Out of Egypt have I called my son", and the introduction of Christ here?
J.T. The statement in Hosea extends back and is linked with Exodus, that is, Israel had been in Egypt, and when he was a child God loved him. Then it says, "out of Egypt I called my son". In coming out of Egypt God had in mind that Jesus was a Son. He did not go back into the land of Israel as a little Child, but in principle as a Son, and as Son He was to serve. In Exodus, God said, "Let my son go, that he may serve me". Now the Lord at the Jordan is owned in this way; He has come out of Egypt, and now He is owned as the Son from heaven.
M.W.B. I was also wondering whether the condition of the people as coming to John and being baptised, was to adjust them so that the Lord could identify Himself with them as called out of Egypt.
J.T. Quite so.
J.J. Seeing this is the first of the Lord's movements in Matthew, what have you to say as to its importance?
J.T. "Then comes Jesus from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptised of him". It is as if the Lord said, I will honour you in this way. He was worthy of such an honour, and then it says, "but John urgently forbad him, saying, *I* have need to be baptised of thee; and comest thou to me?"
H.F.N. How does the Lord's first recorded utterance: "Suffer it now; for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness", link on with what you have been saying in relation to Joseph?
J.T. It links on beautifully. You have in mind the fulfilling of *all* righteousness?
H.F.N. What would that involve?
{176}
J.T. It certainly has a voice today when righteousness is so scarce, and unrighteousness has become so prevalent among the saints, and hence a great deal of washing is necessary. Baptism, here, would allude to that sort of thing.
J.J. Would you say the Lord makes a great deal of this in chapter 21, when He says, "John came to you in the way of righteousness" (verse 32)? It was a divine movement from heaven, and how great it was!
J.T. Then the announcement as to all righteousness being fulfilled: neither John nor Joseph could say that of himself, but it is the thought of God that in man, all righteousness is to be fulfilled.
J.T.S. Is this great feature of righteousness a necessity if we are to have the communication of the precious thoughts of God in regard of Jesus?
J.T. You feel it is manifest that righteousness must come first, and, as has just been remarked, it is the first utterance of Christ according to this gospel, "Jesus answering said to him, Suffer it now; for thus it becometh *us* to fulfil all righteousness". He brings John into it.
H.F.N. Would Peter get his impressions here that he speaks of in his second epistle as to the elements being burned with fire, and then he says, "But, according to his promise, we wait for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness" (chapter 3: 13), and then he bids us to be diligent, and then brings in the ministry of our beloved brother Paul? Would that come within the compass of fulfilling all righteousness?
J.T. Making allowance for ministry is a very important matter. There is nothing really more beautiful than brethren who have ability from God, like John or Peter or Paul, making room for others. It is surely right, but here it is the figure of baptism as meeting the whole question of sin in this world. The Lord's first movement in Matthew has that in mind. He comes
{177}
"from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptised of him".
Ques. Does the Lord establish a point of contact with the remnant in that way in His baptism?
J.T. That is what comes out; He identifies Himself with this great movement of God. The Lord would always do that. Without Him it could not be effective as a matter of fact, and so with any movement. He gives fulness to every movement by linking Himself on with it, so that it says, "Jesus, having been baptised, went up straightway from the water".
Ques. Would you say that repentance is the first step in all righteousness?
J.T. Well, it is; but, of course, you cannot apply repentance to Christ.
Rem. No, I was thinking of those who had taken their place in repentance.
J.T. The Lord Jesus identifying Himself with such a movement is not personal. It really implies His own death vicariously, not yet effected, but in figure, I mean, we cannot connect repentance with the Lord in any personal way. If He identifies Himself with such a movement it must involve His own death anticipatively.
P.H.H. Would you say a word about the interest of heaven in these chapters? I was thinking of the star in chapter 2, and the drawing nigh of the kingdom of the heavens at the beginning of chapter 3, and now the heavens opening and the voice out of heaven.
J.T. To apply it in a practical way, we have come now to perfection. We have the little Child in chapter 2, and heaven by means of a star directing to Him -- a small heavenly body used to direct souls to Him. The position is diminutive in chapter 2, but still it is a development, I am not now speaking of the Lord personally, but how He is apprehended by the saints; it is a development. He is called a little Child, not a babe, and the wise men from the East are directed by a heavenly body, a star, to Him. Now we have the
{178}
heavens opened. As it says, "Jesus, having been baptised, went up straightway from the water". The thing is thoroughly understood by Him; He has gone into the water, and He comes straightway out of it, and then it says, "lo, the heavens were opened to him". He is, as it were, made conscious of heaven's interest, I mean, as to the manner in which He is presented here, "The heavens were opened *to him*, and he saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and coming upon him". So far it is all for Himself here, as you might say, for the thought is to bring out His position; and what He is as fulfilling all righteousness, and what heaven thinks of such an One as that; for we have to link the incidental facts with the name given to Him. That is, it is what Man is, what God has found in Him, and it is all for Himself so far. Then it says, "and behold, a voice out of the heavens saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight". God is now calling attention to Him, but first it is for Himself in these circumstances, heaven delighting in Him thus as answering to the full thought of manhood.
H.E.S. In Luke it says, "Thou art my beloved Son", the word being addressed to the Lord personally, but here it is, "This is my beloved Son". Is the idea that we are to be brought into the light of this?
J.T. Yes. Both Mark and Luke make it personal; but Matthew has in mind to link on with the Old Testament, and from it to build up in our souls the truth as to Christ personally. The second Psalm made it plain that God had addressed a certain Person as His Son, and I believe the idea dominates the whole of the Psalms. For instance, @Psalm 45 is quoted in @Hebrews 1, as alluding to the Son. But now, here is One addressed, the heavens are opened to Him, and the Spirit of God descends as a dove, coming upon Him; and then attention is called to Him, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight". Not now, "*I* this day have begotten thee", but a Person
{179}
with a *history* here on earth in whom God found delight.
J.P.H. Would you say a word as to the Spirit being in the form of a dove? In John's gospel it is referred to as having been actually seen by John the baptist as such. Has that a special significance in connection with the Spirit?
J.T. The use of the word "dove" is to link on with @Genesis 8, that is, all that God is, resting on this Person.
Ques. Would you say why the term "the heavens" is used here on each occasion?
J.T. It is the plural of emphasis, that they may all be included. There are three heavens spoken of, and if they are spoken of in the plural, it means that the whole idea of heaven enters into this.
H.M.S. Why do we have in this chapter in Matthew the voice from heaven, "This is my beloved Son", but not the testimony of the Baptist; but in the chapter in John's gospel we have the Baptist's testimony only, and not the voice from heaven? We might almost have thought the two would have been transposed.
J.T. John has in mind God here in Jesus, although the Spirit came down, and you do not get the transfiguration in John. It is rather an allusion to the greatness of the Person in John, and you do not get allusions such as this announcement and the announcement on the mount of transfiguration.
Ques. Do you think as the result of the approval of heaven in the fulfilling of all righteousness, that there is the support of angelic help in relation to our circumstances? We may have to suffer severely in our circumstances in the fulfilling of all righteousness, but does not the Lord graciously give angelic ministry in that regard?
J.T. Quite so. The next thing that comes in is the question of our food.
J.J. Would you say the last two verses of chapter 3 go with the last two verses of the gospel, "baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
{180}
of the Holy Spirit"? The three Persons are presented in this chapter.
J.T. The point for our souls here is, that the Father and the Spirit are engaged with Christ, but as fulfilling all righteousness, as coming up straightway out of the water.
H.D'A.C. In fulfilling all righteousness, was not the public position of Christ entirely altered by His baptism? Before the baptism, He was in a kind of way identified with the whole nation, and they were not really penitent, but now He is identified with the penitent only, and those waiting and looking for Christ.
J.T. The position is changed, as you say, and it is touching that the Lord did not take the lead in this movement. There are movements in which He leads, but there are movements which He joins. Luke says, "all the people having been baptised, and Jesus having been baptised ..." He came into it as it was proceeding -- That is. He gives fulness and completeness to every movement; there can be no fulness or completeness in any movement without Him.
M.W.B. Do you think the Lord gave the lead in taking the position as coming up out of Egypt, and that the people had to be morally adjusted before He could identify Himself with them?
J.T. That is right. *He* did not have to go up through the Red Sea. The allusion in chapter 2 would be that He came out in personal right from Egypt. The baptism of John was equivalent to the Red Sea for the Israelites; that *is*, *we* have to go through that way. It is a testimony to His Person.
M.W.B. Would there be in like manner the thought morally of Emmanuel in the Lord supporting those who were godly in their position taken?
J.T. He gives fulness and completeness to the movement. Of what value could it be aside from His joining in it? The bearing of it was death. The deluge is baptism, the Red Sea is baptism, the Jordan is baptism,
{181}
and the Lord gives fulness to it. The idea of "all righteousness" enters into it, and aside from that idea, baptism must be a dead letter. It is a question of all righteousness. It is not a mere ceremony, it is a matter of righteousness.
Ques. Is the thought of manhood emphasised in chapter 4? The quotations are generally from the book of Deuteronomy.
J.T. Exactly. The Son of God is announced; He is there as One who fulfils all righteousness, and as owned from heaven by the Father. Well, the next thing is, can Satan use this to take Him out of His place as Man? It was as Man He was owned as Son, as fulfilling all righteousness. Can the enemy use this great fact, and turn it against the Lord to induce Him to leave man's place? In truth it was *as Man* He was owned as Son, that is the point, the One fulfilling all righteousness. It is Satan endeavouring to take the truth out of its setting, to turn the idea of Son of God so as to take the Lord Jesus out of the place that is involved in that relation. It is a futile effort, but an effort such as he is capable of.
P.L. Was it not an effort to divert the Lord from the position of dependence taken up in manhood?
J.T. It is a bold effort of the enemy here to turn the idea of sonship against its setting in manhood, whereas the announcement from heaven alluded to Him as coming up out of the water as fulfilling all righteousness.
A.J.G. So was not the devil's first word to the Lord a suggestion that would connect sonship with deity?
J.T. That is what he was at, to abstract the Lord in His mind from what He really was here on earth. The whole point was that *a Man* had come in to satisfy the heart of the Father. It is a question of manhood, and Satan would divert the Lord's mind, if it were possible, from His actual position as Man here, which was one of dependence.
{182}
E.J.McB. Is not that the reason why it is said He was carried up into the wilderness?
J.T. That is what I understand. It is a very remarkable thing, that, owned here in manhood as the delight of heaven, and the Holy Spirit coming upon Him, He is carried up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil.
Ques. Would it correspond with the end of the first book of Psalms, where the prophetic language of the Lord is, "thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest me before thy face for ever", @Psalm 41: 12?
J.T. No doubt; but the position of the Lord here is wonderful, that is, although owned as Son, He is carried up by the Spirit into the wilderness, and the enemy's bold effort is to abstract the idea of sonship from Him as Man and use it against the dependence that is proper to man. I think that is his present effort, too.
Ques. Is that why he is referred to in this passage as the tempter, the devil, and Satan; using every resource under his control to bring the Lord out of the position He had taken and in which He was owned from heaven, and thus nullify it?
J.T. It is a very bold effort. It says, "the tempter coming up to him said, ..." It is remarkable; he comes up to Him, and says, "If thou be Son of God, speak, that these stones may become loaves of bread". That is, he uses the idea of sonship to divert the Lord from what is proper to manhood, to which sonship belongs. Nothing is plainer in Scripture than that *man's* place is one of obedience to God, and to use the idea of the sonship of Christ to weaken His manhood or divert Him from it, is a bold effort.
E.C.R. Therefore the Lord's answer is magnificent, "*Man* shall not live by bread alone".
J.T. Exactly. As Man He was owned from heaven as Son, and when He used the word "Man" as to
{183}
Himself, He had no such thought as to exclude the idea of sonship from it; it belonged to it.
J.J. It is sorrowful to note that the enemy's effort is still to connect the idea of sonship with deity in the absolute and not with manhood.
J.T. I think it is fair to speak of it in this way. This is the first recorded direct personal attack of Satan against the Lord, and it is to nullify the great truth of sonship owned in Him as Man by the Father. He came up to the Lord boldly, and introduced this thought to take Him off the ground of true manhood, as if sonship did not belong to that, whereas sonship is proper to manhood, and hence the Lord's answer stresses obedience as marking the place He had taken as Son.
{184}
CHRIST'S SONSHIP IN MATTHEW'S GOSPEL (3)
@Matthew 11: 1 - 30
J.T. We were remarking as to the first onslaught of the tempter, that his effort was to sever the idea of the Lord's sonship from His manhood, whereas the Lord immediately says "Man", meaning that His sonship involved His manhood. Although Son, He was in the position of man -- the very relationship involved that. I believe the Lord meant that; so the first thought of the tempter was to take Him out of the position of dependence as man, in regard to His circumstances, His food. Then it will be observed that the second temptation in Matthew is religious. There is a transposition in Luke; the religious comes third, but in Matthew it is second.
A.S.L. Why is the order different in Matthew and Luke?
J.T. Matthew is intended for Jewish christians primarily, and the political side would not be first with them; the temple would have the chief place with them. Luke would bear more on the gentiles, and the political aspect would be more prominent with them. That is what I understand. Matthew bears on Jerusalem; Luke bears on humanity, the nations. So here in Matthew we have the temple first: "the devil takes him to the holy city, and sets him upon the edge of the temple, and says to him, If thou be Son of God cast thyself down".
P.T.F. Why does the Lord submit Himself to the devil?
J.T. He is carried into the wilderness by the Spirit for that purpose, hence He allows Satan to do this. It brings out His subjection in a striking way. He must have recoiled from it; it must have been a dreadful thing for Him; but it was a matter, speaking reverently,
{185}
of the Spirit; He "was carried up into the wilderness by the Spirit to be tempted of the devil". He would not go up of Himself, nor should any of us put ourselves in the way of evil, save as God directs us and puts us in that way for the testimony.
A.J.G. What is the special challenge to sonship in this second temptation?
J.T. The enemy seems to accept that it involved manhood -- he is forced to accept it -- because he says, "If thou be Son of God cast thyself down; for it is written, He shall give charge to his angels concerning thee, and on their hands shall they bear thee". He admits in these second remarks, pernicious though they were, that sonship involves manhood and dependence upon God.
A.S.L. Why would you say sonship refers only to manhood?
J.T. Much has been said to make this clear, and without enlarging on it here, I think the Lord means this in using the word "Man" in His first answer to the devil. It implies that sonship is in manhood; it involves His human estate, and Satan is forced to concede this in the second temptation.
Ques. Is that because manhood involves dependence?
J.T. Exactly; Satan admits that as Son the Lord is dependent, quoting (or, rather, misquoting) the psalm, that God would give His angels charge concerning Him. If His sonship were in deity absolutely, there would be no need of angels looking after Him. Satan is forced to admit that sonship involves manhood, but then, he would tempt the Lord to do something that was unnecessary. Why should He cast Himself down to prove that God would take care of Him?
S.J.B.C. Is there any difference between the Son and the Son of God? "No one knows the Son but the Father". The devil speaks to the Lord as Son of God.
J.T. There is a difference. The term "Son" is more defined as to His Person, as marking Him off
{186}
thus from the saints, but the appellation "Son of God" makes room for others. The Son is thus more defined as to His Person, but still it is the Person in manhood.
H.E.S. Is the title Son of God more characteristic, and the Son more personal?
J.T. That is right. Son of God brings out the order of Man as marking Him. The Son is more distinctive as to His Person.
Eu.R. As to chapter 4, is it your thought that the Lord Jesus here is a pattern in relation to the three problems that we are faced with in wilderness conditions, in relation to the testimony?
J.T. Yes. The first deals with ordinary circumstances; the second having a religious setting in Matthew, and is a very fruitful field for the devil to suggest that we should aspire to prominence in the service; and then the third is political, and although it might be assumed that this can hardly apply to christians, it does so; we are far more national than we like to admit. "The devil takes him to a very high mountain, and shews him all the kingdoms of the world ... and says to him, All these things will I give thee if, falling down, thou wilt do me homage".
D.L.H. Did all these things take place in the wilderness? It would appear that the Lord left the wilderness actually to go to Jerusalem.
J.T. It would appear so. It is difficult just to understand how all this happened; we can hardly compass it. We must accept that Satan took Him in some sense to the pinnacle of the temple physically, and that he took Him to a high mountain physically. As to *how* it happened actually we have to leave and accept Scripture; but, as you say, He necessarily left the wilderness, to reach the pinnacle of the temple. The idea of being in the wilderness, is that He is outside of all human support. It is a question of a single-handed matter between Himself and the devil; there is no one else in view.
{187}
D.L.H. Then would it be permissible to think that the Lord was taken to the pinnacle of the temple in mind, or was it in actuality?
J.T. I should like to accept the word as it is. "The devil takes him", it says. It would be rather dangerous to say it was merely in mind. The Spirit of God presents things to affect our minds without making everything known to us; He is not obliged to. We have to accept in our minds the plain statement, "the devil takes him to the holy city, and sets him upon the edge of the temple", and again, "the devil takes him to a very high mountain, and shews him all the kingdoms of the world, and their glory". The Spirit of God intends that that should impress our minds.
D.L.H. The terms of the scripture would assume that the Lord did actually go to Jerusalem, and also to the high mountain.
J.T. And it brings out the holy submission of our Lord in that the Holy Spirit carried Him up into the wilderness to be tempted, and that He allowed Himself to be taken by the tempter. The ordeal must have been dreadful to Him, but obedience enabled Him to go through it. The lesson for us is that we are not to put ourselves in the way of evil, or attempt even to meet it, aside from divine direction or from the needs of the testimony. It is just what the will of God requires. The Spirit carried Him up into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil. It is to bring out the perfection of His obedience.
Ques. Does the expression, "the Lord thy God", involve manhood?
J.T. Certainly. You cannot conceive of one divine Person viewed abstractly in the Deity calling another His God. It refers to manhood, and the Lord takes Deuteronomic ground in these temptations, meaning that He did not need to go through the wilderness to learn, as we do. In the position of obedience He took Deuteronomic ground.
{188}
S.J.B.C. Would the forty days in the wilderness answer to the forty years of Israel's temptation?
J.T. No doubt; it was Deuteronomic ground.
Ques. Is there any significance in the use of the word "up" in chapter 4: 1? It is the only instance where it is used of the wilderness.
J.T. It was physically so. The Jordan is very low. But there may be a significance in it, that He went up from the place of death.
A.S.L. Does it not very much enhance the account of the temptations that it was when the forty days temptations were over that these three last supreme tests came in, for it says in Luke, "Jesus ... was led by the Spirit in the wilderness forty days, tempted of the devil; and in those days he did not eat anything, and when they were finished he hungered"? There was the reality of His manhood and the need of sustenance, and it was at that juncture particularly that Satan came in with these temptations.
J.T. Quite so. Here it says, "having fasted forty days and forty nights, afterwards he hungered. And the tempter coming up to him said ..." As we noted yesterday, it shows the boldness of his effort.
H.M.S. With regard to verse 10, reference was made to @Exodus 4, where it is said, "Let my son go, that he may serve me". Are we to regard the Lord Jesus as claiming the place of Son that He might serve God?
A.S.L. The word here is "worship".
J.T. It is the idea of serving God, that we might serve Him in the sanctuary. I understand it is the full thought involving worship, so that the Lord, as you say, would have in mind the divine thought in taking Israel out of Egypt, that they might serve Him in the wilderness. It is now fully seen in Christ. In the presence of the severest temptation He retains this ground, that if any one is to be worshipped it must be God: "Thou shalt do homage to the Lord thy God, and him alone shalt thou serve". So that the victory
{189}
is complete, and "the devil leaves him", it says; and then "angels came and ministered to him". That is, He has no angelic support until the victory is complete.
Ques. How do you distinguish between worship and doing homage?
J.T. There is not much difference. The word which is translated "homage" is also used for worship in the highest sense in @John 4. We have to learn what it means in its context. The idea of the original word "worship" in @John 4 is a moving forward or towards each other, the idea of prostration before another, but as full of regard and affection for the person.
A.S.L. The word "serve" is lower and more general, "Let my son go, that he may serve me"; it came out afterwards in the wilderness.
J.T. The order of the service was opened up at Sinai, what God had in mind. It was reduced to the house of Aaron, but Israel was represented there.
S.J.B.C. Your remark about worship and understanding what is meant is very good, that we have to look at the context always, for it is a word having a broad meaning.
J.T. It is a very important thing in regard of that word particularly; we cannot always attach exactly the same meaning to it. There is a fulness in @John 4 which is not always elsewhere.
But our subject requires that we hasten on to chapter 11, and what may be further remarked as to the introduction of it in this section -- chapters 3 and 4 -- is that the Lord is Son. We have to bear in mind that the introduction of sonship in each section bears on the chapters that follow, until we reach the next reference; that is, this section bears on the following chapters until we come to chapter 11. So, as Satan left the Lord, we are told, "having heard that John was delivered up, he departed into Galilee, and having left Nazareth; he went and dwelt at Capernaum", and then it says, quoting Isaiah, "Land of Zabulon and land of Nepthalim,
{190}
way of the sea beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the nations -- the people sitting in darkness has seen a great light, and to those sitting in the country and shadow of death, to them has light sprung up". We may notice here that light is springing up, a great testimony to the Person, that the light was in Him, as it were, originating there. It sprang up, not shone down, but sprang up. Then we have the idea of His teaching and followers, for the Lord is now acquiring His normal place. Satan is left behind vanquished, and the Lord respects the ministry that preceded Him; He waited till He heard that John was cast into prison -- beautiful dependence and regard for levitical principles in the service. Although Son, and having all rights, yet He abides by levitical principles. Then another thing, He leaves one place to go to another, the move involving real physical hardship, for it was to Capernaum, which was very much below the level of the sea. But the Lord disregards all that, leaving one place for another, because the testimony required it. The Sea of Galilee, on which Capernaum was, was to be the centre of the testimony, a despised place, but although Son He accepts it, and moves there evidently carrying out the will of God; indeed light springs up, showing how completely superior He is to the circumstances. Then He has followers in Peter and Andrew, and James and John, and then we have the great general result of His testimony, which Matthew hastens to give us.
J.J.T. Is it the light of sonship in a Man that springs up?
J.T. It is more than the light of sonship; there is the idea of life. We have to bear in mind, "In him was life"; that is really the secret of the light springing up. "The life was the light of men"; what was there was unhindered by circumstances, it sprang up.
M.W.B. If it is not diverting you, why is the reference to the nations brought in so early in this book, "Galilee of the nations"?
J.T. It is with a view to what is in mind in Matthew,
{191}
that God had the assembly before Him. You have the same thought in chapter 16, where at Caesarea-Philippi He brings out the thought of the assembly. Matthew has in mind to appeal to the Jewish christians, corresponding with the appeal to christians in human organisations today, but he warns us by these early references to the nations that God is not confined to them: He goes beyond them, I think that is the idea.
Eu.R. Not only is Satan vanquished, but every condition he has introduced into the world is met in chapter 4.
J.T. The great effort of Satan's attack is met in all its phases. It is a wonderful epitome of the Lord's work, as we read: "Jesus went round the whole of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom, and healing every disease and every bodily weakness among the people. And his fame went out into the whole of Syria, and they brought to him all that were ill, suffering under various diseases and pains, and those possessed by demons, and lunatics, and paralytics; and he healed them" (chapter 4: 23, 24). It is a wonderful epitome of the works of Christ, who "went about doing good ... for God was with him". It includes lunacy; Matthew is the only one who mentions lunacy, the most difficult of all diseases, but it fled before the Lord.
H.F.N. Would you say a word with regard to the order? It says. He "went round the whole of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom, and healing every disease and every bodily weakness". We have the teaching and then the preaching and then the healing: why is it in that order?
J.T. I do not know. Your thought may be that the healing should come first as a testimony?
H.F.N. Normally speaking, we begin with the preaching, but here in the Lord's service we have the thought of teaching first, and then the preaching, and
{192}
finally healing. May it be because of its reference to the professed people of God?
J.T. I was going to remark that it has to do with the acknowledged profession that God owned as judaism, and as christianity now, and when apostasy and defection have set in, the great need is teaching. I believe that is the need today.
M.W.B. The order in the end of chapter 9 is almost similar to this (verses 35, 36).
J.T. Yes, but more contracted.
Eu.R. Does it suggest that, before we can consider the Person of the Son, we need to prove the Lord's ministry on our side, so to speak, in this healing way?
J.T. Quite so. The order of His service is remarkable. Attention is called to the end of chapter 9, which is a very similar passage, but not so extensive. We have the great general result in chapter 4 which is fitting. A great Personage having come in, you have His triumph over the greatest enemy, and then what He is Himself in living power here, that is, life was in Him. "In him was life, and the life was the light of men", @John 1: 4. He is unhampered by the circumstances at Capernaum; a light has sprung up, that is, the whole scene is illuminated, and then He preaches and calls followers, and then there is the great general result of His service, the result to sufferers, as such. He overcomes all the ills that sin has brought in, and breaks the enemy's power.
J.T.S. Is that the reason why it is said that His fame went out -- in this connection?
J.T. It went out towards the Gentile world. Whilst it is primarily to Israel, it cannot be hid; it goes beyond Israel's bounds: "his fame went out into the whole of Syria".
D.L.H. Is it not to be noticed that the Lord teaches in the synagogues, but He preaches more publicly? The teaching would seem to refer to those who were already in ostensible relationship with God.
J.T. That is true, and applies today. What our
{193}
brethren in those places of organised religion need is teaching. In this chapter, the preaching follows, not the teaching, but the light, "From that time began Jesus to preach and to say, Repent, for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn nigh". That is, He is announcing a new system, but consequent upon the light that had sprung up.
A.S.L. Is not this a wonderful epitome of the truth of the kingdom, at the end of chapter 4?
J.T. It is. The Lord says later, "if *I* by the Spirit of God cast out demons, then indeed the kingdom of God is come upon you", @Matthew 12: 28.
H.F.N. Had you a spiritual thought in mind when you emphasised lunacy?
J.T. Only that it is the most difficult of all diseases to deal with; indeed, it is beyond human ability.
P.L. Would it bear on the thought of Matthew being the assembly gospel, that such persons would be secured in intelligence for the assembly?
J.T. There is a means of dealing with all these matters. The saints are never at a loss, although we may have to contend with things that are beyond us. If we turn to the wall like Hezekiah, *God* will come in for us, that is, nothing is impossible; even lunacy, as it affects the testimony, can be met.
A.S.L. Would you say that the great characteristic of the kingdom of God is the finger of God? "But if by the finger of God I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God is come upon you", @Luke 11: 20.
J.T. The finger means that God deals with things in detail with the utmost care. Then the Spirit of God is the power, showing that the Lord, although divine Himself as here in manhood, operated by the Spirit, and that same power is available to us, showing that He brings us into the power that He used.
J.J. Would you say a word as to chapters 5, 6, and 7?
J.T. I was just going to remark that they bring out the full result which is in view. The Lord goes up into
{194}
the mountain, that is, He is not going to inaugurate a system of things on man's level. It is a wonderful testimony. God and men together, but it is not to be organised on the low level of man. The Lord has in mind to open up a new order of things, one of His own, in which He dominates; He goes up into a mountain. Matthew reminds us from the outset that the new order of things involves energy and exercise, and so you find mountains, as we have often remarked. I think there are seven in number in this book. We cannot go into them now, but it is well to remember there are these mountains, with a certain teaching attaching to each one. We have already alluded to the "high mountain" to which Satan brought the Lord, but this one in chapter 5 is the mount of legislation. The Lord legislated for the new order of things, and if we are to have part in it we must go up there. In Luke He stood on the plain, but in Matthew it is a question of power to go up.
A.J.G. Is that because the assembly is in view?
J.T. It is to prepare the way for faith, for the new order of things that Christ is to dominate. So, after He comes down from the mount in chapter 8, the crowds are still there, and there is a leper, and the Lord heals him by touching him. He is dealing now with sin *directly* -- dealing with a state of sin -- and He sends the man to show himself to the priest. It is what the person of the believer is in the testimony. That is what comes out, because chapters 8 and 9 are simply dealing with isolated and specific cases. We have the great epitome in chapter 4. The first specific case is a leper, and he is to show himself to the priest. If the believer is to be on this ground, the principle is that he is to *show himself* for testimony to them, whether they accept it or not.
M.W.B. Is there a moral breaking of the yoke referred to in @Isaiah 9, immediately after the introduction of Christ, breaking the yoke from off the shoulders of
{195}
these believers? The passage in @Isaiah 9 refers to the light springing up, to which we have alluded, and then goes on, "For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of Midian ... For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given" (verses 4 - 6). I wondered whether these two chapters would supply that morally.
J.T. Very good, "A child is born ... a son is given"; it meets the whole position. These specific cases in chapters 8 and 9 cannot be dwelt on severally, but they come into the section with chapters 3 and 4. The healing of the leper is first, and he is to show himself, meaning that the believer is brought now to have part in the testimony, not by gift or ministry, but by what he is *himself*.
A.S.L. That would be the testimony collectively -- hosts of cleansed lepers showing themselves.
J.T. Exactly.
Eu.R. So, in answer to John's question in chapter 11, the Lord could say, "Go, report to John what ye hear and see". He calls attention to these healed cases that were present as evidence of His works of power.
J.T. The lists of His works in this gospel are very remarkable: the first in chapter 4 and then in chapter 9, verses 35 and 36, and then in chapter 11. The message to John is, "Blind men see and lame walk; lepers are cleansed, and deaf hear; and dead are raised, and poor have glad tidings preached to them". It is no mere theoretic thing, but practical; and the cleansed leper is the first great result: you are to show yourself.
F.W.W. Are we to regard that from chapter 4 God is speaking to us "in Son"?
J.T. Yes; we might link it on with Hebrews, which was written to a similar class of people; it had the same class of persons in view as Matthew, and sonship is emphasised in Matthew, not only in regard to the Lord's Person, but in the way it enters into the testimony and into the truth of the assembly. John has in mind His
{196}
Person in abstract deity; Matthew would show us how sonship enters into the testimony and the Service, so that as Hebrews says, "God having spoken in many parts and in many ways formerly to the fathers in the prophets, at the end of these days has spoken to us in [the person of the] Son". The point is the speaking is "in Son", a divine Person in that relation, so that it was God Himself speaking.
F.W.W. That is emphasised again in chapter 17.
J.T. We shall come to that in regard of the assembly's foundation, and the service or functioning of the assembly in chapter 18. The personnel that enters into the assembly is in mind from chapter 17 to the end of chapter 18, which is another section.
Eu.R. Should we be in the assembly now as persons who were blind, and see; and lepers who are cleansed; and lame who can walk on both feet?
J.T. That is what Matthew brings out. In the great epitome in chapter 4, things are presented from the standpoint of what the Lord did, but chapter 11 is more the effect -- what the people see. After the epitome of chapter 9, we have the apostles. Now we have material, as the result of the Lord's work for the great ministry. We have already touched on ministry, not as ordained by Christ as Man here, but in John the baptist coming down from the Old Testament. "The law and the prophets were until John"; he was the end of all that, and he is brought in in chapter 11 to confirm the truth that the law perfected nothing, even John perfected nothing. It is not to discredit John, but to bring out the principle that perfection is not in that order of things, but in the Son; finality is in the Son.
S.J.B.C. What the Lord told them to tell John is almost a quotation from @Isaiah 35: "Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf be unstopped; then shall the lame man leap as a hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing" (verses 5, 6).
J.T. It stresses the idea of results; that is the thing.
{197}
We want results; God wants results. Of what value is ministry apart from results?
Eu.R. And results that call attention to the Person: "blessed is whosoever shall not be offended in me". It is the *Me* that is drawn attention to.
J.T. That is the thing. God is looking for results, and that is what the Lord stresses when He speaks to John. The law really perfected nothing; results according to God must come in through Christ and by the Spirit, in christianity.
Ques. In @Isaiah 35 the word is, "behold your God ... He will come himself, and save you" (verse 4). Is that God speaking in Son?
J.T. Exactly; that is what we had yesterday in chapter 1: "God with us"; He is now to be seen. It is God in a moral way, but nevertheless there, not as He was seen in the prophets, but in a Person who is Himself God, and the results are there.
E.G. Would you say a word on the last clause of verse 3? "Art *thou* the coming one? or are we to wait for another?" John does not seem to acknowledge the Person.
J.T. He had lost faith. Whilst John the evangelist does not say anything about this in recording the ministry of John the baptist, Matthew stresses the failure of John at this juncture, and, of course, it would imply that he had lost the truth of the Person he had so beautifully testified to earlier. According to @John 1: 15, he said, "He that comes after me is preferred before me, for he was before me". Now he has lost heart as to Him.
Now you will notice in chapter 10 what is implied in ministry. John the baptist represented it, as we had yesterday, but in chapter 10, after the references to the Lord's works in chapters 4 - 9, we have the twelve: "having called to him his twelve disciples", meaning the cream of the result for God, as we might say, twelve being a number representing potentiality, in
{198}
the activity of love. The use of this numeral in Scripture confirms this; particularly in the tribes of Israel. What can be divinely realised apart from those in whom love can be active? The numeral twelve denoting that they can be manipulated according to love. The exactions are heavy, but "Love never fails". The chapter has to be read carefully by those who serve, but love would take us through all that. Then, at the end of the chapter there is the great thought of representation. The outcome of the Lord's works involves representation: "He that receives you receives me, and he that receives me receives him that sent me. He that receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. And whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward". That is, the idea of the representation of God here is brought down even to a disciple. It brings out the greatness of the work of God, as brought out in the number twelve and worked out in love.
J.O.S. Would you say a word as to "the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you"?
J.T. The idea of "your Father" is brought in informally in Matthew. The Lord does not say, "my Father and your Father", in Matthew. The idea is brought in informally, which is characteristic of Matthew, that His Father really is ours, and that it is His Spirit that speaks through the ministers, viewed under the heading of the twelve.
H.F.N. Is your thought that this representation is the result of the ministry of the twelve as serving in love?
J.T. That is the idea. The place representation has in the chapter is the moral outcome of the activity of love, for after all, "God is love", and this in a moral sense, in the way He acts and has come out. So as
{199}
the saints serve in love, to that extent they represent God, and then the disciple acquires such a place that a reward is attached to what is given in his name.
H.F.N. Would these features -- the prophet, the righteous man, and the disciple -- represent certain divine principles?
J.T. We might profitably run over them, as to what they mean, from God down. There is Christ, then a prophet, then a righteous man, and then a disciple. There is the idea of the representation of God in each.
H.F.N. Might we regard the prophet in that way as one bringing in the light of God's world, and the righteous man as establishing the principles of it, and the disciple as showing its true character?
J.T. A disciple is one who has learnt or who is learning. There is not so much said about him as the others, but still there is a reward attaching to giving a cup of cold water in the name of a disciple.
E.J.McB. Would the thought be that when the leper showed himself as cleansed to the priest, he manifested what was done in him, but when the man sets a thing forth representatively he is rather describing the One who did it?
J.T. Exactly, he brings God in, and it is well to bear that in mind. It is a question of the representation of God, from Himself down to a disciple. Think of a disciple having a name! It lifts an ordinary Christian above the level of men. He has a name: "in the name of a disciple". This principle is really worked out in Moses rod (as we had it last evening), indicating experience. It is a question of experience, that God brings us to His side of things by what He does in us. He brought Moses to His side, and then said to him that he would be God to Pharaoh -- the article should not be there. It is not that he would be a god; that would make him a god in himself, a different person -- that is not the idea. It is that God Himself was represented in Moses, and Aaron was to be his prophet. That
{200}
runs through, and under the heading of the twelve we have the acme, as we may say, of the law in this section, love working out -- and love is of God. "God is love", and in the measure in which that is expressed, God is expressed, and God is represented down to a disciple.
Eu.R. This last verse would be a great stimulus to simple acts of love amongst the saints generally in every locality, and would elevate them to this character -- hospitality and all that kind of thing.
J.T. Quite so; it is representative of God.
W.C. Would the reference to receiving imply reproach, for the whole position is that? So that what is genuinely the work of God is separated from what is merely profession.
J.T. Exactly. These terms -- prophet, righteous man, and disciple -- allude to what is genuine, what is representative of God. There may be reproach attaching to receiving them, and hence the reward.
S.J.B.C. Why does He bring in "one of these little ones"?
J.T. "Whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a cup of cold water"; I suppose you are one of those. It suggests that you are an object of care.
H.E.S. You said that Matthew sets forth what is maintained here. Are we to understand it is set forth, not only in Christ personally, but in those who represent Him, and these works are the result of it?
J.T. That is right. It all works up to chapter 16, where we have the assembly, which is to bear the brunt of everything, and then in chapter 18 you see it functioning. So that it is a question of what is of God here in a moral way in us.
H.F.N. What is the distinctive feature of sonship in chapter 11?
J.T. A further feature is brought into view as following upon the greatest born of women -- that is, John the baptist. What hope would there be in any
{201}
one's heart other than that of Jesus under these circumstances? Chapter 11 brings out the complete breakdown of everything that had been representative of God: even the greatest of those born of women would seem to have failed. But the Lord is careful to distinguish between John and the cities where he had been labouring; that is, He shows infinite divine fairness to those who are in the testimony. He says beautiful things about John; He says nothing against him. John's questions are only recorded to show where he was for the moment, but the Lord's tributes are beautiful, and ought to be assuring to every servant. How fair He is in appraising what is done! But then there were the cities, as it says, "in which most of his works of power had taken place", that is, the area of those works of power and corresponding today with the area in which the Holy Spirit has been operating. Take this land, for instance. What testimony has been rendered! What power has been shown! And it is most solemn that the Lord is raising the question here as to the area in which *most* of His works of power had taken place, and what the result would be. As it says, "Woe to thee, Chorazin! woe to thee, Bethsaida! for if the works of power which have taken place in you, had taken place in Tyre and Sidon, they had long ago repented in sackcloth and ashes. But I say to you, that it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in judgment-day than for you. And thou, Capernaum, who hast been raised up to heaven ..." These are very solemn things as regards the area in which the testimony has been carried on in our times. Taking them to heart, we see how right feelings should prevail in the presence of this terrible rebuke of the Lord to the areas in which the testimony has been carried on, but then, on the other hand, we see the buoyancy of sonship in Him, the buoyancy of Christ Himself. As it says, "At that time, Jesus answering said, I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth ..."
{202}
A.J.G. Was that because the Father and His will were more to the Lord than His service?
J.T. Exactly, and if everything appeared to fail at this juncture, after all, God is supreme, as He says, "Lord of the heaven and of the earth", and He is acting now from Himself sovereignly, carrying on His work from His own point of view, hiding things from some, and revealing them to others, hiding things from the wise and prudent, and revealing them to babes. So the little ones, the babes, are the safe ones; those of no account are the ones that get the light from the Father.
J.J. Would it be right to say that the Lord is speaking here as the second Man from heaven in this part of the gospel, whereas previously it was as the last Adam?
J.T. I think that would be right. It is a question of the life-giving Spirit. It is not only now a new order of things legislatively, as in chapters 5 to 7, but we are now approaching a new order of things in life, in quickening power. "Babes" denote the beginning of a new and living order of things. The Father is disclosing things to the babes who have to learn everything.
J.J. Would that not turn on the character of the second Man out of heaven?
J.T. Quite so: "such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones", @1 Corinthians 15: 48.
A.S.L. In saying, "Lord of the heaven and of the earth", does the Lord maintain His place of service? Because He Himself is Lord of heaven and earth, but has not yet taken that place.
J.T. It is to bring out what is at the end of the gospel -- the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. The Father is now brought into view as operating from His own point of view, and the Son is buoyant in it. He is an example for us when things look dark; they are really brightest if there is opportunity for God to come in.
F.C.H. What is the force of the expression, "Jesus answering said ..."?
{203}
J.T. I suppose the allusion would be to what was going on between Himself and His Father. It is a spiritual suggestion; I mean, it is like the turning of the corner where there is the greatest pressure (@Nehemiah 3: 24). It is more *inward* now, as David built inward. There is the great general outline of the city to be built, but it is inward here. Really this touches on John's gospel, and we have to learn to look inward and see what is going on between divine Persons. It is a wonderful thought, and glory seems to be opened up to us a little, "Jesus answering". Whom is He answering? He is speaking to His Father; it is an inward thing, and we have to learn what building inward means (@2 Samuel 5: 9). We are now approaching the level of the assembly and we have to understand this inward thing, what is going on between the Father and the Son here in manhood.
E.J.McB. Would not all those activities and the mighty works that had been refused but open the way for the development of the inward side?
J.T. He is in the presence of His Father here. That is, those of us who have had any little spiritual access to God as entering the holiest, see everything according to God. There is not a thing wanting; all His thoughts are there. But we see things are not right where we are, but the answer is, "I praise thee, Father ..." God will come in, and He has got His own thoughts.
S.J.B.C. Then He speaks of the Father as "Lord of the heaven and of the earth"; would that bring in the sovereignty of God?
J.T. Yes; as sovereign Ruler He has right of way.
H.D'A.C. It is most encouraging at the present time, when outwardly things are very poor and small, that the Lord is teaching us to fall back upon divine counsels and the operations of divine Persons.
J.T. God would put it upon us as to what we think of things around, of current things, what is going on in christendom, that we should feel things; and what
{204}
hope is there for us but in this answer, "I praise thee, Father". *God* will meet the whole position, and is meeting it. Still, it is important to have a right estimate of everything. "God has judged your judgment upon her", @Revelation 18: 20. That is, God expects us to have a judgment as to what is current in the world.
P.L. Is it encouraging that the epitome of good in the movements of Jesus is brought in before the epitome of evil as suggested here?
J.T. That is very good, and the answer to everything is the Father who is the sovereign Ruler of heaven and earth. When the ark went into the Jordan, it was as "the ark of Jehovah, the Lord of all the earth", that is, He had right of way, and now He has right of way in heaven, too. So there is every encouragement, and hence the Lord rejoices and says, "I praise thee, Father". So God would have us in a state of holy spiritual buoyancy, and yet feeling things, so that the worship of God goes on in what is outwardly the darkest moment.
Rem. In @Isaiah 49 it says, "I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought and in vain; nevertheless my judgment is with Jehovah, and my work with my God" (verse 4); and then Jehovah's answer is, "that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth" (verse 6).
J.T. His judgment was with Jehovah. The Lord felt the thing -- that is a point to be noticed -- but in feeling it He was superior to it, and the service of God went on. What a note that was for the Father under those circumstances! "I praise thee, Father"; and that praise goes on all the time; the Lord maintains it.
P.H.H. In connection with that, would you say a word about the "well-pleasing" in verse 26, and then in verse 27, "he to whom the Son may be pleased to reveal him".
J.T. The Lord says to the Father, "Yea, Father, for thus has it been well-pleasing in thy sight". It is the idea of divine pleasure entering into these things.
{205}
J.J. Would you say there was a close connection between the revealing here and that in chapter 16?
J.T. The revelation in chapter 16, as we shall hope to see, is by the Father. The Father reveals *things* to the babes, but in chapter 16 it is more than things. The things that are hid from the wise and prudent are revealed to the babes, but what was revealed to Peter goes beyond that.
J.J. I was thinking that as the Son is calling to Himself here as the centre, the revelation would be of a similar character, although more advanced, in chapter 16.
J.T. It is the Father's action. It brings out here the Father's activities as to the babes; He reveals to them, meaning that those of us who take the low place, get the revelation from the Father of things that are hidden from the wise and prudent. Sonship and many other precious things; things which are hidden from the great teachers of christendom, God is pleased to open up to any of us who take a low place.
J.T.S. Is the position at the present time at all like Thyatira? "I gave her time that she should repent" -- was that to be felt? But then in Philadelphia, "thou hast a little power, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name" -- are we coming now into the region of divine pleasure?
J.T. Very good. The position today is very similar to what is depicted in this chapter, the wise and prudent alluding to the leaders in christendom, those who say they know and see, but as the Lord says, "now ye say, We see, your sin remains", @John 9: 41. But the Father proceeds, and will proceed, till the end of the dispensation, to unfold things to the babes. So the position now is that of babes who are in the hands of the Father.
M.W.B. Is there the thought in the babe suggestive of the condition that would prove that "God is with us"?
J.T. It is the believer viewed potentially. The babes
{206}
represent a state that is taken on which is impressionable. The term is not used in any reproachful sense, but indicates a condition that can be built up from the very bottom, and the Father has us in hand in that way. There is nothing to set aside in a babe in relation to what is acquired; he is available as in the Father's hands for impressions from Him.
Eu.R. Does not the Lord stand in relation to us as the Father did to Him? I was thinking of the expression in the last chapter, "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth". That verse precedes the one as to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. The power is available now in relation to the development of what is pleasing to God.
J.T. It says, "All things have been delivered to me by my Father, and no one knows the Son but the Father, nor does anyone know the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son may be pleased to reveal him". This is exclusive at this juncture. The Lord is shutting out the wise and prudent from this great knowledge, this inward thing. There is an inwardness in the position of Christ in this world. Matthew has been dealing with the outwardness of the testimony, the springing up of light, the great works, and so forth; but now there is an inwardness coming into view and a corresponding exclusiveness, for what is in view is outside the range of the greatest men viewed as men. "No one knows the Son but the Father, nor does anyone know the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son may be pleased to reveal him". As has been remarked before, and as the note in the New Translation indicates, it is not a question of His external position as marked off by works of power as the Son of God, but the infinite inwardness of the thing that is impenetrable, not merely an external knowledge which is possible, but a real knowledge of His Person is beyond any and every creature.
H.E.S. Is there the thought both of heart and mind
{207}
in those two verses? With regard to the things revealed, is it a question of the mind particularly, but with regard to the Person is it really a question of the heart?
J.T. Just so; the mind must have to do with knowledge.
Ques. Has the expression in @Proverbs 9 any bearing on what you are saying? "The knowledge of the Holy is intelligence" (verse 10).
J.T. It has. The "knowledge of the Holy" is no part of the curriculum of the universities, but it is everything in regard of this inwardness that we are speaking of. We may go a certain way in the inwardness in regard of the Son, what He is, but a real knowledge of Him is beyond us. Yet the Lord would lead us a long way; He would convey to us that there is much opened up to us -- the "knowledge of the Holy".
D.L.H. Would you say something as to the contrast between the full knowledge of the Son of God as in Ephesians, and this thought that no one knows the Son but the Father?
J.T. That links on with what has already been before us as to the bearing of the appellation, Son of God. Whilst involving His Person as Man, and the Leader of a race, others are brought into that relation. So that @Ephesians 4 would be Christ known as the Son of God, and as such coming under the notice of John, for instance, and others who "contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father", @John 1: 14. They had a view of Him as Man in His relations with His Father, and in that way they were admitted into much. When we come to @John 17, for instance, the Lord "lifted up his eyes to heaven and said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee; as thou hast given him authority over all flesh, that as to all that thou hast given to him, he should give them life eternal ... and now glorify *me, thou* Father, along with thyself, with the glory which I had along with thee before the world
{208}
was". You can see how those listening -- John, for instance, who had a place in His bosom (what inwardness would be there, especially!) -- as they got the Spirit afterwards would have power of inward perception as to sonship in Christ and as to that in which they had part. But then, there would always be this, "no one knows the Son but the Father". There is a point beyond which we cannot penetrate, and I believe that is what is in view. But still, the thought of inwardness and the "knowledge of the Holy", as has been remarked, the acceptance of the babe state, the impressionableness, are all in view here.
A.S.L. In @Revelation 19, His name is called "The Word of God", and then, in the same connection, He had "a name written which no one knows but himself".
J.T. There you have the inscrutableness of it.
D.L.H. I only thought "the Son" was, as we may say, exclusive; no one can come into that title; but we do have part in sonship in association with Him as sons of God.
J.T. That is what @Ephesians 4 contemplates, but the title "the Son" here, is really to direct our minds to the Person in His inscrutableness.
J.J. Why is this inscrutableness brought into this assembly gospel here?
J.T. To educate us as to the inwardness of christianity, how much there is, and yet there is a point beyond which we cannot go. This is the beginning of assembly instruction directly, and this thought of inwardness should be kept in view, the infiniteness of it.
E.J.McB. I was wondering whether this would not draw attention to the Son as being able to reveal, and give Him a peculiar place with us.
J.T. It does; it places Him as Man on equality with the Father; He is pleased to reveal the Father. You could not think of a stronger statement of His deity in manhood than that; He is capable of revealing the Father.
{209}
CHRIST'S SONSHIP IN MATTHEW'S GOSPEL (4)
@Matthew 14: 23 - 26; @Matthew 16: 1 - 18
H.H. Would you say a word with regard to the yoke in chapter 11?
J.T. It is to bring us into the Lord's position before the Father -- His yoke. What was remarked about the inwardness of chapter 11 should be borne in mind in this connection, for the passage introduces the Father and the Son, the Son evidently influenced by powerful feelings towards the Father. He had spoken about John, and about the area in which His own mighty works were done, and then, answering, He speaks to the Father, evidently influenced by powerful inward feelings: "Jesus answering said, I praise thee, Father", and then He proceeds to speak about Himself, His Person, that no one knew Him but the Father, nor did any one know the Father save the Son and he to whom the Son was pleased to reveal Him. So that we are in the presence of the greatest things, things that are opened up in John's gospel, and I believe the Lord's invitation at the end of the chapter has in mind that those spoken to should come into all this, and learn from Him, I apprehend, more as a model than as an instructor -- learn *from* Him objectively.
P.L. Have we something like this in @Psalm 45, the king moving in power and blessing, and then the appeal to the daughter to "See, and incline thine ear" -- would that be the word to the disciples? And then, "All glorious is the king's daughter within" (in the royal apartments, J.N.D. gives it in the note) -- would it suggest this inward side of things that the assembly is to be brought into?
J.T. That helps, for the allusion in @Psalm 45 is directly spoken of in @Hebrews 1, as referring to the Son, and hence it enters into this section in Matthew.
{210}
The idea of the Son coming in in @Psalm 2 is in view all through the Psalms, and will have a place in the future in the experience of the remnant, but it has an exalted application now in its inward aspect -- in its inwardness. In the account in @1 Chronicles 11: 6 of the capture of Zion, the stronghold was taken by Joab, but the record in @2 Samuel 5: 8 omits reference to Joab -- though, according to the New Translation, space is left for him. The Spirit hesitates, as it were, to bring him in, or what he represents, that is, the exercise of gift or ability among us. Under such circumstances 2 Samuel rather places the whole matter typically in the hands of Christ Himself, and what is in view in this chapter is the inward bearing of the instruction, so those addressed are to take His yoke on them, and learn from Him, and they would find rest to their souls. It is what He is in the presence of the Father as Son; and then, what follows in chapters 12 to 16 emphasises the thought of inwardness, involving the mystery. "Joab", it says, "renewed the rest of the city" (@1 Chronicles 11: 8), which looks on to the future and in a way to what is public now. But there is the *inward* side in 2 Samuel which leaves out Joab.
P.L. Is it the thought in @1 Corinthians 13 of love surpassing public gift as seen in Corinth?
J.T. Quite so, and the account that John gives as to what transpired at the supper table, the one that Jesus loved finding himself in His bosom -- not on it, but in it. We lean on it, but he was in it; that is the inward thought, the idea of the bosom being receptiveness, and John is in it; so that he had a view of things that no other could have, and what he gives leads up to chapter 17, which is peculiarly inward in its bearing. So, in chapter 20 the disciples are inside and the doors are shut. It says in @2 Samuel 5, "David built round about from the Millo and inward".
D.L.H. Might there be a reference to what the Lord says: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn from
{211}
me", in Hebrews, where it says, "though he were Son, he learned obedience from the things which he suffered" (chapter 5: 8)? Would that refer to "my yoke"?
J.T. The idea is there. We are brought alongside of the Lord, as it were, to learn things there. We are taken out of the realm of current religion -- what was in Judaea and Jerusalem and Galilee, publicly, and placed alongside of Him. "Come to me", He says, "... Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me".
What John opens up as he contemplated His glory enters into this. You are by Him, so to speak; you see how He is with the Father, and you are taken out of the realm of ordinary religion, indeed out of everything, and brought into a new realm where the Father and the Son are apprehended.
H.W.A. Does the thought of inwardness, as you are now speaking of it in spiritual apprehension, lead on to trustworthiness as forming a constituent part of the assembly. In chapter 12 we have this thought fully in Christ. "Behold my servant, whom I have chosen, my beloved, in whom my soul has found its delight" (verse 18).
J.T. The inward thought is what is totally outside of the realm of current religion, indeed of the world generally. You begin to grasp what is inward, and then what follows in the way of parabolic ministry has in mind to shut out what has proved itself reprobate, although under responsibility as to what has been said, it is yet unable to understand. So it says in chapter 13, "All these things Jesus spoke to the crowds in parables, and without a parable he did not speak to them, so that that should be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things hidden from the world's foundation". The "things hidden" are being disclosed by parabolic ministry, but in the next verse it says, "Then, having dismissed the crowds, he went into the house; and his disciples came to him, saying, Expound to us the
{212}
parable of the darnel of the field", and He goes on to expound to them in the house, so that we have a formal separation now between what is public -- and which has proved to be rejecting the Lord -- and what is private, leading up to the assembly, the mystery; and those termed babes, the persons addressed here by the Lord and invited to come to Him, are the nucleus of this new order of things -- and also His brethren in the end of chapter 12. We are now distinctly on a new line leading up to the assembly, and it is of great importance to notice that there is inwardness in the introduction of the Father and the Son, laying the basis for all this.
Ques. Speaking about inwardness, is it attractive that the Lord should speak about His own heart? It is the only time that He speaks of His heart: "I am meek and lowly in heart". The Lord could speak to certain ones to come unto Him and He would open to them all the secrets of His own heart.
J.T. The learning is very suggestive. What they had to learn had to do with what was thus inward in Himself. It really implies what He is before the Father. What a Man He is! What feelings He has! How what He is thus is to be learned, giving us character for the new order of things!
A.S.L. Would you say a word as to the character of the rest that He gives? "Ye shall find rest to your souls".
J.T. There again you have the inward thought. Externally there may be trouble, but there is rest of soul.
A.S.L. I wondered whether it might be -- speaking with all reverence -- what He Himself found as the perfect Servant and the dependent Man, as just expressed in His saying, "I praise thee, Father". It is all well, for "thus has it been well-pleasing in thy sight" -- whether He would bring us to that attitude of soul?
J.T. Just so. There may be much physical toil and
{213}
weariness, but the rest of soul alluded to cannot be disturbed by what is external.
W.C.G. Does "Christ in you the hope of glory", connect itself in Paul's teaching with inwardness?
J.T. It does; Colossians has it in view; "hid" is a sort of key word in that epistle (@Colossians 2: 3). "Christ in (or among) you the hope of glory"; not yet publicly with us, but inwardly He is in us or among us. The Lord would draw us alongside of Himself so that we might learn what things are in Him as before the Father.
H.F.N. What are the distinctive features that come out in these following chapters as leading up to Peter's confession of Christ as "the Son of the living God"?
J.T. If we bear in mind the inward teaching of chapter 11 as the nucleus of what is contemplated, we can more readily proceed and see how all this is carried forward as material for the assembly, but it is carried forward through certain experiences contemplated in the intervening chapters. The first thing is in chapter 12, where the *greatness* of what is there is stressed. It is a delivering element, whilst full recognition is given to the previous greatness -- all of which was there -- the greatness of the temple, the greatness of Jonas and Solomon, yet now there is the One who is greater -- and all that He brings in. It is a delivering thought, transferring from Old Testament ground on to New Testament ground, so to speak. In an informal way, as alongside of Jesus, we come to see this greatness, and take our stand in relation to it. Then the chapter brings out the awfulness of the opposition, in attributing the mighty works of the Lord to the power of Beelzebub. You can hardly conceive of anything more dreadful, and He treats it so. We are to be educated as to the character of the evil that is current against Him. He exposes it most logically, showing how shallow human reasoning is under the influence of the devil. How could Satan stand? How can his house and kingdom stand if he be divided against himself? Then He shows
{214}
that He has bound the strong man. He brings out in the teaching His superiority, indeed, that there was a greater there. It is the greatness of what is here that chapter 12 stresses; and then the brethren are brought to light under those circumstances, that is, persons who do the will of God; as it says, "stretching out his hand to his disciples, he said, Behold my mother and my brethren; for whosoever shall do the will of my Father who is in the heavens, he is my brother, and sister, and mother". That is how the matter stands in chapter 12. The brethren are brought into view, marked by this feature of doing the will of the Father who is in heaven. It is deliverance: brought from the authority of darkness under the rule of the Father in heaven and doing His will. So that, in the end of chapter 12, we have an advance from the babes and those who are weary and heavy laden, to the thought of the brethren, that is, persons who stand and do the will of the Father who is in heaven.
S.J.B.C. It is a clean cut with Israel, is it not? It seems to be the great division in the gospel. The Lord disowns all natural relationships and all relationships with Israel, acknowledging only that relationship which is moral -- those who do the will of the Father.
J.T. That is right. Then, in the beginning of chapter 13, it says, "*that same day* Jesus went out from the house"; the matter is settled on that day: "that same day Jesus went out from the house and sat down by the sea". That is, He takes up another position, and the outlook is the sea, or what is among the nations. Then we have the parable of the sower, the parable of the wheat and the tares, and then the entrance into another house (verse 36). That other house indicates what is in mind, that we are to learn inwardly; we have to learn inside.
M.W.B. Is there the thought of inwardness and what is exterior in the two sets of parables mentioned, the outward expression in such as the mustard tree
{215}
and the leaven, and the inwardness in the treasure and the pearl?
J.T. Quite so. I believe the inward side is what has been particularly stressed by the Spirit in recent years, and indeed from the very outset of the revival. It is a question of the house, but what is in christendom is generally what is public; everything appears outwardly, whereas the Lord has brought into evidence the thought of the temple and the house. The first great trouble that arose amongst the brethren had relation to the house; the order of the house, involving its inward bearing, was really set aside, and hence, those who had part in that great movement of division have lost all thought of the assembly; they have really lost the assembly and the inward teaching that we are speaking of. I think the Lord would help us to hold to it, especially as to His own Person. How essential is the "knowledge of the Holy", as spoken of this morning, and holy associations, as it is said, "the holy One of God". All that is inward.
Eu.R. Are there in that way three circles: that which is wholly opposed, and then those who stand without who might be believers not prepared to part with natural religion, and then the saints entering into the inwardness of which you speak?
J.T. That is right. There is that which is wholly opposed, and there are those who have interest, and, we hope, see the truth, and then there are those who go in; as it says, "he went into the house; and his disciples came to him". He does not compel them here. We shall see in the next chapter that He compels them to go on board ship, but here they come into the house. We want to keep that in mind; we must not lose the idea of this other house that He entered into.
H.D'A.C. Would you explain a little further as to the first great trouble in relation to the house?
J.T. The first great trouble was 'Bethesda', whose principles set aside the thought of the holiness of the
{216}
house of God. They really made no provision for the protection of the Person of Christ amongst the brethren. But inside this house He would be protected. You get throughout the gospels what was inside, and I believe the upper room in Jerusalem, according to @Acts 1, refers to what is inside. It was the guarantee for the protection of Christ and all that refers to Him, the guarantee of holiness. That is, the names of the eleven apostles, and the women, including the Lord's mother, and the Lord's brethren, were all in the upper room.
H.E.S. Is what is outward and oppressing felt in chapter 11, and what is inward seen in Christ, emphasised in this chapter?
J.T. Yes, and the Lord had all this in mind in sending out His servants. He enjoined that they should not go from house to house, and if they entered into a house and the son of peace was there, they were to stay there. Going from house to house tends to looseness; there are no headquarters, so to speak, no rallying point where the Lord's interests are cared for. Well then, we have the house here, but before the house is entered, besides the first parables as to sowing, there is the parable of the mustard seed and the parable of the leaven. All that is public, and then we are told that He only spoke in parables to those without. Inside we have the exposition of the second parable, and then the Lord's word as to the treasure, and the pearl, and the net. These are all inside, and allude to the assembly or what pertains to it. It is not yet named, but when it is named we understand that is what the Lord had in mind. The Lord would specially stress the idea of inwardness, and how it is maintained in the house, outside of which is the crowd that is spoken to in parables. Inside, the Lord expounds everything to His disciples, and takes us into His mind and into the counsels of God.
E.C.R. Does the thought of the disciples coming
{217}
to Him and the instruction following, link on with "Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me"?
J.T. You can see the trend of it, "He went into the house; and his disciples came to him". They are now on the move according to the end of chapter 11: everything is to be learned from Him, and what wonderful disclosures are here in these parables!
Then the next chapter is to bring out how the Lord will provide in the way of food. There is a great miracle, and after that He dismisses the crowds, having compelled the disciples to go on board ship. Now they do not go of their own volition; He compels them to go, meaning He has influence and moral power with them to do that, and the disciples are amenable to such influence. It says, "And having dismissed the crowds, he went up into the mountain apart to pray". Now we have the inward thing again. He is apart on high, and they are in the ship under His influence, compelled to be there. The Lord has His own way of compelling us into conditions for our safety and education. Now there is a new lesson; that is, He is seen walking on the water. This is not a public thing really; it is for them. We can see the point of His compelling them to take up this position for the great lesson to be learned in it, and Peter learns the lesson -- in measure at least -- and then we have the acknowledgment openly of His sonship, which is a remarkable thing, and to be noted. It says, "But those in the ship came and did homage to him, saying, Truly thou art God's Son".
F.W.W. Would you indicate the great lesson to be learned in this walking on the water?
J.T. It is superiority to circumstances, the enemy acting on the waves: "the ship was already in the middle of the sea tossed by the waves, for the wind was contrary". It is a picture of our circumstances acted on by the enemy. Am I superior in those circumstances? For contrary winds and wild waves are the order of the day for the assembly. We cannot look for anything
{218}
different until the Lord comes. So the lesson is to be superior, and to know how to walk as the Lord walked -- to walk upon the water.
Ques. Is it not an attractive scene to think that for a brief space of time there were two -- the Lord and Peter -- upon the water, and they were doing exactly the same thing? I was thinking of the word, "Come unto me". The Lord says, "Come", and for this brief space Peter was absolutely superior -- like the Lord -- to every contrary element.
J.T. Yes. It was a very good beginning, if he had only held to it in faith. But, as you say, he did actually walk on the water. It was possible, and the idea of two runs through Matthew. The Lord says later, "for me and thee". It is very precious to be in His company in this way, for really they were suffering, the wind was contrary and the ship was tossed. In result you learn how to do without the ship -- the Jewish system or any establishment in this world.
H.F.N. If this ship represents the Jewish system, why did the Lord compel them to go into it?
J.T. The Lord was to use this ship to teach them; it was employed by Him under these circumstances as a means of getting over, other than what He had in His mind for them. They were to learn that the ship, although He put them into it, was for their education, really to get them out of it. "Lord, if it be thou", says Peter, "command me to come to thee upon the waters". When the Lord placed them in the ship it was a more or less comfortable position, although the wind was contrary. Well, is there anything to induce me to leave it? Can the Lord present Himself in such a way as to induce me to leave it? -- that in superiority I leave it, not to condemn the ship, but to bring out the greater thing, to be in accord with His position, as walking on the water.
H.D'A.C. I suppose it was not exactly that Peter
{219}
wanted to walk on the water, but to get to Christ on the water.
J.T. "Command me to come to thee upon the waters". Taking account of the water, it was impossible from man's point of view, but after Peter got out, it seems as if his faith waned. But the point is, that the Lord puts Himself in such a position before my eyes that I want to be with Him, in spite of the difficulties, and no one can be an assembly man without this experience of getting alongside of Christ, however difficult the position may be.
E.G. Although his faith waned, he knew the Lord would save him.
J.T. He had confidence in the Lord; he is learning.
A.S.L. Is not Peter a representative of what the Lord would lead each of His own to do? You are stressing the fact that He compelled them to get into the ship, but He did not compel Peter to come out of it; He said, "Come".
J.T. It is the principle of attraction. The Lord places Himself in the most difficult position, and faith says, I want to be with Him even there, notwithstanding the difficulties, on the water. It is not simply, "command me to come to thee", but, "upon the waters", accepting the difficulties.
S.J.B.C. Would the ship indicate the Jewish system, and Peter leaving the boat, the faithful -- those loyal to Christ -- leaving that system? Then would there be an analogy now? It is not now a question of coming out of judaism, but of judaised christianity.
J.T. That is the lesson for us. However difficult the position, and the position *is* difficult today -- for young christians certainly -- you say, I want to go to the Lord *in spite of* the difficulty, not only to be with Him. Some say, we are looking for the Lord to come, and what they mean in many cases is to get out of the difficulty, but the Lord does not appreciate that at all. This chapter is to teach us to be with Him in the difficulty;
{220}
He is so much to the soul and heart, that you want to be with Him in Spite of the difficulty.
A.S.L. Is "risen with Christ" accepting death and having faith to reach resurrection ground?
J.T. It is understanding superiority to death really, but the point is, I want to be with Him, "If it be thou, command me to come to thee upon the waters".
J.T.S. It is the power of attraction unto Him and, as reaching Him, we should be conscious of bearing His reproach.
J.T. It would involve that, whatever the difficulty, you want to be with Him.
Eu.R. What have you in mind as to the result, that all in the ship do Him homage and confess Him as God's Son? What does that signify?
J.T. It is a picture of the Jewish remnant owning Him by and by. It goes beyond our dispensation. Peter on the water is the assembly position, but going out of the ship and landing is another matter.
H.E.S. We have to learn that the power is there although outside of the ship.
J.T. Exactly. It was Peter's salvation that He knew the Lord could help him.
J.J.T. How far does "Truly thou art God's Son" carry us? Does it suggest a formative work in those who pass through the experience?
J.T. Yes. It does not take us so far as chapter 16, which is the assembly's knowledge, so to speak, of Christ's sonship. We have not as yet come to the full assembly position, but the instruction is leading up to it. This is a Jewish thing, what they did in the ship. Then it says that the men of that place recognised Him, which would be the Jewish position in the future.
M.W.B. More like Nathanael's expression at the end of @John 1: "Rabbi, thou art the Son of God".
J.T. That is right. The allusion would be to the Old Testament: "Truly thou art God's Son". That will be the confession of the Jews by and by.
{221}
Rem. I wondered if @John 11 gave us the same thought. Martha thought He might have come when the difficulty arose, but as soon as she heard Him she said, "I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God".
J.T. Just so; she came into the light of the Son of God. It is Jewish ground, not as in @Matthew 16, but, though it is not our ground, we have part in it. The assembly properly goes beyond this, that is, in chapter 16, which we are now coming to, it is a question of revelation, bearing out the thought of inwardness. In chapter 14 it is objective knowledge acquired by events that came out in the Lord's ministry, but chapter 16 is revelation. That is, chapter 11 and chapter 16 link on in the sense of revelation.
Ques. Does Peter's moving out of the boat to go to the Lord on the water have an answer in his epistle where he says, "To whom coming, a living stone"?
J.T. That is the idea: "To whom coming". He is the supreme Object of your heart.
Eu.R. Would it be right to say "Truly thou art God's Son" is more the result of declaration in contrast to revelation in chapter 16?
J.T. Revelation is to persons, but this is a public thing. Of course, it was to those in the boat, but nevertheless, it was what they saw in the Lord's movements, and not a question of revelation.
J.J. I suppose if chapter 14 is a Jewish scene, chapter 15 is gentile -- the Canaanitish woman, and would the two put together give the Lord an opportunity to bring out the truth of the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. Chapter 15 is a question of traditional teaching, and then we have the gentile brought in, and then the second feeding of the multitude. These are additional thoughts leading up to chapter 16. The end of chapter 15 ought to be noted in relation to what we are speaking of -- indeed, the whole chapter bears on our subject, because it is a question of deliverance
{222}
from traditional teaching, that is, "Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up". It is very sweeping, and so we may well accept it. The Father is in control, beginning with chapter 11, and so all traditional teaching is wiped out. There is not a single organisation in christendom that is not to be wiped out: "Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up". Whatever the pretension, the Father has not planted it; He has to do with the assembly, and He reveals Christ to Peter with a view to the assembly. Then the Canaanitish woman represents the gentiles coming in of themselves. "Coming out from those borders", it says, she "cried to him", He has become a centre of attraction now. Then in the next paragraph it says, "Jesus, going away from thence, came towards the sea of Galilee, and he went up into the mountain and sat down there; and great crowds came to him, having with them lame, blind, dumb, crippled, and many others, and they cast them at his feet, and he healed them", and then He says to His disciples, "I have compassion on the crowd, because they have stayed with me already three days". We have now the idea of people staying a long time with Him, the idea of conferences, as we call it, the brethren prepared to stay three days. It is an assembly principle.
M.W.B. They were three days with David eating and drinking.
J.J. What about the two feedings which are brought together in the Lord's word in chapter 16?
J.T. That fact helps as to what we are saying. The import of the feedings of the multitude has the assembly in view. The first feeding is administrative. The Lord lifts up His eyes to heaven and gives thanks; that is, He recognises the rule of heaven, which is an important thing with us -- that is the Father in heaven. In the second feeding He does not lift up His eyes to heaven, but just gives thanks -- which alludes to the Spirit. The two thoughts of the Father in heaven, and the Spirit on
{223}
earth are involved in these two feedings, and they are brought together in chapter 16 before we have the revelation in Peter.
F.S.M. Is the revelation to Peter in this chapter: "flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens", an advance on chapter 11, the things which are revealed to babes, or is it an example of it?
J.T. It is decidedly in advance. 'Things' is one thought, and 'persons' another. "Flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee", that is, who Christ is. It is a question of who Christ is.
G.J.E. This revelation of the Father was given to the man who got out of the boat.
J.T. Quite so. If we are to understand the subject, we have to keep our eye on Peter, because it is *what* he is, not *who* he is. There is no doubt as to who Peter is, but it is now what he is, that is, material: "thou art Peter". But before we come to that, we have to see the position of the Lord. There is a movement on the part of the Lord with regard to the Pharisees and Sadducees. It says, "the Pharisees and Sadducees, coming to him, asked him, tempting him, to shew them a sign out of heaven", but He says, "A wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and a sign shall not be given to it save the sign of Jonas. And he left them and went away". He not only left them, but "left them and went away".
Ques. What is the difference between the sign of Jonas here and in chapter 12?
J.T. This has a sort of judicial reference. The Lord in chapter 12 calls attention to what He would do, that He would be in the heart of the earth, but here it is that the Pharisees and Sadducees would get no sign but His death, that is, what transpired at the cross is the only sign He was going to give them now. His resurrection was a private thing, but His death was public.
{224}
Ques. Do you think it has any reference to the fact that Jonas went to the gentiles and not to Israel?
J.T. The sign of Jonas would rather be his experience -- what came out in him.
H.F.N. In connection with the Lord's movements in verse 13, "when Jesus was come into the parts of Caesarea-Philippi", would it be right to link them with the ark moving of itself in @Numbers 10 -- to find a resting place in relation to the assembly? Would that be just?
J.T. There is no doubt that all these references involving the gentiles, including this, show what is in His mind. "In whom *ye also* are built together", in @Ephesians 2, alludes to the gentiles, in result really that the assembly should be among the gentiles. The Jewish part was early and of course prominent, but in result the assembly is taken out from among the gentiles in the main. So the Lord had that in His mind undoubtedly.
J.R.S. His heart yearned after the gentiles.
J.T. It did, but the point is how material for the assembly is to come about.
E.J.McB. Is the question the Lord puts to them a test of assembly material?
J.T. In referring to that it is well to keep the earlier verses in view, that is, "he left them and went away", and then the question of the leaven that many retain after leaving what is not of God; they leave the persons -- that is the thing outwardly -- but carry the leaven with them, and that has wrought damage. I have no doubt a good deal of leaven was carried over a hundred years ago, and this showed itself after a few years, and resulted in the terrible rupture and loss. Therefore the Lord, in what follows from verse 5, is aiming at the leaven being left behind as well. So it says, "Then they comprehended that he did not speak of being beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadducees". They not merely apprehended,
{225}
but comprehended, which is a very important word. They are now taking things in, and especially as to the leaven, which is one of the most important matters; that in leaving what is leavened, we judge the leaven as well, and leave both.
Ques. Do we find in contrast to the leaven that there is food from the Lord, and He would have us ponder over every item? He was surprised that they had not learned their lesson as to food coming from His own hand.
J.T. They had forgotten what He could do in regard of food, but the great point is, "beware of the leaven", and in leaving, not to carry any with you. Then, having comprehended His meaning, it says, "But when Jesus was come into the parts of Caesarea-Philippi, he demanded of his disciples, saying, Who do men say that I the Son of man am?" This is a new thing. What are people saying about Christ? I believe the Lord expects us to know what is said about Him, and if we love Him, what is said about Him will be interesting to us; we are to have a judgment as to it.
{226}
CHRIST'S SONSHIP IN MATTHEW'S GOSPEL (5)
@Matthew 17: 1 - 8, 22 - 27; @Matthew 18: 15 - 20
J.T. It may be remarked for the consideration of all, that we have considerable ground to cover today in two readings. This morning we shall need to touch again on chapter 16, which is the main scripture of our subject, and on the scriptures read in chapters 17 and 18; and in the afternoon we shall need to consider the Lord's confession of His sonship before the high priest, involving His sufferings -- if the Lord give us grace for that -- and then the acknowledgment by the centurion, at the cross, of His sonship, and finally, its place in the baptismal formula in chapter 28. It may be well to keep this in mind, so that the ground may be covered, keeping to our subject as much as possible.
H.E.S. You referred to the Son and the Son of God, but the confession of Peter is, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God". The expression "the living God" occurs at the time of the ark going into the Jordan. What is the particular force of that expression?
J.T. The confession of Peter here is not the outcome of what he gathered from the Lord's ministry, or even of the announcement from heaven in chapter 3, but it is the outcome of a revelation. The Father having in mind the assembly as taking the place of Israel in the testimony, it was important that the thought of life should enter into it; for the assembly was to be replete with life as over against the deadness which marked Israel at the time of our Lord's service; and was in keeping with the living testimony rendered to the Jews generally. The idea of life is stressed in relation to the assembly, it is to be in the foundation, and to characterise the whole structure. So Peter himself, carrying out the thought by the Spirit, speaks
{227}
of the saints as living stones; "yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house" (@1 Peter 2: 5), but it is, "To whom coming, a living stone" (verse 4). It is to keep that in mind that it is stressed here: "the Son of the living God". Of course, it has a great bearing today, because the profession has become dead, corresponding with the condition of Israel in a general way, and what God would stress is the idea of life as one feature of the assembly -- it is a living organism.
A.M. Would the thought of inwardness be connected with the confession?
J.T. I think so. That thought runs through from chapter 11, taking us away from what is public in the history of the assembly where everything hinges on public events, public confessions of faith and catechisms, creeds and order; all has a public character and is void of the idea of mystery, of secret relations with God, and communications from Him, and to Him, within. This was certainly a new thing, although there had been public evidences of the Lord's sonship as at the Jordan, because it was evidently taken account of by those present -- certainly John the baptist took account of it -- and then there was the evidence of His service. He is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead" (@Romans 1: 4), which would include what He did as in the case of Lazarus and others. Indeed, it seemed to be a general thought, because the message to John was, "the dead are raised"; and so, in chapter 14 He is owned as Son on account of external evidences; but this chapter is inward and private, the Father intervening of Himself, but in keeping with what the Lord had said to the Father, "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes". There was the hiding from the public, and the revealing to the babes, and so in the house in chapter 13, and again here: "flesh and blood has not
{228}
revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens". It was an intervention of the Father and therefore secret. There was no outward evidence of the Lord Himself knowing it; indeed, one would almost assume that He took that ground by the way He speaks; He awaits Peter's confession. The Father intervened of Himself to bring out this confession from Peter. It was a matter, we may say, entirely personal to Peter until he made it known.
E.L.M. Would the expression "flesh and blood" refer to the public position of the Lord, which is distinct from the revelation by the Father to Peter?
J.T. I doubt whether the expression "flesh and blood" could be applied to the Lord as marking His ministry. I should think it would be more what belongs to men as such. I should be afraid to include the Lord in such a classification, for His communications, although spoken orally through a man's mouth, had their own distinctive character which could not apply to any other. I know some have thought that, and there is not much to object to if it is guarded, but I think it would be hardly reverential to classify the Lord under that head; I mean, He must in all things have the pre-eminence. The Lord refers to flesh and blood in this way, in order to shut out what is held in such regard among men, to show that flesh and blood are outside of all this. The Lord referring to the confession as coming from Peter's lips, implies that He takes the ground of not knowing, which is not derogatory to Him. If He were in the position of dependence here, He would wait on the Father's movements; for the point from chapter 11 is what the Father will do, which we may always reckon on. The Lord gladly seizes the position as evidence of a movement of the Father, and then He says, "And *I* also, I say unto thee". He would say something additional, but based on what the Father had revealed to Peter. He said, "thou art Peter"; it was the discernment He had, as based on what Peter
{229}
had said, discernment as to what was in Peter; and I believe it enters into the mystery, what goes on inside, so to speak, the Father's operations inwardly discerned by the Lord through Peter's confession, and so the material would be taken on by Him and used spiritually.
Ques. Why does the Lord say, "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona", and then go on to say, "thou art Peter"?
J.T. It says, "Jesus answering said to him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona", and then, "And *I* also, I say unto thee that thou art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly". Simon Bar-jona is Peter in his responsible setting. It is the Lord's recognition that he is being greatly honoured as having such a revelation in his responsible setting, "Blessed art thou", He says, but the pronouncement that enters into the assembly is more formal: "*I* also, I say unto thee". It is another divine Person speaking, to pronounce on the effect in Peter and, now that material was already present for the assembly, a great point of departure. It will be observed in the New Translation that the *I* is emphatic "*I* also", alluding to the Father's communications; and so the revelation to Peter, and the Lord's formal pronouncement should be taken together as inaugural of the assembly, and as entering into the great thing that is now taking form.
P.L. Is there a type of these activities of the Father and the Son in the dual activities of David and Solomon in relation to the inauguration of the house?
J.T. Quite so; Solomon was associated with David, receiving his orders from him. The link here between the Father's revelation and the Lord's pronouncement should be kept clearly in view as entering into the position of the assembly in this world. It is a wholly new thing, and its inwardness is seen as issuing here in Peter's confession, the idea coming from the Father, the Lord taking account of what the Father did, and speaking and moving accordingly. So that it says,
{230}
"From that time Jesus began to shew to his disciples " "From that time" looks on to the cross; the Father's revelation, you may say, is the beginning of the matter.
L.M. The first epistle of Peter begins with "Peter", and the second begins with "Simon". Is there any connection there in regard to the responsible side in the second epistle and what he is as privileged of the Father in the first epistle?
J.T. No doubt there is something in that. What may be observed in our assembly relations, is that we have a public responsibility which is conveyed in "Simon Bar-jona", involving the truth of Romans, and 1 and 2 Corinthians and kindred epistles, whereas "Peter" is the wholly spiritual idea, the side that goes through. There is the provisional side of the assembly, its position in localities throughout the world, composed of men and women in flesh and blood conditions in responsibility here, and there is the wholly spiritual side that goes through and is eternal; that is what the Father has in mind.
Eu.R. What is suggested in "on this rock I will build my assembly"?
J.T. The rock is the confession, what was in the man's soul, what the man *is* indeed.
Eu.R. How do you distinguish between the stone and the rock?
J.T. As has often been remarked, the stone is of a kind with the rock, but the rock is a great thought running through Scripture as foundational. Peter is not foundational; Christ is foundational, but Christ known in this way. Remember, it is not the Christ known publicly -- as we may say -- but the Christ known as Peter knew Him by a secret revelation.
G.J.E. When the Lord said, "*I* also, I say unto thee", does it not show His own peculiar joy in the confession from the lips of a man as the result of the revelation of the Father? Had He not been waiting, as it were, for this confession?
{231}
J.T. There can be no doubt at all that the introduction of this matter in verse 13 implies that the Lord was just looking for this. The time had arrived for it, but then He waited for it. His question as to who they said He was, was to bring this out, but nevertheless it is a secret matter coming in from the Father, and that has to be borne in mind as entering into the inwardness of the assembly in the mystery.
C.O.B. The Lord speaks of Himself as the Son of man, but the revelation is that He is "the Son of the living God". How would you speak of the conjunction of those names?
J.T. The Lord's use of the appellation "Son of man" is a matter that deserves enquiry and consideration. He uses it almost exclusively Himself, something like eighty-four times in the gospels. It is only used once in the Acts, I believe, by Stephen, and quoted in Hebrews and in the Revelation, but it does not enter into the ministry seen in the epistles of the New Testament. It does not enter in as formally used, save as a quotation, and therefore it is a matter to be inquired into, why the Lord uses it so frequently. I believe it is to inspire confidence in men; He is thinking of men. It comes out more particularly where His rejection is imminent or evident among the Jews. It is a term which, in a way, He seems to have lived in, as implying His relations with men according to eternal counsels. He uses the title constantly in Matthew, as intending to convey what He was Himself in the midst of His own, as marking Him off publicly; it has His public position in view. The "Son of man" is not a title that enters into the assembly; in this great matter His relations with God, as Son of God, are in view.
Ques. In Peter's confession, he says, "Thou art the Christ"; would it emphasise the knowledge of Christ as the Son of God?
J.T. It is well to compare this part of the confession with what is mentioned by the other two synoptic
{232}
writers. Mark just mentions "the Christ", meaning that what he has in mind, in the confession of Peter, is *the service of God* in an anointed Person in this world. Luke says, "the Christ of God", meaning that the Lord is known as anointed for the exercise of *grace*, that God should be known here. Matthew gives us the whole thought; he includes the idea of the Anointed, which is taken over from the Old Testament, and it was important that the Father should have to say to Peter in regard of this, making known that the One who was the Vessel of grace and service here, was in His mind the Anointed. Both things came out at His baptism, of course, but the point here is what the Father is having to say to the one who had the greatest place among the twelve in the ministry and in the formation of the assembly at Pentecost. "The Christ" is simply that He is to be apprehended as the One at the disposal of God for His work, to do things for God, and His sonship is not only that He is Son, which was publicly announced before, but "the Son of the living God". The import is that the assembly should be replete with life; it should be a living organism, and continue to be that.
M.W.B. Do you see any connection between the confession of Peter here in specific relation to the rock and Paul's preaching the Son of God, and the reference to the Son of God in @Ephesians 4?
J.T. I should connect Paul's service with this, because he also had a revelation, "God ... was pleased to reveal his Son in me" (@Galatians 1: 16); not *to* me, but *in* me. It carries the inward thought even more strikingly. Then, what had come out already, that is the announcement from heaven in chapter 3, and the attestation of Christ publicly by resurrection, also enters into Paul's ministry, and is worked out in Ephesians, where it is a question of manhood according to God in Christ: "the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ" (chapter 4: 13).
{233}
H.F.N. We have spoken of the inauguration; would this confession have a practical bearing in regard of ourselves?
J.T. The bearing of it is that in the assembly we are to be in direct relation with the Father and the Father with us, and nothing less than that.
H.F.N. But is there a distinct moment in the soul when the Lord is apprehended in this way, which brings us in really as assembly material?
J.T. That is an exact statement of the truth. Believers stop short of the light in the soul as to Christ. It is here, once for all, of course, but it has to be entered into.
A.J.G. Then is it the apprehension of Christ in this way held livingly in the souls of those who compose the assembly that makes the assembly invulnerable against the gates of hades?
J.T. That is right.
Ques. Is it beyond @Deuteronomy 29 where it says, "The hidden things belong to Jehovah our God; but the revealed ones are ours and our children's for ever" (verse 29)?
J.T. The hidden things there are over against the revealed things. This revelation comes under the heading of what is revealed, indeed, everything is out now, as we may say. As the apostle says, "according to the revelation of the mystery, as to which silence has been kept in the times of the ages, but which has now been made manifest, and by prophetic scriptures, according to commandment of the eternal God", @Romans 16: 25, 26. The mystery is a known thing now, but then, is it known in each soul? We may know it abstractly, but coming into the thing is the point.
J.T.S. "The spiritual discerns all things" (@1 Corinthians 2: 15); would that be important in this connection?
J.T. Quite so: God has revealed them unto us by His Spirit; everything now for believers is by the Spirit, but nevertheless one is in touch with the Father,
{234}
so that we have the "spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him", @Ephesians 1: 17.
Ques. What is the thought in verse 20? "Then he enjoined on his disciples that they should say to no man that *he* was the Christ".
J.T. All such expressions are to keep the unregenerate from seeing divine things. As soon as the principle of rejection or apostasy sets in, then there must be the principle of hiding or preserving things. That which is holy must not be given to the dogs, nor pearls be cast before swine, so that the natural mind of man may not misuse them.
J.J. The Lord says here "my assembly"; would that be the inward side? When we come to Corinthians it is "the assembly"; is that the outward side?
J.T. The expression "my assembly" is peculiarly fitting here, implying that He has something now of His own that He can use. Whether administratively or in the service of God inwardly, it is *His* in either sense. He has that, and it enters into our position as sitting down "in assembly", as to whether it is really His. Sometimes He has to say, "*your* house is left unto *you*", but the primary thought is that the assembly is His, and that ought to enter into the consciousness of every company of saints together in assembly. Can we say that it is His? And that He takes us, and uses us, according to the end in view? And can He sing praises to God in the midst of us?
J.J. "I will build"; would that be connected with the building of the woman in Genesis -- the inward side?
J.T. That is the first use we have of the word "build" in Scripture. The woman was *for* Adam as taken out of him.
Eu.R. Should our great concern be to know this inwardness of which you speak? There is danger sometimes of generalising things and claiming them for all believers, without perhaps being sufficiently
{235}
exercised to promote what is of this character in our gatherings.
J.T. We have to keep in mind what the Lord meant when He said, "I will build my assembly"; and the question is, does what He meant enter into the assembly in which I may be? Does each local company answer to this? This is the most important passage in all those suggested; and is really the crucial one in regard to the whole subject, as to whether the saints have come to see what the Lord meant when He said, "my assembly", and whether there is any answer to it when we come together, not with preconceived thoughts, or subjects, or hymns, but as entirely free to be for Him -- "to be to another". So the position is His, and all that, are there in the assembly are His unitedly; this is of immense importance at the present time, to arrive at what the Lord meant and whether there is anything answering to it for Himself now.
H.F.N. In that way, if we miss the importance of what you are saying, would not everything that is distinctive about the recovery of the truth be really lost to us?
J.T. The truth in any and all parts of it must be held rightly in relation to the assembly, and that in a living way. The assembly is an organism, a living thing, built of living material.
W.C.G. Do persons who have followed as far as you suggest with the thought of inwardness, have their mount of transfiguration now? Is that the privilege that goes with it?
J.T. What took place on the mount is the next thing that comes in in regard of sonship. Much could be said on the remaining part of chapter 16, but what ought to be noted particularly as to the mount of transfiguration, is the Lord's remark, "There are some of those standing here that shall not taste of death at all until they have seen the Son of man coming in his kingdom". Whilst the thought of the living organism
{236}
is to be stressed constantly, over against that there is the principle of sovereign selection, which must not be quarrelled with: "There are some of those standing here". The Lord is making His selection, but the statement would place all under concern as to who those are to be. Am I to have part in this great matter -- to see the Son of man coming in His kingdom? That is the proposal, to see Him coming in His kingdom.
E.C.R. Why is it put in that way in Matthew? In Mark it is the "kingdom of God come in power", and in Luke, "the kingdom of God".
J.T. The stress here, is on the Person of the Son of man coming in *His* kingdom, and the glory attaching to the display of it. That is to say, we are becoming acquainted with the personnel of the assembly. What dignity! And what ability to share in glory! For glory is not to be borne by persons unequal to it. We have to learn how to take on glory, so as to bear it rightly, for that is the idea in the glorious scene on high. One has to learn dignity, what one is in the divine thoughts, the greatness of the saints in the divine mind. Moses and Elijah represent that. See how they carry themselves here! It says of the Lord, "he was transfigured before them. And his face shone as the sun, and his garments became white as the light; and lo, Moses and Elias appeared to them talking with him". Elsewhere it says that they appeared in glory, but here they are "talking with him". There is not a shade of discrepancy between those persons and the glorious Person of the Son of man, because it is not the lowly man now, but the "Son of man coming in his kingdom". He is changed and appears now in all the glory that is becoming to such a position, and these two men are equal to it. The intention is that we should learn to take on glory, to be at home in a glorious scene, to understand our greatness in the mind of God, for we are formed for this greatness.
H.F.N. Does the thought of inwardness come into
{237}
this chapter? Has Peter to learn the great lesson of inwardness?
J.T. It is remarkably so, because they are taken up on the principle of sovereign selection.
H.F.N. Then, in addition to that, would not the voice coming out of the excellent glory suggest the thought of inwardness?
J.T. That is the whole thought running through. As Peter so beautifully depicts it in his letter, the voice was *by* the glory. It is well to notice his statement: "For he received from God the Father honour and glory, such a voice being uttered to him by the excellent glory: This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight", @2 Peter 1: 17. That is a remarkable statement, the glory itself speaking, so the idea of glory is personified. It is the Father's voice, but spoken of as glory personified.
Ques. In chapter 16 the Lord says, "thou art Peter". Is not that a greater thought than in chapter 14? Do we see the same spirit with Peter as with Ittai when he said, "whether in death or life, even there also will thy servant be", @2 Samuel 15: 21? Peter had the desire of affection to be near the Lord and so he qualifies as material that the Lord can speak of in chapter 16: "thou art Peter", taking character from Christ.
J.T. "Thou art Peter" is simply *what* he was, not *who* he was. If it be a question of building, then it is what he is, but if it be a question of personal distinction, which John always has in mind, it is who he is. "Thou shalt be called Cephas" (@John 1: 42); that was his name and would be personal distinction, but that all comes out here on earth. We are dealing in @Matthew 17 with what comes out in heaven. We are so little acquainted with the idea of heaven and the dignity there -- such dignity that men can speak to the Lord Jesus on equal terms. Not that He is on our level personally, but they were speaking with Him; this is recorded as calling attention to the liberty and dignity
{238}
they had in that glorious scene above, and I believe that bears on our eternal portion.
Eu.R. Do you link this with @2 Corinthians 3: "beholding ... the glory of the Lord"?
J.T. I do not think that is as high as this; this is a heavenly scene, @2 Corinthians 3 alludes to the effectuation of the covenant, which is a matter down here; what the Lord is carrying on by His ministry. This is a glorious scene *on high* bearing on our eternal portion and dignity.
M.W.B. Which we can now enjoy.
J.T. Quite so. It is a question of entering into it, of whether we can take on the greatness above. We have the idea of greatness on high personified in Hebrews; and in Colossians we have the idea of fulness personified: "in him all the fulness ... was pleased to dwell"; and in 2 Peter the glory is speaking. These are wonderful things, and the Lord would help us to take them in, to lay hold of them by the Spirit, and enter into them, and become conditioned for the heavenly destiny before us.
H.D'A.C. "Having been eyewitnesses of his majesty", or greatness. It goes beyond Corinthians.
H.E.S. Why have we a fuller statement in this gospel of what the Father's voice declared than in any other passage of Scripture?
J.T. That is a good enquiry, because we are now dealing, as we said, with the personnel of the assembly, and how the heavenly greatness is to come out here in a moral way. The greater we are as of the assembly, the less we can afford to be down here. I have no doubt Peter's comment in his epistle bears on Matthew. The announcement here is from the glory: "lo, a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight: hear him". We do not get "I have found my delight" either in Luke or Mark. It is the fullest statement here corresponding with what was said at the Lord's baptism.
{239}
A.C. In @Psalm 90, Moses said, "Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy majesty unto their sons", verse 16. Would the first part correspond with chapter 16, and the majesty with chapter 17?
J.T. That is a remark that ought to be well noted -- the work and the majesty. The work is chapter 16 and the majesty chapter 17. It was asked whether this glory on high is the same as "we all, looking on the glory of the Lord with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory". The "glory of the Lord" in @2 Corinthians 3 is His glory in effecting the covenant, bringing it into our hearts; that is, it relates to His mediatorial service; the glory shines in His face. But this is transfiguration in Himself, meaning that He is taking on the glorious condition that is to mark Him in manhood eternally and in which we are to have part.
L.M. Would it answer to @John 17, "that they may behold my glory", what the Father has given to Him?
J.T. Well, there is something in that, but it is what He is *Himself* here, and His *personal* change, and what Moses and Elijah are, how they can speak to Him in this glorious position in perfect liberty. That is what is in mind, and Peter is so out of accord that he is unable to see the difference between the persons. That is a poor thing, because we shall ever see how distinguished Christ is; it will always be manifest, for He is the "firstborn among many brethren". There is always a distinction in Christ, however glorious the saints may be, and that is where Peter failed here.
P.L. Does the bride in the Canticles understand it? She appreciates His movements, and says, "The chiefest among ten thousand" (chapter 5: 10).
J.T. Quite so; it is a suggestion of myriads among whom He is chiefest, and enters into eternity.
A.J.G. Does the Father's voice confirm the sense of this? Peter says, We heard *such* a voice.
{240}
J.T. These are specially distinguished men in the Old Testament that God brought up. The one had actually gone into heaven without dying, and the other died and was buried by God Himself. God can do anything in this sense, and can bring any man up for a purpose. He brought these up as samples, as to what you and I can be, for it is specially stated that Elias was a man of like passions to ourselves (@James 5: 17). So the change is a question of God's operations in every one of us, and we are going to be changed; as it says, "who shall transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory", @Philippians 3: 21. That is the point, and He brings these two men up as illustrative of the thought; God is able to do that. He brought up Samuel, for instance; it was no demon that He brought up, it was Samuel, an old man covered with a mantle -- what he used to be. But here it is not what Elijah used to be, but a man able to speak with Jesus in the glory.
W.C. Is the privilege accorded to Moses and Elias the answer to their faithfulness in suffering for the rights of the throne here?
J.T. That may be right, and, moreover, they represent the law and the prophets, and they are withdrawn when it is a question of what is to be said. Now the whole thought is transferred to Jesus, and it is as the beloved Son in whom the Father has His delight. It is to bring out the change of the speaker, as Hebrews stresses, that God has spoken "in Son".
E.B.G. You have mentioned the thought of the inward working and also the greatness of the Person of the Son of God; do those thoughts run collaterally with us? You alluded to 2 Samuel where it speaks of building inward; the scripture goes on to say that David became "continually greater". As the inward work goes on, is there a greater appreciation of the glory of the Person of the Son of God?
J.T. It is wonderful to ponder that the more insight
{241}
we get into the heavenly greatness and glory of Christ, the more He becomes to us -- "continually greater".
H.F.N. What do you gather as to the contrast between the baptism and the Father's voice here in relation to the thought of sonship?
J.T. "Hear him" is added here, but then it is Christ in heavenly glory now; that is to say, it is the communication of what has particularly come out through Paul. I do not set aside what came out through the others, but it is particularly what came out through Paul. It is Christ in heavenly glory that is the Speaker now, and that enhances what is said. Hence the Lord is said to have appeared to Saul himself and spoken to him in the Hebrew tongue, and he says, "have I not seen Jesus our Lord?" @1 Corinthians 9: 1. How that would enter into his ministry!
M.W.B. Do you think this has any counterpart in the assembly's experience now in listening to His voice?
J.T. It is a word to us to hear Him. The others are withdrawn -- the greatest of the Old Testament saints, as we may say, and now, as the Son, He is alone with His disciples. In Luke (we have already touched on it elsewhere) we get an example of what is meant after the transfiguration, in Mary sitting at the Lord's feet hearing what He is saying, an example of one who paid attention to the voice from the excellent glory.
Ques. What is the point in "Jesus coming to them touched them"?
J.T. It is to convey the sensibility that goes with the glorious scene that we are in there. Ministry would take on that.
J.J. Is your point that we come into this glory now?
J.T. We take in the idea and see how suited we are, according to God's thoughts of us, for companionship with Christ -- that there is no disparity between Him and us.
Ques. Does this link on with @Psalm 16 where it is said, "Thou art the Lord: my goodness extendeth not
{242}
to thee -- To the saints that are on the earth, and to the excellent thou hast said, In them is all my delight"? Here it is the voice of the Father to the Son, "in whom I have found my delight", but the saints are referred to as the excellent in whom is *all* His delight.
J.T. There is a beautiful link, but I do not think @Psalm 16 takes us to heaven. It is the Lord amid the remnant here. The reading, as you will observe, is "To the saints that are on the earth". We are now dealing with saints in heaven and what is becoming to them up there. In the Psalm it is the Messiah sharing with His own on earth, whereas here it is the Son of God sharing with those who participate with Him in sonship, according to the mind of God -- His companions in heaven.
W.C.G. So we sing, 'There in effulgence bright, Saviour and Guide with Thee ...' (`79:5).
J.T. It is important to notice that the saints in @Psalm 16 are on the earth, but now we are dealing with a heavenly company.
J.T.S. Does it go farther than "we see Jesus ... crowned with glory and honour" (@Hebrews 2: 9), and then, "bringing many sons to glory" (verse 10), and then the absence of disparity in that "he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one" (verse 11), in view of the service in the assembly?
J.T. That brings it together beautifully; how we are in the assembly -- all in this passage in Matthew enters into that, and how He praises in the assembly. That, indeed, comes out in the closing part of the chapter, I mean, as to what we are down here. The Lord anticipated Peter in the house, "What dost thou think, Simon? the kings of the earth, from whom do they receive custom or tribute? from their own sons or from strangers? Peter says to him, From strangers. Jesus said to him, Then are the sons free", and then later He says, referring to the piece of money, "take that and give it to them for me and thee". Now, this
{243}
opens up to Peter the way to bring in those glorious things on high that were seen in Moses and Elias, and to apply them to himself, and to all the saints, as having part in the assembly -- "me and thee" -- in sonship. The Lord is the Son owned in His distinctiveness, but then we are sons, too, "Then are the sons free"; He is including Himself there.
W.W. Why is the subject of lunacy raised as the Lord comes down from the mount of transfiguration? The man says, "Lord, have mercy on my *son*, for he is lunatic", and he is healed by the One who had been acclaimed *Son* by the Father. It was remarked that Matthew is the only one that refers to the healing of lunacy.
J.T. The allusion is to derangement of mind which, as far as we can see, is incurable by men's efforts, but coming under the notice of the Lord it can be cured, meaning, I think, that men naturally are senseless, unable to take in divine thoughts, indeed, everything is distorted with them, whereas the Lord has given to us "a spirit ... of power, and of love, and of wise discretion" -- or a sound mind, @2 Timothy 1: 7. A sound mind is so essential to entrance into all these great things, a mind great enough in the power of the Spirit to grasp those thoughts above and carry them out down here. So it is remarkable that we have this case; he is definitely called a lunatic, but he is cured.
Ques. Is there any point in that the Lord rebukes the man and not the demon here?
J.T. It is in keeping with what we are saying. It is a question of man here in responsibility.
Eu.R. Does the last incident involve that the Lord would enable us to meet obligations here, so that we may be preserved in the liberty of sons?
J.T. That is a suggestive question. We certainly should not be under any reproach for not fulfilling righteousness here. The tribute was really not due from the sons, but the Lord gives what is asked so as not to
{244}
be an offence to those who made the demand.
Now the closing remarks ought to be in relation to the next chapter. What we have been saying ought to be viewed in connection with the assembly in its administrative service. It is essential that the substance of what has been already stated should be apprehended and enjoyed in order to enable us to come out as in chapter 18: "tell it to the assembly". It is not now "my assembly", but "the assembly", meaning that it has now a definite status. As the Lord says, "But if he will not listen to them, tell it to the assembly", and so on. The Lord now contemplates in the course of instruction, that what He calls "my assembly" in chapter 16 has a known status here -- *the* assembly, and I think the great thoughts we have been engaged with must be laid hold of and enjoyed in some way, if we are to be qualified to have part in such an august body; for it is the assembly here as qualified to give a judgment.
J.J. Is there allowance for the public side in chapter 18?
J.T. There is. The position of the assembly is *the* assembly, without any reference to its history or origin; it has now acquired a known status on the earth, and is a court of appeal -- as you might call it: "tell it to the assembly", and if he will not hear the assembly, that settles the matter.
D.L.H. Does not the assembly represent the full expression of divine grace here?
J.T. It does. Luke and John help as to the inward formation in addition to what we have been saying. According to Luke, the Lord appeared, after He arose, to His own who were "gathered together", as it says, and they were saying, "The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon". Well, that is the grace side. What they were saying means they had taken in the position that Simon was appeared to, the most undeserving one, as you might say, for he had denied the Lord. The idea is that the Lord exhibited grace in
{245}
appearing to him, and that certainly is a great element in the assembly in dealing with disciplinary matters. It is like the cities of the levites of old; they were the residences of grace; they were marked by that, and occupied by the firstborn ones, enregistered in heaven.
M.B.W. Do you link the thought of the name Emmanuel with verse 20 of this chapter?
J.T. I thought we might see that. We have clearly in view what has already been remarked as to the position of the assembly, that it has a definite status on the earth: the assembly viewed thus as a final court of appeal. Then, in view of possible declensions, the Lord says in verse 19, "Again I say to you, that if two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens. For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". I think these verses contemplate a change from the verses, 17 and 18; which provided for conditions that marked the assembly at the outset, so that decisions were ratified in heaven: "Whatsoever ye shall bind on the earth shall be bound in heaven", the Lord said. There is however a change from that in verses 19 and 20, but the change does not preclude the idea of heaven acting, that is, the Father still having part in the thing, and the presence of Christ on earth. For Matthew never gives us the ascension; he always keeps in mind the presence of Christ here in the way of power and support, and so it is really in keeping with the name Emmanuel, which is "God with us".
S.J.B.C. Would the two or three that are gathered together for prayer on behalf of the erring one be the two or three who had seen him and told the matter to the assembly?
J.T. The point is "two of you". There would be no point in making the "two of you" correspond with the persons who had enquired. Of course, you might
{246}
bring them into it, but the point is "two of you", two of those dignified persons that the Lord had been speaking about to bring out the greatness of the members of the assembly, even in regard to administrative matters down here.
S.J.B.C. It has been questioned whether the two or three gathered to the Lord's name applies to the assembly gathered for the Lord's Supper or for other purposes -- or is it an individual matter?
J.T. We shall get help if we follow the order of the verses. There is a change in the use of the word, "Again I say to you"; there is another thing now to be dealt with, a possible reduction from the great position spoken of in verse 17, "*the* assembly". There is a change contemplated, and so the Lord brings the thing down, not to another two, but "two of you", that is the persons He had been speaking to, to bring out what is there, and what power they have in heaven. The point in verse 19 is that they move the Father, so that what they ask for shall be done unto them -- those two. It is to bring out the persons -- "two of you", and then, "Where two or three are gathered together ..." It does not say two or three of you, but "two or three" who are "gathered together unto my name"; that is, they recognise the Name, and the Lord is with them: "there am I in the midst of them", not simply "in the midst", but "in the midst of them" -- the persons are in view that are there.
Ques. Why does the Lord use the word "again"?
J.T. Just as I have said, to bring out the change of circumstances -- it is another bit of instruction.
F.I. Would these in chapter 18 be those who pass through the experience of @Luke 24, that you spoke of, and then @John 20? In @Luke 24 He came into "their midst", and then in @John 20 He came into "the midst" and breathed into them. Does the administrative side in chapter 18 follow the experiences of @Luke 24 and @John 20?
{247}
J.T. @John 20 is the great general thought: "the midst", including the whole assembly, all the saints. But "their midst" in @Luke 24 contemplates the persons that were thus gathered; they were so distinguished that they were talking about the Lord's resurrection, and the fact that He had appeared to Simon, that is, they were occupied with grace. Then, the others came in and spoke about His being known to them in the breaking of bread. The Lord honours them in being gathered thus and in what they were saying. So @Luke 24 would correspond pretty much with this, because it is "there am I in the midst of them", that is, those persons; it is the honour that marks them.
Eu.R. Does it in that way involve the local position?
J.T. Surely; administration is always local.
{248}
CHRIST'S SONSHIP IN MATTHEW'S GOSPEL (6)
@Matthew 26: 57 - 64; @Matthew 27: 45 - 54; @Matthew 28: 16 - 20
J.T. While these scriptures have been selected in this section, they are not the only ones that refer to the Lord's sonship. They are the principal ones, and I hope we shall see that each of them stands connected with some special feature of the truth. There is the allusion to His sonship in chapter 22, where it is said that a certain king "made a wedding feast for his son", and also in the end of the previous chapter, where the owner of the vineyard sends his son, saying, "They will have respect for my son". Then the Lord raises the question of His sonship with the Pharisees, as to whose Son is the Christ; and, of course, there are the references to His Father implying His sonship.
Ques. Would you mind saying a little more on chapter 18: 20, in connection with "my name"? I gather that your exercise has been the bearing of this most important truth of sonship on our present position, and I was wondering whether gathering in the light of His name would be a kind of link with what was before us yesterday.
J.T. It involves the Person, and so the verse precludes independency. Any two or three christians might literally use the words 'gathered unto the Lord's name', but it might be in independency, whereas, it is noteworthy that the instruction of the verse follows what is said about the assembly in verse 17, and what is said about the "two of you" in verse 19, and expresses the idea of His name, "gathered ... *unto* my name". The preposition "unto" makes His name an object, as it were, a known thing which in itself would preclude independency. It involves regard for the Name which is His renown or glory.
H.H. Would you say that "there am I" is the
{249}
personal presence of Christ, and, in that way, would be more than support? I mean, we can have support without the personal presence of Christ.
J.T. It involves His personal presence in the Sense in which that is to be apprehended now; it is not His corporeal presence, for He is corporeally in heaven, although Matthew does not say so; but in the sense in which such a statement is to be understood. It is the Spirit's power, but more than that -- the sense that the Lord Himself is present, and not only present, but "in the midst of them". As we said this morning, it calls attention to the persons, as if honouring them under these circumstances. There could not possibly be any independency in such a position.
H.E.S. Why is it that, when the high priest speaks of the Son of God, the Lord answers him by the title Son of man?
J.T. Well. His use of the appellation "Son of man" has already been alluded to. It is the title He takes very frequently, as was remarked -- the title He takes publicly, especially in the presence of His rejection by Israel, intimating His relation with the race of men, with mankind, for the title really means He is the Heir to all that pertains to them, and thus He is qualified to take up all their obligations and clear them.
H.F.N. What are the distinctive features of the truth as to Son of God suggested in this section of Scripture?
J.T. This confession of His is not voluntary. His attitude is that of a Sufferer now; He is in the hands of His accusers, and so what He says is in the nature of a confession, it is drawn out of Him, the confession meaning that He is ready to suffer for what He confesses. So the high priest's inquiry is almost in the language of Peter's confession, but omitting the word 'living'. "The high priest answering said to him, I adjure thee by the living God that thou tell us if *thou* art the Christ the Son of God". He brings in the living God in the
{250}
adjuration that he puts the Lord under, and asks Him whether He is the Christ, the Son of God. It is what might have been expected from the ecclesiastical leader. Linking it back with Peter's confession, it meant the overthrow of what the high priest stood for, and the Lord knew it and did not shrink from fully owning that He was Himself the Christ, the Son of God. We are in the presence of a confession involving the Lord's martyrdom or death, and He did not shrink from making it, that is, as before Caiaphas, a good confession. A good confession today in relation to the ecclesiastical world is the full confession of Jesus as the Son of God. He is the Christ the Son of God, which means that all that God has to carry out is in His hands, and not in the hands of any man-made officials. The anointing of His head earlier, by the woman in the house of Simon the leper, meant the same thing, that in her mind He was the One to effectuate everything for God. It is a question of confession. Peter's confession made him blessed: "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona", and constituted him material for the assembly. But now, in the presence of persecution, are we ready to make the confession, involving, as it does, the overthrow of all that is man-made ecclesiastically? It is a remarkable thing that what is forced out of the Lord by Caiaphas is the confession of the Lord's sonship. Pilate stresses His kingship, but the Lord is not afraid of that either; He is not afraid of a full confession before Pontius Pilate although it involved His death -- that there was another king besides Caesar. The two confessions, therefore, that in chapter 26 and the one in chapter 27, involve on the one hand the overthrow of a man-made christendom, and on the other -- hand of imperialism according to man. The Lord is to supersede all that.
J.R.S. Is that overthrow what was in the mind of Paul in @1 Timothy 6, when he says, "who witnessed before Pontius Pilate the good confession"?
J.T. It is important to bring that in here: "and
{251}
hast confessed the good confession before many witnesses. I enjoin thee before God who preserves all things in life, and Christ Jesus who witnessed before Pontius Pilate the good confession". We are put under obligation in regard of confession, not to provoke persecution, but, as it is called for and insisted on, we confess what we hold at the risk of suffering.
Ques. Does the confessing of Jesus as the Son of God in 1 John suggest the full development of what you speak of as inwardness? "Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him, and he in God" (chapter 4: 15).
J.T. Yes; it seems to me the idea of confessing is very important in what is before us, not to provoke opposition, for that is not the ground the Lord takes; He is already classed as a Sufferer. We are now in the presence of the holy Sufferer in the hands of His enemies, and we see how He acted and how His movements brought out His sonship. This assertion meant the overthrow of all that Caiaphas represented, as it does today, for it is a question of the house, and His sonship in the house. Christ is Son in the house; He is the builder of it and He is Son over it; and so, in addressing Thyatira, He says, "These things says the Son of God, he that has his eyes as a flame of fire", @Revelation 2: 18. Thyatira represents the whole ecclesiastical system set over against what the Son builds, and that I believe is the force of His confession here before Caiaphas.
Eu.R. The ecclesiastical system is characterised by dead works, but in Hebrews it says of the Lord, "who by the eternal Spirit offered himself spotless to God, purify your conscience from dead works to worship the living God" (chapter 9: 14). Is that the way He is moving here?
J.T. Quite so. Caiaphas administers the oath of adjuration, as we were saying, in the name of the living God (@Leviticus 5: 1). "I adjure thee by the living God". That is, Caiaphas owns the living God, but does not
{252}
attach it to the confession, whereas Peter did. The confession of Peter implies that the new system is to be living, whereas the high priest is assuming the idea of life in connection with his system, which was pernicious.
J.H.L. Is @Psalm 2 similar to what is here? In connection with the declaration of the Son there is the raging of the heathen, "Why do the heathen rage?"
J.T. Quite so, but the link in this chapter is with the ecclesiastical system, the religious side of the opposition.
A.M. Would the confession be carried forward to @Acts 4, Peter and the others before the council? "Let us threaten them severely no longer to speak to any man in this name" (verse 17).
J.T. You have the idea of the Name in your mind? It is very remarkable that Caiaphas links on the thought of the living God in administering the oath to the Lord, which the Lord respects, and omits it as to the Lord's title. "tell us if *thou* art the Christ the Son of God?" The truth was that He was "the Christ, the Son of the living God". The overthrow of the system at Jerusalem was on moral grounds, that is, God brought in something that superseded it morally, before He did it actually. The new thing is described in @Acts 2 and what follows. It is a living state of things, permeated by life and unity, the testimony to the Son of God; and therefore the old was superseded, and the removal of it was on moral grounds. So today, what is available in testimony is what is living, what the Son of God brings in, for He not only builds the house, but He is over it and is in it as Son. Hence, in His address to Thyatira, His eyes are not "dove's eyes;" they are dove's eyes amongst those who love Him in the house, but they are eyes of fire against Thyatira, and all this will soon come to light. It *has* come to light for the overcomer; she is morally overthrown already: "Babylon has fallen". God has brought in Philadelphia as over
{253}
against Thyatira, in that sense, for there is that which is living there.
Eu.R. And over against Sardis, too: "thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead", @Revelation 3: 1.
J.T. Quite so.
H.H. Is it not in contrast to the two false witnesses? I was thinking of @Revelation 11, the two olive trees that stand for the truth and whose testimony goes through.
J.T. They are said to be "sons of oil", @Zechariah 4: 14. It is a question of the Spirit, and two being adequate witness. They sought adequate witness here; it is said, "And the chief priests and the elders and the whole sanhedrim sought false witness against Jesus" -- a terrible thing; they sought witnesses, but false ones, "so that they might put him to death. And they found none, though many false witnesses came forward". There will never be any want of them. Then it says, "But at the last two false witnesses came forward and said, He said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and in three days build it". Well, He had said something like that, but what He meant was not what they meant.
Ques. Is this in contrast to the witness amongst the brethren that we had this morning: "If two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter"? We know from another scripture that these witnesses did not agree.
J.T. What is required in the assembly is competent witness, that is to say, two persons: "the testimony of two men is true" (@John 8: 17), the Lord said. The administration of the assembly is based on confidence, that the persons are known. As we saw when we began in our inquiry into this book, the thought of righteousness runs through. It is a question of righteousness, and witness borne by "two of you" -- two of the assembly -- is reliable. God has His way of accrediting witness. We have to consider the persons who bear witness,
{254}
so that "two of you" in chapter 18 would be accredited witnesses of God whose testimony should be acted on; what they witness to is established. But here, they found none. It is false witness, that is, in this setting we have to do with false witnesses, and nothing is more trying than untrue accusations. I am sure the habit of untrue accusation is most distasteful to God, for it really runs with the idea of the accuser of our brethren. No true witness of the assembly would accuse the brethren; he loves the brethren. So the stress laid on false witnesses is striking here. These two are false, although what they say has a semblance of truth.
D.L.H. Besides, is it not the case that the Lord never did say He would destroy the temple. He said, "Destroy this temple" -- you do it -- "and in three days I will raise it up".
J.T. In truth they would kill Him, the true Temple. The false witnesses say that "He said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and in three days build it".
Ques. Would you say that by remaining silent He exposed the false witnesses, and by speaking He exposed Caiaphas and his system -- the high priest rent his clothes?
J.T. Quite so. It has a very important bearing just now. The Lord's confession here raises the question of what He builds, what the Son of God has brought in, as over against the dead, man-made system.
F.S.M. The incident we are considering must have involved the Lord Jesus in much suffering. Are the thoughts of sonship and suffering linked together here, as in the next section? I was thinking of the scripture in @Hebrews 5: "though he were Son, he learned obedience from the things which he suffered" (verse 8); sonship and suffering seem connected there.
J.T. Quite so; the Lord's confession of His sonship here involves suffering. "The high priest", it says, "rent his clothes, saying, He has blasphemed: what need have we any more of witnesses? behold, now ye have
{255}
heard the blasphemy. What think ye? And they answering said, He is liable to the penalty of death. Then they spit in his face ..." How touching all that is!
J.T.S. You emphasised the danger of quoting, not what the Lord has said, but something resembling it; would there be something like that with the enemy in his quotation of the psalm in the second temptation?
J.T. Yes; it is not a correct statement. The Lord had said something like this; Scripture had said something like what the enemy said; but these are perverted things, only partially true, but error is in them, and a false impression is conveyed.
P.L. The Lord says in the psalm, "All the day long they wrest my words", @Psalm 56: 5.
J.T. One has thought of it with reference to current events, the large amount of unfairness in the accusations that have been made is most distressing, coming from those whom we must regard as christians; they only show how easily any of us may take this part in false accusation, the most spiritual may come under it, hence the need of keeping ourselves in love. Love does not impute evil; it is the only antidote against coming under the influence of the accuser of our brethren.
N.K.M. Did Peter have this in mind in @Acts 2, when he said, "Be saved from this perverse generation" (verse 40).
J.T. Exactly; it is perverse, and the idea of a generation comes out in Matthew and in the Acts. The generation had been exposed as being perverse, and they were to save themselves from it. One of the things we ought to be diligent about is fairness, for "Love ... does not impute evil", @1 Corinthians 13: 5. They were so far from having love -- it was so scarce, alas! at Corinth -- that the apostle had to make a sort of picture of it in the abstract.
Rem. It says in Ephesians that the new man is "created in truthful righteousness and holiness", and
{256}
then it goes on to say, "Wherefore, having put off falsehood, speak truth every one with his neighbour, because we are members one of another" (chapter 4: 24, 25).
Eu.R. Does not the enemy seek to use semblances of the truth oftentimes in relation to local difficulties, to bring in disintegration?
J.T. Yes, and truth mixed with error is the most dangerous lie. We were noticing that the Lord's confession before Pilate is as to His kingship. Pilate says to Him, "Art *thou* the King of the Jews?" Notice, it is the "governor" here in the main throughout, meaning that the person in authority is speaking, the one representing Caesar. Is the Lord ready to say something that will incriminate Him in the eyes of the one with power in that way? But He does not shrink from it. Pilate says, "Art *thou* the King of the Jews?" Jesus says to him, "Thou sayest".
H.F.N. Would you say a word with regard to what Paul refers to in Timothy, "Christ Jesus who witnessed before Pontius Pilate the good confession", @1 Timothy 6: 13. The confession leads on to fulness of light, and one feels it is one of the most profound thoughts that came from the pen of the apostle.
J.T. He puts on Timotheus the obligation of witnessing, and goes on to say, "that thou keep the commandment spotless, irreproachable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; which in its own time the blessed and only Ruler shall shew ..." -- that is the appearing. Then he continues: "the King of those that reign, and Lord of those that exercise lordship; who only has immortality, dwelling in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see; to whom be honour and eternal might. Amen". The Lord Jesus is in the apostle's thought, and he refers back to His position in the Deity. It is one of the weightiest statements that Scripture affords in that respect, and, as linked on with the confession of Timotheus,
{257}
it becomes applicable to ourselves, as to the bearing of our confession.
Ques. Do you think in verse 64 there is a warning that if they missed the blessing connected with the glorious Person before them, they would come under His judgment as the Son of man?
J.T. It is the "Son of man sitting at the right hand of power, and coming on the clouds of heaven". There is certainly a warning in that.
D.L.H. Is there a suggestion of His deity in the clouds of heaven?
J.T. Yes. @Psalm 104: 3 would indicate that. These are the things that come in informally; by which we are built up in the understanding of His deity.
Now, the scripture read in chapter 27: 45 - 50 brings us to the most touching and profound scene conceivable, that is, the Lord Jesus on the cross effecting atonement, and, notwithstanding all the harrowing scenes that preceded it, and the effect as to physical endurance it must have had on Himself personally as a Man here, we have the most striking testimony to His sonship, in that it is said, "about the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a loud voice, saying Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" And then again, in verse 50: "And Jesus, having again cried with a loud voice, gave up the ghost". The power that was present in Him, although He was literally dying -- at least, about to give up His spirit -- is the most striking testimony to His sonship, and to His divinity, so that the centurion, and they who were with him on guard over Jesus -- for notice, it is not only the centurion but those with him on guard over Jesus -- "seeing the earthquake and the things that took place, feared greatly, saying, Truly this man was Son of God". So that at the cross, we have the gentiles, as they doubtless were, Roman soldiers, witnessing to this great fact, having its own voice right down the
{258}
ages, for indeed the centurion is the first gentile to witness to this.
H.E.S. What is the particular thought in that they were gentiles who first came into this light?
J.T. It is a feature with Matthew, that things do not work out in any arbitrary way, but the setting aside of Israel was on moral grounds; the work of God was elsewhere and it showed itself. God respects His own work. "Let thy work appear unto thy servants", as was quoted this morning. Wherever it is, it is to be respected, and it certainly is most striking that this gentile soldier should be the first gentile to testify to the Son of God -- even before Paul.
W.S.S. This is the conviction that is to come into every one of our souls as to this Person.
J.T. That is the point in this gospel -- and what you become owing to the light that comes into your soul. Undoubtedly this man came into the light and spoke accordingly.
H.F.N. Are these last three scriptures more in connection with the public side of things, and not exactly the inwardness of chapter 16?
J.T. The inward is properly the assembly worked out from chapter 11 to chapter 18, where it is seen as owned and having a status on earth, superseding the council the Lord spoke about in chapter 5. We are now dealing with the public side, that is, the side of confession and suffering.
P.H.H. Does the confession of the centurion stand over against the reviling from the chief priests and the scribes and elders, who also mention the term "Son of God"?
J.T. That is suggestive. You will observe that those that stood round deriding the Lord, alluded both to His kingship and sonship. The enemy took up the Lord's confession of both, and that requires from ourselves a good confession on both sides -- His sonship and His authority, lordship. The enemy would take
{259}
those things up and deride us, aside from the admission of them as seen *in* us. It was no mere profession with Him. Power was there, because He could cry out twice as He died; when everyone else would be weak. He "cried with a loud voice", it says.
This gospel builds up a constitution capable of sustaining suffering, it is the acacia gospel -- showing the power of endurance in the face of the awful pressure that is against us -- the gates of hades. It is not only formal military power, but the council of evil, the gates of hades, and so the Lord, from the outset, aimed at building up a constitution in His disciples so that they should take their share in suffering. This gospel is especially intended for that, and so it tells us constantly that He was going to suffer, and the kind of people that would cause the suffering: as for instance, in chapter 16, what would happen to Him from the scribes, and the elders of the people; in chapter 17: 22, how He would be delivered into the hands of men; and then in chapter 20: 19, how He would be delivered up to the nations by the Jews to be put to death; so that the whole race is implicated in the death of Christ. We have to bear in mind that not only the religious leaders, but men, as such, will cause suffering, so that we are to be on our guard: as it says, "be not afraid of those who kill the body, but cannot kill the soul ..." We are not to be afraid of man.
J.J. Would that be in the mind of Paul in writing the epistle to the Galatians, bringing in his own suffering to overthrow this legal system?
J.T. So that he says, "he that was born according to flesh persecuted him that was born according to Spirit" (chapter 4: 29). Our nearest of kin may be found among the persecutors, that is, those that are born after the flesh, which is essentially opposed to what is of the Spirit.
H.H. The psalms connect the thought of kingship and sonship with suffering. You get is @Psalm 2,
{260}
"*I* have anointed my king upon Zion", and then it also says, "Thou art my Son; *I* this day have begotten thee". You have kingship and sonship there, and do not the psalms deal with the exercises that necessarily come in in order that there may be the maintenance of those two thoughts with the saints, and all to be reached at the end in triumph and praise?
J.T. So that the confession before Caiaphas and the confession before Pilate involved the whole truth of the Lord's Person, what He is on God's side as the Son, for the representation of God comes in in sonship. He says, "they have both seen and hated both me and my Father" (@John 15: 24); the Father was there. Then the confession before Pilate was of His lordship, and that, too, brings in suffering.
Ques. In regard to this matter of suffering, is there any connection with the three Hebrew children in Daniel who would not worship the image and who had the presence and company of one like the Son of God in the fire?
J.T. Showing beautifully how the Lord comes in as Son to stand by us.
Ques. With regard to the subject of the forsaking, is it right to say that the Father forsook the Son? It says, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" This blessed Man is the sin-bearer -- the Son of God truly -- but I find it difficult to think that the Father forsook the Son.
J.T. You have no difficulty in saying that *God* forsook Him? We have to bear in mind that there was total abandonment; there could be no atonement otherwise. That the Father is not in evidence is quite to be admitted; it would never do, because it says that the Father judges no one (@John 5: 22); but then, it is the same Being, there is no other God; we have to bear that in mind.
Rem. I admit that fully, but Scripture does not make the statement, that the Father forsook the Son.
{261}
J.T. No; it could not, for the Father judges no one. Our minds have to be controlled by Scripture, and it is God that judges, and therefore it is God that the Lord addresses on the cross. In Gethsemane it is the Father, but it is the same Being. There is only one God, and "to us there is one God, the Father", only the Father never judges, as the Lord said, and therefore it would be unscriptural to say the Father forsook Him, I mean, in that sense. But then, on the other hand, we must remember there is only one Being, God. We cannot say that the Father is one, and God is another.
Ques. Would it be correct to suppose that, while God as such was forsaking Him, the Father as such was supporting Him on account of the delight He found in Him?
J.T. That is not correct. He was *forsaken of God*, and we must accept that fully without mitigation. It brings out His own greatness; no one could sustain such a position but One who is Himself divine.
H.D'A.C. We ought to observe the importance of that word, "My God, my God". No one had ever been to God what Jesus was, and no one had ever been to Jesus what God was. There was an intense delight in God on the part of Jesus. How often He said in Spirit in the psalms, "My God", and now He has to say, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" How such a word must have reached the depths of the heart of God!
J.T. "God is one", which would imply there is no diversity of thought in anything done, and so the forsaking was absolutely of God, and the fact that there was One there to sustain such a judgment brings out that He was Himself divine.
Rem. In Gethsemane the Lord addressed the Father, and He asked that the cup might pass from Him, and did not that account for the intensity of His sufferings, so that His sweat was as it were great drops of blood?
J.T. At Gethsemane He was dealing with the
{262}
enemy's power, so that He brings in His Father. His Father was there, and angels ministered to Him, but on the cross it is not a question of Satan's power, but of God's unmitigated judgment.
D.L.H. And when the forsaking was over and the Lord Jesus had accomplished His work, He could then say, "Father, into thy hands I commit my spirit".
J.T. That is very beautiful and very touching.
J.H.L. Is not this the only time the Lord addresses the Father as "My God", prior to His death?
J.T. Only in Spirit, as has just been remarked, in the Old Testament. Of course, He quotes from @Psalm 22 on the cross. He had said it in Spirit before, but now He says it Himself. But you do not get it in the New Testament save here. In @John 20, He says, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God".
J.H.L. That is in resurrection.
J.T. Yes.
S.J.B.C. In connection with @Psalm 22: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" and then later on when it says, "neither hath he hid his face from him" (verse 24) -- would that be the fat of the sin-offering going up? When the fat of the sin-offering, the inward excellence and strength of the victim, was burned on the altar, it was said to be a sweet savour unto Jehovah, so that even as the sin-offering on the cross, there was that which delighted the heart of God.
J.T. You can only think of Him in the power and excellence that led Him into death, but the fact of the forsaking is not modified by that.
In chapter 28: 16 - 20, we have the final setting of the sonship of Christ in this gospel. It is not now seen in suffering, but in the deity, that is, as revealing the relation which God has taken, in order to effect His thoughts in man. It is not sonship in absolute deity, but in revelation; the relations that God has been
{263}
pleased to take to effect His counsels and to make His love known. The setting is wonderful and ought to induce everyone to be baptised to it; "to the name of the Father", as it is said, "and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". It is one name, but involving such features -- the Father, the Son, and the Spirit. It is God in grace as presented in the gospel, inviting from men committal in baptism. The light presented should induce this.
A.J.G. Is this name "of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit" all involved in God being "all in all" eternally?
J.T. I think so. The order involves not exact equality, but relativeness. It implies gradation of Persons, the Father first, the Son next, and then the Spirit. These are relations taken in love to accomplish the counsels of God and make them known. They involve surrender or sacrifice on the part of the Persons. It is not deity in the absolute which is presented; it is God coming out to be near to us that we might know Him. The relationships presented to us are not relationships involving judgment, but grace. The Father's name is always connected with grace, and the Son's position is to carry out the Father's thoughts in dignity, and the Spirit is to make all effective down here. It is a wonderful economy, the economy of revelation, as we may call it, entered into deliberately in order to make the counsels and thoughts of God effective and to establish confidence in the hearts of men.
M.W.B. Have you any thought why we have no record in the New Testament, especially in the Acts, of this formula being used? In fact, in @Acts 19 it is stated that "they were baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus" (verse 5).
J.T. That opens up a very wide enquiry as to the position of this part of Scripture in the testimony, and whether it was ever really carried out. The commission here contemplates Galilee as its basis. The Lord is in
{264}
Galilee and the disciples are viewed as the poor of Israel's flock. The Lord deliberately goes to Galilee, and it is a question whether it does not look on to a future day, the disbelieving nations -- not the persons of the nations, but the nations -- a very great undertaking. Of course, the persons must be involved, but the nations as such are in view. Matthew has in mind that the nations are to be brought into blessing; in chapter 25, indeed, he pictures the Lord when He comes sitting on His throne with the nations gathered before Him, and some go into everlasting punishment, and others into everlasting life; they are treated according to their treatment of His brethren, that is, the Jewish brethren. Now in these verses it looks at those brethren -- they are His disciples here, not called apostles -- as having power, not simply to enlighten the nations, but to *make* disciples of them -- a very great matter! Whilst there is no evidence that the commission here was ever carried out, it will yet be carried out, and it bears on the position of the assembly, in that the Lord expects power to be amongst His people to influence others, to make disciples (@Acts 14: 21). Aside from the fact that they were a broken number, eleven not twelve, and that some of them doubted, it was an imperfect state in the disciples. But He does not stop to repair the position; the Lord simply goes on, and says, "All power has been given me". That never fails; it never can fail, and He proceeds to say, "Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations, baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". It contemplates, even in that broken state, that there is to be power to disciple people.
Eu.R. In this connection do lordship and discipleship run parallel with the great thought of sonship? The assembly gives Christ His real rights whilst rejected.
J.T. It says, "the eleven disciples went into Galilee to the mountain which Jesus had appointed them". It contemplates distance, and that they come under
{265}
His direction. It is His dignity as in authority, which the chapter contemplates. Then it says, "when they saw him, they did homage to him: but some doubted. And Jesus coming up spoke to them, saying, All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth". I believe this section of Matthew is brought in, not because it has ever been carried out, but to show what is possible in a place that in no way enhances the position, that is in Galilee; it has no distinction religiously; it contemplates a position of reproach, but the power being there the reproach is not in the way. The power is enough. Who can dispute the power of God, whatever the outward circumstances? So, I believe, the apostle Paul acted on the principle of this chapter in going to Corinth. He made no pretence about appearances; he was no religious leader at all, he was a tent-maker, but then he said the power was there, and you cannot dispute the power.
P.L. And must one be in Galilean conditions to understand the stoop of divine Persons?
J.T. The stoop is a word to be noted. God came down. Even in the Old Testament it is contemplated that He humbled Himself to behold the things in the heavens and the earth, and He humbled Himself, speaking reverently, in coming into this economy, and in coming into Galilean conditions. But you need not mind that. The presence of God among His people is enough, and whatever the circumstances it will make itself felt, and so you have influence and the means of affecting people.
J.J. Did Paul have that in mind in the last verse of 2 Corinthians? He speaks of "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit". Was it to bring them to what we have in the end of this chapter?
J.T. I am sure he had. The principle in this chapter, as it bears on Christianity, runs right through Paul's ministry at Corinth, the determination not to know
{266}
anything but a certain thing, that is, Jesus Christ and Him crucified. A man like that is one that knows he has power, and that power will show itself, it cannot be disputed. So "the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power", @1 Corinthians 4: 20. Hence God has been pleased to come into this economy. Paul speaks about the weakness of God; we have to use the word reverently, but it is remarkable, he says, "the weakness of God is stronger than men" (chapter 1: 25); that is the point. If God can establish His superiority He is ready to come down and take a lowly place to gain His point, and that is what this chapter means.
P.L. The ark is the great symbol of that in the Old Testament.
J.T. Exactly; it was a small thing, but it was the glory of God and the power of God, and even if it is in the hands of the Philistines it overthrows Dagon and returns by itself, as you might say.
A.J.G. Power to influence others would be the outcome of the inwardness we had earlier, would it not?
J.T. Indeed, all that enters into this. The greater we are inwardly, the smaller we can afford to be outwardly. In his letter to the Corinthians the apostle was prepared to surrender anything in order to reach his point with them.
Ques. Does this scripture suggest a voluntary movement on the part of the eleven disciples?
J.T. The Lord said, "go, bring word to my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there they shall see me". They moved under direction. It is important to see the thought of *authority* in this chapter. The angel said, "Behold, I have told you". It is a question of the authority of the Lord, "An angel of the Lord, descending out of heaven, came and rolled away the stone and sat upon it. And his look was as lightning, and his clothing white as snow. And for fear of him the guards trembled and became as dead men. And
{267}
the angel answering said to the women, Fear not *ye*, for I know that ye seek Jesus the crucified one. He is not here, for he is risen, as he said, Come, see the place where the Lord lay. And go quickly and say to his disciples that he is risen from the dead; and behold, he goes before you into Galilee, there shall ye see him. Behold, I have told you". There can be no doubt as to what the angel meant, and there is a voice in that from the standpoint of Matthew and the assembly; it is a question of the commandments and the authority of the Lord. So the disciples moved in that way, and now they are to teach, as He says: "teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have enjoined you". We can see the force of the commandments here, and how the moral bearing of this chapter was carried out by the apostle Paul as seen in Corinthians. He does not represent the formal carrying out of this commission, for I believe it is still future. It is a question of the nations, as such, but Paul carries out the spirit of it and insists on the commandments, and that as far as he was concerned he was ready to go to any lengths legitimately to gain what he had in mind for the Corinthians. The Lord had much people in Corinth, and the Lord had gone to the cross and the forsaking of God to gain Paul, and the apostle was ready to move on this line.
D.L.H. And are we to understand that now during this period the formula should give place to the name of the Lord?
J.T. I do not think that this formula should be ignored in baptisms. Whilst this gospel contains the mind of God as to a future dispensation and as to movements towards a godly remnant, it was written by a christian apostle, one of the apostles of Christ, especially to christians, and I cannot see that the beautiful formula should not have its full place, for it is a question of God coming in and taking up this attitude in lowliness and humility, as I may say, so as to gain our hearts,
{268}
for what could be more attractive than this presentation of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, a presentation that denotes the service of love that man might be delivered from the authority of darkness?
{269}
THE LORD'S SUPPER AND THE NEW COVENANT
@Mark 14: 22 - 26; @1 Corinthians 11: 17 - 26
J.T. It is in mind to dwell on the Lord's supper -- particularly as setting out the new covenant, that is, to give it the glory setting. The new covenant, involving the love of God, involves the glory, and the glory is to shine; having its full effect in the heavenly city which is said to come down "out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God", @Revelation 21: 10.
D.L.H. Would you explain a little what you have in mind in speaking of the glory of God in connection with the Supper?
J.T. The types help. When the first covenant was introduced, we have the idea of volume in the blood of it; and in the second ascent to the mount, there is the idea of glory; that is Exodus -- the idea of volume in the blood, and the idea of glory in the face of Moses, and then in the tabernacle itself; so that the glory becomes the guiding and moving power. In referring to the cup, Mark is the only writer who says, "they all drank out of it", and as they all drank out of it, the Lord spoke about the covenant; and after that we have their singing and the change of position. Matthew and Mark have in mind the change of position involving the glory, and the change that flows from what is in the Supper, for they stress the idea of eating and drinking.
D.L.H. Is your thought that the Supper leads to the glory?
J.T. It involves the glory. Exodus involves the glory; first the thought of volume in the basins, and then the shining in the face of a man, that is to say, the glory is within their compass. It is not a great general thought, it is in the face of a man, corresponding with what is opened up in @2 Corinthians 3 and 4.
{270}
P.L. Is the covenant liberating, and the glory engaging?
J.T. Just so, and it reflects on us; the glory affects us so that we are changed too, that is, the taking of the new ground -- the change of position involves change in us; we are rendered glorious, in other words, "We all, looking on the glory of the Lord with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit", @2 Corinthians 3: 18. The interweaving of the idea of the lordship of Christ, and the Spirit, in that chapter is to be noted; so that the change comes about, and that leads to an enquiry as to the part the Spirit has in relation to the covenant in the Lord's supper, and the part He has in relation to the Father; what He is as the Spirit of the covenant and what He is as the Spirit of adoption or sonship.
F.S.M. Is it the thought of subsisting in glory? The word "subsist" is used twice in the chapter, "How shall not rather the ministry of the Spirit subsist in glory?" (verse 8). "For if that annulled was introduced with glory, much rather that which abides subsists in glory" (verse 11).
J.T. The word "subsist" enters into it, and has great importance in our enquiry, because it is a thing which is substantial. It does not consist merely in words, but it is in the persons who have part in the covenant.
J.R.S. Are you linking that thought with the fact that they all drank out of it?
J.T. That is the basis of it. The subsisting of the covenant, that which is the ministry of the Spirit is in the saints: "they all drank out of it"; it is a real drinking which implies satisfaction. It is a question of what the saints come into, and what we are, as taking new ground, because after this they went to the mount of Olives. There is no doubt what the mount of Olives signifies in all the gospels. It was the place where the
{271}
Lord was accustomed to go; it was His retreat; He spent nights there, so that we have the suggestion of a position that was customary to Him.
D.L.H. And that would be the effect of the glory upon our souls, that we should desire to reach the mount of Olives, so to speak.
J.T. That is the idea, to be there "all glorious".
W.W. Do you say the persons who drink the cup of the new covenant become all glorious by drinking of it?
J.T. That is the line. Satisfaction of soul works inwardly. Then there is the effect of beholding the glory of the Lord, so that we are changed.
Ques. Does the "we all, looking" in @2 Corinthians 3 follow on the all drinking out of the cup? "They all drank out of it", and then "We all, looking on the glory of the Lord with unveiled face, are transformed", etc.
J.T. The former is internal, the drinking -- it works from within. The latter, of course, is more objective, the "glory of the Lord" and we are changed into "the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". That is, the interweaving of the thoughts of lordship and the Spirit affords much instruction in that chapter. You could not get such an interweaving aside from both being divine Persons, "The Lord is the Spirit", but the parenthesis beginning with verse 7 brings in the Spirit of God. There is the ministry of righteousness and the ministry of the Spirit, and the ministry of the Spirit subsists in glory, and the glory is so transcending that it eclipses the glory that attached to the first covenant. The covenant makes the idea of reconciliation a substantial thing *in* us. The types help, that is to say, Exodus is the glory. The entrance into Canaan is by the Spirit, and what comes into view there is the old corn of the land. We have dwelt much on the thought of entrance in, as following the ark, but as a matter of fact the people were over before the ark.
{272}
The idea in the ark is *power* that the saints should go over; it stood in the midst of Jordan till all the people were over, and, as over, it is not the thought of the ark which is emphasised, but the old corn of the land; another figure is applied. *The ark is a question of power in that setting*. The covenant is the idea to begin with, what God is towards us in Christ.
J.O.S. Is the glory of the Lord an administrative glory, in that connection?
J.T. The administration of it is glory; the glory of it is in the administration. It is an inherent thought in the administration of the love of God in our hearts.
P.H.H. Would you say a further word as to volume? Are you referring to @Exodus 24, and the volume of the blood in the basins there?
J.T. That is right. It is important to receive the testimony -- the volume in the basins, suggestive of what there is towards us.
P.H.H. I was just wondering if you linked it at all with the thought of the pouring out in connection with the cup in Luke. Is there a connection in our mind between that, and the volume in the basins?
J.T. Well, there is. I think we can readily take in the thought of the blood in the basins; it was without limitations, we are not told how many basins. It suggests volume as compared with other references to the blood in the types. I do not know whether you get the thought of volume anywhere as you do there; and surely the Spirit of God would remind us of the volume of blood that we might be bathed, as it were, and our souls flooded with the thought of what God is in Christ. Matthew and Mark enlarge on it, in that it was "shed for many", meaning that it reaches out. Then the shining in the face of Moses brings the glory within our compass in a man, in one who becomes attractive personally; by this, as applying to Christ, we are brought into accord with Him. In going to Olivet the spiritual thought would be that we are brought into accord with
{273}
Him, glorified, as it were. There is the correspondence with the position, for it is said that *they* sang the hymn, and *they* went to the mount of Olives, showing that there is liberty now with them. Hitherto He had been saying and doing; they say nothing save as He challenges their hearts as to who should betray Him; it is what *He* says and does. But then the glory liberates the soul and brings us into accord with Himself. They sing the hymn and they go to the mount of Olives, that is to say, the change of position is there on their part, but it is in accord with Jesus custom; He had been accustomed to go there.
N.K.M. Why do you stress the thought of the custom of Jesus in going to the mount of Olives?
J.T. It is the suggestion of the link He had with His Father, and what would engage Him by night on Olivet. We know well enough that He was in the bosom of the Father -- that He would enjoy that place of love. We are to learn from the references what is meant as they went there now. Doubtless He went with them, but the point is, *they* went.
Ques. Is it anything like "in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee", @Psalm 22: 22?
J.T. It is leading up to it. The thing is to get our souls into the glory of the Lord, so that we take the new ground -- spiritual ground, as I may call it, all glorious, "All glorious is the king's daughter", @Psalm 45: 13.
Ques. Does @Romans 8 suggest the thought at all: "these also he has glorified" (verse 30).
J.T. That enters into it. "Whom he has justified, these also he has glorified": that lies in the Spirit; but it is the Spirit as having part in the administration of love; the love is brought in.
Ques. By the use of the word "glory" here, do you suggest it is excellency as presented in the Old Testament?
J.T. The types help us wonderfully if we get the
{274}
thought that enters into the covenant. That is, the glory causes us to move in Exodus; that is where the movement lies, and the ark is the *power* that removes everything in the way. Nothing can stand in the way of the ark; it stays in the midst of Jordan until everyone in Israel passed over, "All Israel", it says, "went over on dry ground, until all the nation had completely gone over the Jordan", @Joshua 3: 17.
Ques. Do you connect that with the fact that they went out to the mount of Olives?
J.T. That is the idea. The institution of the Lord's supper was in Jerusalem, where the opposition was. That is where the Supper is, but there is a change from that. Olivet does not refer to opposition; it is outside of Jerusalem. The Lord as the ark deals with all that opposes. It is the idea of the power that is there so that all the people should pass over; then as passed over, what they find is the old corn of the land, *not the ark*, they were over before it in the type. Not that we are over before Christ now, but the type teaches us the power of the Lord to deal with every obstacle.
J.R.S. Would you bring in the word, "if therefore ye seek me, let these go away", @John 18: 8?
J.T. That is the *ark*. The saints come into view first on the morning of the resurrection, as regards the testimony; the point being that they are brought into view, they are liberated; but as brought into view Christ is seen in another way. Properly speaking, as He comes into the company *it is Christ in heaven*, which is another thing.
J.J. I suppose the Lord had the thought in mind of change of position when He said, "go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God", @John 20: 17.
J.T. "I ascend" is *not* the thought of the ark.
J.J. In John, the mount of Olives is not mentioned; it is the garden, and it says that He often resorted there. Would that be more intensely spiritual?
{275}
J.T. Quite so, but the ark is a question of power. How can we get over without Christ in death? That is the point, that He in love took His place in the bed of Jordan, and remained there, so to speak; the ark remained there till the whole nation passed over, and then the stones are taken up by the twelve men from the spot where the feet of the priests stood in the bed of Jordan. So that they are over *out of that spot*. What power there was to hold back the forces of death, and they are still held back. The assembly convened is in the knowledge of that.
P.L. "What ailed thee, thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou turnedst back?" @Psalm 114: 5.
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Do we come together in the light of that great victory and the power of the ark as seen in that way?
J.T. We come together in the light of the knowledge of the Lord, but the ark is more than that; it is a spiritual thought. Am I conscious that the power of death is still held up? We say that death is abolished, but it is only true for faith.
J.R.S. Have you in mind that the ark in the midst of Jordan is sustained in the Supper right through?
J.T. No. The Supper is at the Red Sea properly; there is no ark there. The types help us enormously if we grasp them. That is, we take up the idea of the abolition of death, but the question is, Am I conscious of the power holding it back?
F.S.M. Would the introduction of the thought of glory in relation to the Lord's supper help us? There is first the contemplation of the glory of the Lord's Person, and then the apprehension of the glory of His power, which would enhance our view of the saints.
J.T. That is how it works. The glory is that God has come in in Christ, that His love shines, but the ark is an additional thought; and the old corn of the land is a still further thought. The ark comes in as
{276}
the power that overthrows all that is against us. It has done it in a sense; death is held back, we are beyond it in the assembly. It is not a theory but a reality; the power is held back by the Lord. Death goes on, but there is a point reached, where we know the power of death is held up.
W.C. You said that the Supper was at the Red Sea. At what part of our coming together would the thought of the ark properly come in?
J.T. It comes in where there is a definite movement spiritually. It is said in @Numbers 10: 33, that as they set forward from the mountain of Jehovah, three days journey, the ark of the covenant of Jehovah went before them in the three days journey. In @Numbers 21 the Holy Spirit is recognised formally: "sing unto it" (verse 17). There is the formal recognition of the Spirit, and this makes way for the position of the ark at the Jordan. There are two features of the Spirit's action in the assembly; the first has relation to the covenant, and the second has relation to the Father. I believe @Numbers 21 is the transitional point, "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God", @Romans 8: 14. But then, there is death. By what power has it been disposed of? That is the idea of the ark, so that we follow it at a distance. It is not here a question of loving Christ, but a question of reverence, the enjoyment spiritually of His power in holding back the forces of death. The old corn of the land is the other side, that I am in another place. That is what He is as over there, a wonderful thought to grasp! "As the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones", @1 Corinthians 15: 48.
C.E.B. Is not the ark in Jordan typical of Christ in death?
J.T. It is, but as holding back the forces of death, not so much His death as attesting love, but attesting *power*; it is His power. The love matter is settled, it is the power matter that has to be settled in death. But in resurrection He is proved to be the Son of God:
{277}
"marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead", @Romans 1: 4. *The type means simply, that He holds back death as having entered into it*.
C.E.B. There was no Jordan there.
J.T. It was forced back. As soon as the priests feet touched the waters -- they touched the waters -- then the Jordan went back. If we got the great general idea of the types, our souls would be established. We begin with the idea of God's love in Christ; that is the Lord's supper. There were no stones taken out of the Red Sea, nor was death itself set aside; it was there, only a way made through. There was no ark at the Red Sea. But when you come to Jordan there is the ark; and the distance between the people and it has to be maintained. Then, as the feet of the priests touched the waters, they go back. When the people arrived, the waters were out of sight. But the ark is there; *it* is not out of sight, and every Israelite, as he passed over, passed by it; and it remained till every one had passed over. That is to say, Christ entered into death to abolish it for us, that we might pass over, but it is all a matter of faith, entered into and maintained by the Spirit. The order is one, two, three. You begin with God in Christ, that is, the volume of His love, the shining out of His love in Christ; but then, we begin to meet obstacles, and that is where the ark comes in as a question of power.
J.J. Why do you say the Supper is at the Red Sea?
J.T. Because it is after we cross the Red Sea that we get the covenant -- not immediately after -- what God is to us.
Ques. Is that why the apostle in @Romans 8 says that he is persuaded that nothing can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord?
J.T. He is triumphant there. I wish that the brethren would grasp the thought of *power*. Our position in the assembly is not theoretic; there is real power there;
{278}
the power of death is held up, but only for faith. The Jordan returned and overflowed its banks again, when the ark came out.
P.H.H. In @Joshua 4 it says first that "The waters of the Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah" (verse 7), and then later it says, "On dry land did Israel come over this Jordan; because Jehovah your God dried up the waters of the Jordan from before you, until ye had passed over" (verses 22, 23). Is that what you have in mind?
J.T. That is right: "until ye had passed over". The thought is that God has the saints in His mind, He wants them over, and the power has dealt with what is in our way. The taking up of new ground shows that power is there to remove what hinders.
Ques. Are you connecting the "over" with liberation, and the ark in the midst of Jordan more with a provisional idea with that in view? For the moment, death is held up in view of reaching the other side.
J.T. That is the bearing of the death of Christ during the faith period. In the millennium, death will be abolished publicly; but it runs through the faith period, it is not literally abolished, it is there yet. In fact, it says that Satan has "the might of death" (@Hebrews 2: 14), but still he is annulled. That does not mean he is entirely destroyed, but that his power is gone for faith. The Spirit is the power that works in us; what wrought in Christ works in us, and unless we have those two thoughts together, it is merely theoretic.
Rem. It has been said that the Red Sea and the Jordan coalesce in the mind of God, but not in the experience of the believer.
J.T. That is true. From @Numbers 21 onward, the Spirit is recognised, and the Jordan has no force at all; but it is only a theory, unless we lay hold of the great fact that it is by the same power exactly in which God wrought in Christ in raising Him from the dead.
W.W. In connection with the Red Sea, you pointed
{279}
out that the ark was not there. It seems as if the cloud of glory was the central feature there, but at the Jordan it is the ark.
J.T. The glory cloud was there before they came to the Red Sea, as soon as the people began to move, so they were "baptised unto Moses in the cloud", @1 Corinthians 10: 2. That is the Spirit. It is not God here caring for His people, but the ark is *Christ* apprehended, so that, when they first moved from Horeb, instead of the glory leading, it was the ark that led; meaning that Christ stepped out, knowing the insuperable difficulties before the people. "The ark of the covenant of Jehovah went before them in the three days journey", @Numbers 10: 33. It is a question of power. But when you come to @Numbers 21, there is the judgment of sin in the flesh which was in the way. God has dealt with that in the cross, the lifting up of the Son of man was that; that thing is dealt with, and the Spirit is recognised formally in song: "Rise up, well! sing unto it", and from that point there is movement. The glory cloud and the tabernacle are not much in view after that; it is a question of what is seen by those having the Spirit: "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God", and the ark in Jordan is in relation to that. I now see it is the Person of Christ, known in my soul, as He deals with this great obstacle in my way. I believe most of us would admit that we are afraid of death; it is one of the last things we get rid of.
Ques. Nothing could be seen at the Jordan except the ark. Is it a question of what we are looking at?
J.T. That is, you are not afraid of death.
Rem. I wondered if it would link with "we see not yet all things subjected to him" -- we are not looking at that -- "but we see Jesus". It is a question of what we see.
J.T. Stephen was surrounded by death in the most dreadful way, but he saw "the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God", @Acts 7: 55. We
{280}
have to learn to ignore the thing; it is a thing actually there, but it is not there *for us* at all.
A.L. The disciples were quite right in having the doors shut for fear of the Jews. Was that to exclude what would hinder their progress?
J.T. It is an element that has to be excluded; that is your part; you can do that by the Spirit. It is a question of the *doors*, mark you, not the door, meaning that our hearts are shut to that element.
E.G. Would @Hebrews 2: 14, 15 refer to what you have in mind? "Since therefore the children partake of blood and flesh, he also, in like manner, took part in the same, that through death he might annul him who has the might of death, that is, the devil; and might set free all those who through fear of death through the whole of their life were subject to bondage".
J.T. That is the idea, set free from the fear of death. As I was remarking, how much fear of death there is! If I sit down with the fear of death I do not go over.
C.E.B. Has the thought of the twelve stones any bearing on the matter?
J.T. They were put there by Joshua, not by the direction of the twelve men. It is the Lord, as it were, rendering us testimony that He has been there, and that we have been there, too, and that we have come out from the same spot where the feet of the priests stood. It is life out of death; that is the thing.
D.L.H. It used to be said that the Red Sea was Christ's death for us, and the Jordan was our death with Christ; that is surely true.
J.T. It is true; but we must bear in mind that the ark was standing there until they all passed over.
D.L.H. Otherwise I do not see how we could enter into it, if there were not the sense that He is standing there.
J.T. The fear of death in the hearts of the brethren does not belong to the assembly. When I come to the Jordan I do not see any death, I am entirely superior
{281}
to it. It is not that it is not there, but there is superiority to it in the power of the Spirit.
Ques. Was Mary Magdalene one in whom the fear of death had gone? She was prepared to wait there, and was the vessel to receive that testimony from the Lord.
J.T. She was there in great affection, but in darkness really. She was looking for the Lord in the tomb; she was not over Jordan; she thought He was still dead, and it took her a long time to get rid of the thought. But Peter and John accepted that He was out of the grave. In principle they were over.
J.O.S. Is it the force of the apostle's prayer in @Ephesians 1?
J.T. Well, @Ephesians 3 fits in too. We are to know the exceeding greatness of His power in @Ephesians 1, the power "in which he wrought in the Christ in raising him from among the dead" (verse 20); but in @Ephesians 3 it is the Spirit of the Father strengthening us in the inner man. Death is not there for one so strengthened. He does not deny he is in flesh and blood conditions, but he is outside and free from it, and that is where any enjoyment in the assembly really lies; we are in complete freedom and do not see death -- we are not conscious of it.
Rem. You said this fear of death may be at the root of the lack of liberty when we are together, we cannot see the end of ourselves. If we looked where Stephen looked, we would be more in liberty.
J.T. He was not looking at the stones. No doubt he felt them, but he was superior to all. What a man he was! The Holy Spirit was visibly there in that man.
W.W. Is that the way the glory becomes a known reality in our souls?
J.T. We get the expression attached to the ark; it was Jehovah's glory. He "gave his strength into captivity, and his glory into the hand of the oppressor", @Psalm 78: 61. But the glory that enters into the Lord's Supper is at the *beginning of the wilderness; it is what*
{282}
*God is to us*. Then the Spirit comes into view by experience, for in the way the Spirit is first spoken of in @Exodus 17 it does not say the people drank of it, though the water was there for them. It is in @Numbers 20 they drank of it; the Holy Spirit becomes a known thing, and you drink it, as it were. Then they sing unto it; the full enjoyment of the Spirit is celebrated; and after that the movement is aside from the movements of the tabernacle and the glory; it is a movement by the Spirit: "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God". Then there is the ark at the Jordan as holding back the power of death so that the saints are happily together, their spirits entirely free of death. It is not a theory, it is a reality, and then, consequent upon that, you have the old corn of the land; and there is not a word about the ark till you come to Jericho. It is a question of what Christ is as belonging to heaven; the "old corn" is what He is in heaven.
C.T.L. Would you mind saying how you bring those things in at the Supper?
J.T. It is a question of spiritual power. Most of us do not touch it at all. It is not a question of what we sing and speak of, but the actual entrance in freedom consciously from death. There *could* be no opposition in connection with the old corn. That is what God is opening up to us, to get us on to the heavenly ground where Christ is known according as He is known in heaven. God is leading us on to it, so that the thought of heaven should become familiar to us.
C.T.L. We need the Lord Himself after the Supper, to enter into it.
J.T. He comes in in the way of support, but the brethren will recognise it is right that the Holy Spirit is to be apprehended in relation to the covenant, and then in relation to the Father -- the Spirit of adoption. What we have said hinges on those two thoughts.
J.J. When the apostle said in @1 Corinthians 12 that
{283}
we "have all been given to drink of one Spirit", did he mean the Spirit of the covenant?
J.T. I think so. Drinking always implies satisfaction. A great step towards what we are speaking of, that is, we are in the assembly without any grievance; we have got satisfaction.
Rem. We are not called to face the article of death in the morning meeting.
J.T. Well, you should face it before you come. Have you faced it? I do not know of anything that we put off longer than the actual facing of the article of death. It is those that do so that come into what we are speaking of.
D.L.H. It is remarkable that beloved J.N.D. in Canada was brought through some illness to the point of death, and I remember him saying that when he came to it he faced it, and found he was over it with Christ.
J.T. I have no doubt he was; his hymns would indicate it.
Ques. In speaking of death have you in mind everything that would hinder our entrance into this new position?
J.T. That is right.
N.K.M. Do you suggest that in our state of soul we should have passed over Jordan when we come together to break bread?
J.T. We enter on things individually, and when we come together in assembly, what we have attained stands by us. It is an individual matter, as far as I see; but if I have entered, when I sit down in the assembly it stands by me, and I am able to be there according to God. So, in facing death, can I say, "I am crucified with Christ"? That is taking root downwards. For instance, in @Romans 6 we are said to be planted in the likeness of His death, but that is not as deep as being crucified with Him. It is when I come to the full apprehension of my meanness as after the flesh, and accept it, and
{284}
say as the apostle does further on, "if any way I arrive at the resurrection from among the dead", @Philippians 3: 11. When this is true, then I have passed over, and in the assembly I am free. What a power there is in that!
Ques. Would that be like @John 12, Mary with her pound of ointment?
J.T. That enters into what we are saying.
H.P.W. The arriving in @Philippians 3 is now, is it not?
J.T. Quite so, you arrive at the resurrection by the power of God through faith.
D.L.H. Is it not important to recognise that the setting of the Supper is in the wilderness, but that it takes us into what is abiding and eternal?
J.T. Yes, and that is the reason why, in Matthew and Mark, after drinking out of the cup, the Lord expounds the covenant; and then they sing a hymn, and go to the mount of Olives. The change of position is there.
J.J. Where does the Captain of the Lord's hosts come in (@Joshua 5)?
J.T. That is for conflict in the heavenlies, and Jericho comes in in that connection -- the overthrow of the world. You come to see that not only is death abolished, but the world is overthrown; but in Joshua we do not have assembly service at all. We come to the old corn of the land, but we have to wait in the types for David and Solomon for assembly service.
F.I. Which side of the Jordan do you put the singing of the hymn?
J.T. The wilderness side. It was in Jerusalem they sang. In this setting, Jerusalem is the sphere of opposition, where the power of evil is; and going out of Jerusalem is a change of position to a place that does not suggest opposition -- to Olivet.
D.L.H. So it says, "Having sung a hymn, they went out to the mount of Olives".
J.T. It is very beautiful as you partake of the Supper
{285}
to recognise the Lord as the Mediator of the covenant, "The Lord is the Spirit, but where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty", @2 Corinthians 3: 17. You celebrate Him as effecting the covenant, not only in dying, but by the Spirit in our hearts, and that is involved in @2 Corinthians 3.
P.H.H. Would the singing of the hymn be the outcome of resting under the cloud, the glory of the covenant?
J.T. It was after He had expounded the covenant, they are set free and they move.
Ques. Would you say that Paul and Silas were over Jordan in @Acts 16?
J.T. That is a very fine illustration of it. The Spirit of God peculiarly depicts the scene for us, leaving nothing out that made it terrible; and yet at midnight, when they might be weak, it says that they sang praises to God -- a wonderful testimony to the power that takes us over Jordan.
Rem. They would make good preachers of the gospel!
J.T. You can see how it enters into the epistle to the Philippians.
W.W. What place has the feast of tabernacles in @Nehemiah 8?
J.T. The feast of tabernacles means that we love one another, and are living near to one another; we do not wish to live at a distance from one another. They dwelt in booths according to the wilderness experience.
J.J. What part of the New Testament would you liken to the old corn of the land?
J.T. John, I think. John quotes the Lord as saying, "the Son of man who is in heaven" (chapter 3: 13). Chapter 6 is "where he was before" (verse 62), but in chapter 3 it is "who *is* in heaven". The preposition does not mean that He entered there, but that He is indigenous to the place. He belongs there, and so, in chapter 20 He says, "I ascend to my Father". He goes
{286}
up in His own right, and comes into the company, not as the ark of the covenant, but as having gone up into heaven.
D.L.H. And would not the statement in @John 16: "he shall receive of mine and shall announce it to you" (verse 14), be the old corn of the land?
J.T. Just so, it is what is up there.
{287}
THE INHERITANCE
@Joshua 18: 7; @Joshua 13: 14, 33; @Joshua 14: 3 - 5
In reading these scriptures I have in mind to show that the inheritance which God gives to His people culminates in Himself; His great end being that He may be all in all. In detailing what He has for His people under the heading of 'Inheritance'. He has in mind the normal expectation of men, and that in accepting the gospel there is something tangible -- something that the human heart can regard as its own. God takes account of this, and comes down to the lowest level of such desires on the part of those who believe.
When Peter made inquiries from the Lord Jesus as to what place he and his fellow disciples should have -- they having left all -- the Lord specified what they should have, but left out the greatest thought: that is, that they should have God. He left that out designedly, for it would not have added anything to the value of the inheritance in the minds of Peter and his fellow disciples *at that time*. He said, "There is no one who has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and for the sake of the gospel, that shall not receive a hundredfold now in this time [that is, it would be immediate, having also with it persecutions] ... and in the coming age life eternal", @Mark 10: 29, 30. And so it is that, in commissioning Paul, the Lord said that the believer should receive an inheritance among the sanctified -- that is an immediate thing; not something in the distance, but an immediate inheritance. Indeed, such is needed for the deliverance of the soul from its position and status in this world, all of which stand in the way of the believer; and divine consideration leaves nothing out in providing what is calculated in any degree to aid the believer in his deliverance from, and his exit out of, the world. For deliverance out of the
{288}
world is contemplated, not as a mere theoretic thing, but that each one should emerge in a satisfied way, understanding that he has recompense.
Paul again, in writing to the Corinthians, brings forward this side that there are things which "eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him", and that they are "revealed to us by his Spirit", @1 Corinthians 2: 9, 10. The Holy Spirit has revealed them, who, as it is further said, searches "the depths of God". Thus, dear brethren, you can see how God comes down, as we believe, to our level, however low it may be, and graciously and tenderly furnishes us with every item -- every legitimate thing that may be useful in our deliverance and in our maintenance and preservation in running the race that is set before us. Later in the christian experience, *God* becomes entirely regarded as an inheritance; and, when I say 'later', I do not mean necessarily a great number of years, for in the progress of souls, some are much more rapid than others. Indeed, God looks for quick results; I do not think He has any pleasure in the slothfulness of some of us; not that He does not appreciate any little bit of movement in our souls, but He indicates that, if room is made for Him, He can bring about quick results in us.
We have, for instance, in the Thessalonians, remarkable results after a few weeks, and so in many other instances that one might furnish. God looks for quick results, and, where they are found, He does not fail to notice them and to approve and reward by a sense of His pleasure in those who are moving on rapidly, but steadily. When I say *rapidly*, beloved brethren, I would speak especially to the young; God looks for regular, steady proportionate movement, not only in intelligence but in affection and in the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. He looks for perfection, which implies that all the senses spiritually are developed.
Well now, to further illustrate what I am speaking
{289}
of as to the slothfulness of the saints in coming to the great end that God has in mind, namely, that He is to be all in all, I would refer to Abraham, the great father of believers. As Jehovah said to him, "I am thy shield, thy exceeding great reward" (@Genesis 15: 1), immediately Abraham says, "Lord Jehovah, what wilt thou give me?" And God got down to his side at once. He will never fail to respond to any legitimate claim on our side, whatever it be, and we ought to take notice of this, especially young christians. Indeed, God would not shrink to take the ground of obligation towards us; He loves to be tested in that way, and, as I said, comes down to the lowest level of faith -- *not lower than that*. And so He takes Abraham out and asks him to look at the stars. I suppose no astronomer ever got such a view as Abraham did; God was beside him, not to occupy him with the great orbs and their distance from one another -- they are there just provisionally for us, and when the need is over they will be disposed of, and astronomy will cease to be of any use. But He says, "number the stars, if thou be able to number them". It is God graciously getting down alongside the man of faith, and He says virtually, 'If I am not enough for you, then I will give you something that you will value, some legitimate thing': and the legitimate thing was a great posterity, plenty of it. God never stints us in things that are legitimate, although guarding us from what might damage us; but He gave promise to Abraham of plenty of what he saw -- He said, "So shall thy seed be!"
Having said all that so that you might see clearly what I have in mind, I come to the book of Joshua, which is the great inheritance book for faith; and I have in mind to show that the Levites are just *all* the saints, only viewed as refined; quality taking the place of quantity -- that is the idea. That is to say, Judah is Levi; Reuben is Levi -- and so all the tribes, as in @Deuteronomy 33; Benjamin, Joseph, Zebulun, Issachar,
{290}
Gad, Dan, Naphtali and Asher -- they are all Levi. In other words, God has in His mind that a refining process is to proceed, and it is to the end that He will be all to us. The Lord Jesus, having brought about subjection, delivers up the kingdom to Him who is God *and* Father, so that God may be all in all (@1 Corinthians 15: 28). He Himself, beloved -- wonderful to say -- takes the place of subjection, the Lord Jesus, the Son indeed, that God may be all in all. And God is never diverted from that, never for one moment is He diverted: in all His activities amongst us from Pentecost till now, that is what He is working for. As I said, He comes down to the weakest of us, the shallowest, and assures us that He has plenty for us, that no legitimate desire will be left ungratified, but all the time He is adopting His own way by the Spirit that, after all, He Himself should be the supreme inheritance of the soul.
To refer to the book of Joshua, I may say -- as no doubt many of you know -- that the inheritances given to the tribes, with the exception of Levi, are what I might call territorial. I use that word so as to help you to follow what I have in mind, and you will see, I think, before I have done, that the more you come to the knowledge of God the less territorial you are -- the less geographical you are. I find it extremely difficult to get rid of geography; in one sense, we should not; in another sense, we should. I have used the word 'territorial' -- the Spirit of God indicates it -- so that the brethren can follow intelligently. The territorial inheritance comes under three heads: first, what Moses gave -- which every true believer has -- to the two and a half tribes. This typically is what comes under the authority of Christ, it alludes to the kingdom, and involves His lordship.
Persons who are a bit refractory and who prefer to retain certain things in this world, status and the like, God may get down alongside them and accede to their wish; but, in acceding to the wish of such, as Moses did
{291}
to the two and a half tribes, Moses maintained that the unity must never be broken, forty thousand of them must go over -- and they did go over, so that the twelve tribes were represented in an unbroken way in the twelve stones at Gilgal. Yet, sorrowful to say, these forty thousand, having been subject to Joshua, returned to their own territory; territorial inheritance was everything to them, neither Jehovah nor His house were first with them, nor were they governed by love of the inheritance amongst the brethren, in its true spiritual significance -- yet God gave them an inheritance.
Then, the second is what Joshua and Eleazar gave at Gilgal; the great territorial inheritance of Judah and Joseph comes under that head, meaning, I apprehend, that believers who are deeper in their apprehension of divine things go over Jordan, not to return. There are believers like that, whose living associations are to be where God is, where God's house is, and they know something about Jordan. Would that the Lord might help us to a little better knowledge of Jordan! -- in itself the most remarkable of rivers; but think of what it is spiritually! What it is to have a place with Christ in the bottom of it and to come up thence and to have a place at Gilgal with the brethren; it is there the reproach of Egypt is rolled away, and one is clear of every stigma, so that he can lift up his head in that world where God is, as belonging to it; as in a sense indigenous to it, as Christ is, for "as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones", @1 Corinthians 15: 48. What a wonderful thought, beloved! How can any christian think of going over there and returning? It is the divine sphere, the sphere that divine love has prepared for us.
So Judah and Joseph -- the half tribe of Manasseh with Ephraim -- obtain their inheritance from Joshua and Eleazar at Gilgal. You can understand, dear brethren, without my saying much more as to that, what preparations, what adjustment marked these tribes, and
{292}
what comes out in both of these tribes is an appreciation of the inheritance -- they valued it. We have in Caleb that element of faith and intelligence that would have what was promised, nothing less; however great the difficulties in making it good, he would have it, and he obtained it; and his daughter comes in as a beautiful model for young sisters, who would have, not only the south land, most pleasing as was the aspect, but she must have springs of water -- and she has the upper springs and the nether springs. And then, in the case of the daughters of Zelophehad, they had a similar claim, as it were, a claim that God respects with the utmost pleasure. "The daughters of Zelophehad", He said, "speak right": it was pleasing to God that they wanted an inheritance among their brethren. Well, that is how the matter stands.
Then the remaining seven tribes get their inheritance from Joshua and Eleazar at Shiloh, that is, in the house of God. I mention these general facts so that you can see, dear brethren, how the matter stands. A territorial inheritance, that is, that which you wish, that which you claim, that which you see is for you and which God gives to you with pleasure, comes under these three heads; it is for us to see under which head we range. I myself prefer to be amongst those who get their inheritance at Gilgal.
Having said that, I want to come back to what I said as to Levi. You have in him the idea of spiritual refinement: quantity given up -- surrendered, as I may say -- for quality. Not that God will not have numbers; I believe that the numbers of the blest are a matter of counsel. There is nothing haphazard with God, beloved; in God's counsels everything is perfected, and I believe, if there are to be many brethren, amongst whom the Lord Jesus is to be the Firstborn, there will be no more and no less than divine counsels purposed. But there will be many -- and, when God speaks of many, there *will* be many -- and they will be entirely according
{293}
to the requirements of God, they will be all conformed to the image of His Son, they will be all after His quality too, I am making full allowance for His deity, which is ever to be guarded, but, viewing Him as Man, the sons will be all like Him, and He will be the Firstborn amongst them; there will not be a shade of disparity between the glorious Firstborn of God and His brethren -- the Son and the many sons.
Well now, I want to show you that Levi represents this side. Whilst God's counsels cannot fail, yet the work of God will proceed. Ministry is very largely to show how it proceeds, so that what hinders might be removed, and that the Holy Spirit might be ungrieved and unhampered in His service towards us. In the well-known passage in @Hebrews 12, we are said to have come to many things, amongst them "the assembly of the firstborn ... registered in heaven". I have selected that one item of the list in that remarkable passage because I think, beloved brethren, it fits in at the end of the days. It is next to God Himself, as you will notice, in the passage, and alludes to the very best in heaven. You say, I would like to examine all this and see these people. Beloved brethren, what God is seeking to do today is to show that we all belong to these people, every one of us, as having faith, young and old; and the more we see it the less we shall be occupied with numbers in themselves -- not that every soul is not delightful to God, however many there may be -- but we are occupied with refinement, and with what is great in God's account, what is entirely according to His mind, that is, persons, every one of them a firstborn. You could never get that in an ordinary family, it is reserved for the family of God. There will be others, for every family in heaven and earth is to be named of the Father, but the first one, as mentioned in @Hebrews 12 -- which comes next to God Himself -- is the assembly of the firstborn ones enregistered in heaven -- we have come to that. We are not to think
{294}
we are far away. Indeed, I do not think we should think we are far away from any of the items in that wonderful list of things we have come to.
I have been speaking of Levi, and it is to Levi that allusion is made, in this assembly of firstborn ones, and one would challenge oneself. What do I know of those people? Who are they? Whence are they? How have they been formed? Ah, that is the secret of this wonderful dispensation, and it ought to thrill our hearts. We shall see in that coming day the great handiwork of God as He brings out His best -- this assembly of firstborn ones "registered in heaven". Presently we shall enter that realm literally, the Lord Jesus is about to come, as the Scripture says: "the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord", @1 Thessalonians 4: 16, 17. All will be entirely according to the mind of God, every one a firstborn, every one able to lift up his head in the dignity of a firstborn.
Well now, dear brethren, I want to just show briefly, from the four passages in Joshua, what attaches to the movements of the Levites, that is, ourselves, viewed as having the priesthood. The first shows that the inheritance is the priesthood, and the question arises, who will take it up? You will notice that Levi, in the book of Joshua, is almost synonymous with priesthood, indeed, the only service of the Levites, I might say, in the book of Joshua, is in connection with carrying the ark; and what a glorious position to be found in; carrying the ark in the presence of the power of evil closing in around us on every hand! In Joshua the ark is the power of God; what else will stand by us, beloved brethren? We read in chapter 8 that as they bore the ark, all Israel and their elders and their judges were on
{295}
this side and on that side of the ark. May the Lord bring us to that position, delivering us from all partisan feeling to take up our position on this side and on that side of the ark. What can overwhelm us? What can harm us? The ark in our midst is the power of God; we are all, as it were, around it -- what can touch us? But the priests the levites are bearing the ark; not only are we round about it, but we are supporting it, as it were -- that is the position.
Well now, the priesthood is the first thing I had in mind as to inheritance. It is an inheritance for every brother and sister here and everywhere. Mark you, it is an *inheritance* -- it contemplates present and millennial conditions. Priesthood is a mediatorial thought; when there is no evil to contend with, no corruption, priesthood will be no longer in view; but for the moment it is an inheritance, and it is to be valued. The saints are viewed as having this great function as over against a territorial inheritance. Do we all take it up, beloved? God is urging it. He is urging that the service should continue whatever the external conditions, and it can only continue as Levi accepts his inheritance, that is, the priesthood: it belongs to every christian.
Then the next I would mention are the sacrifices of Jehovah made by fire. We do not feed on priesthood, but we do feed on the sacrifices, and what a great thing it is, dear brethren, to feed on the food that God feeds on -- that is the idea -- and we thus become accustomed to God, and thus our constitutions are built up after God, and we find ourselves at home with Him, and strong in His inheritance; for we are living on the sacrifices of God made by fire, that is, the sacrifices ascending to God in all the savour of Christ. It is the side of the inheritance that furnishes food. If we are to function as priests, we must partake of priestly food, and priestly food is that on which, speaking reverently, the blessed God feeds. It is a question of Christ, of the
{296}
offerings made by fire, and what goes up in sweet savour to God from the altar.
Finally, in the end of the thirteenth chapter, we have the statement that the Lord God of Israel is the inheritance of Levi. Now that is the great end, dear brethren, that I have in mind. In addition to this, in the next chapter, He gave them cities, it says, to dwell in. Whilst we have no territorial inheritance, there are dwelling-places: some of us can happily speak of these dwelling-places; they are for the moment provisional, but they are very happy dwelling-places; as we move about, beloved brethren, we find cities to dwell in. The more we apprehend our heavenly calling, the more will our houses be, as it were, dwelling-places for the levites, and the more will the local companies, our gatherings, be happy spiritual dwelling-places for the saints -- cities to dwell in, provisional indeed, but heaven brought down; the levites represent what is heavenly. They had cities to dwell in, cities suitable to God. The cattle were outside, as it reads, "suburbs for their cattle and for their substance". The two and a half tribes on the other side of the Jordan thought more of their cattle than themselves; not so the levites of God, their cattle have no part here. God provides for the cattle and the substance: the dwelling-places of the levites, the cities, are spiritual realms, places where heaven is brought down; so that as there, we become accustomed, dear brethren, to heaven, and when we get there we are not away from home. One longs for the experience of the place designed in eternal counsels, where one shall be quite at home, no stranger; and I believe all this is brought about as we understand that the "cities to dwell in" are just provisional, but no less in principle than what we are coming into, for the blessed Spirit of God here is the earnest of all that is above -- our inheritance. Then what is above? Let us learn to dismiss material thoughts and to be spiritual. The thought of heaven requires the greatest attention by
{297}
the brethren, for I am persuaded -- and I know it in my own mind and heart -- that we are extremely material. And so the understanding of the assembly in its present provisional constitution is to qualify us for a realm that is entirely spiritual, where God is all and in all.
In the thirty-third verse of @Joshua 13 it says, "Jehovah the God of Israel is their inheritance". Have we come to that, dear brethren, in the assembly? When the tabernacle was set up, and anointed, the glory filled it and the cloud covered it. What was that glory? Who could define it? No one, it is beyond us. It is God saying to us, I want all this place for Myself. Not that He shuts the saints out -- it is that God may be all and in all. There is nothing to intrude, and God would say, I want the whole sphere, and He fills it; the glory filled the tabernacle, and the temple too; for as the temple was finished the ark was brought in, and the priests sounded with the trumpets to make one sound, and the glory filled the temple, and the priests could not enter. You say, Why could not the priests enter? It is just this, dear brethren, as I understand it, that the official side is unnecessary where God fills all. If God fills us completely there is nothing official needed; God is all and He fills all -- that is the great thought. So that it says, "that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God", @Ephesians 3: 19. Marvellous thought! There is no need for authority to be brought forward there (not that it is not there), and there is no need for the official priesthood. God is there; He is there as the supreme object of the heart and mind, and He fills all -- God is all: as it says, "that God may be all in all".
That is what I had in mind, dear brethren, that the Lord might help us forward as regards the service of God "in assembly", that we might see the end in view and be less occupied with what we are given and more occupied with the Giver -- with God: "For of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be glory for ever. Amen".
{298}
THE POWER OF GOD
@Exodus 7: 14 - 17; @Exodus 14: 15 - 18; @Exodus 17: 9 - 13; @Numbers 11: 16 - 17; @Numbers 10: 33 - 36
In reading these scriptures, dear brethren, I have in mind to speak about *power*, but in thinking of 'power' we have to be discerning so as not to mistake the power of Satan for the power of God. The antichrist coming in presently -- the way being prepared for him now -- will be marked by power, but the power that is from beneath; nevertheless, such power as shall deceive men, except the elect of God. All shall be deceived, for he comes "with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness" (@2 Thessalonians 2: 9, 10). These lying wonders are apparent at the present time in a limited way, so that the world is becoming accustomed to them and admires them. Hence in undertaking to speak on this subject of power, it is perhaps excusable if I warn the brethren, so that we may be able to distinguish between the power of God which works in us, and the power of Satan which works in the world.
We learn in 1 Corinthians that the christian assembly was invaded, even in those early days, by the power of the devil, so that the apostle had to give instruction to the saints as to how that power was to be discerned, and how the power of God was to be discerned. He says, "no one, speaking in the power of the Spirit of God, says, Curse on Jesus; and no one can say. Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit", @1 Corinthians 12: 3. We do well to become accustomed to the Spirit in this respect, so that, in addressing the Lord, we do so feelingly and with affection. The Spirit will never fail us as we are thus governed in speaking to the Lord, and in speaking to Him He ever comes in to lend power to our use of those adorable words, "Lord Jesus"!
In speaking of this power -- the power of God -- I
{299}
am obliged to allude, not only to what is called dynamic power -- actual, active power -- but also to power in the sense of authority. The adoption of official terms or references denoting power must be a dead letter aside from the actual power that God furnishes to support those terms; so that in Scripture the two thoughts run together; that is to say, the idea of conferred or delegated authority here upon earth, and the idea of actual power by which it is supported. Hence the Lord says, "But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, he said to the paralysed man, I say to thee, Arise, and take up thy little couch and go to thine house", @Luke 5: 24. The two ideas run together there, and they should never really be separated with us. God has furnished us with power in an unlimited way. The Corinthians, as I remarked, were setting it aside in the bringing in of human ability, and that principle has grown until it has completely set aside the Spirit of God in the public profession. The official terms to some extent remain, but they are not supported by the power of the Spirit of God, and so we need the word, "For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power" (@1 Corinthians 4: 20), and as the apostle says, "my word and my preaching, not in persuasive words of wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power: that your faith might not stand in men's wisdom, but in God's power", @1 Corinthians 2: 4, 5.
I have the New Testament, I need not say, in mind, as my remarks indicate, but I find liberty in turning to the types because they amplify, as we have often remarked, that which is presented in the New Testament. So I selected these scriptures, all relative to the great servant who stands out in the Old Testament without an equal in this respect; a man who is spoken of in the New Testament as faithful in all God's house (@Hebrews 3: 2), a remarkable honour conferred on this great servant. No one else is thus spoken of, and we may well take him up as an example. But then, I have
{300}
him in mind more as a type of how power is exercised, whether on the part of the Lord Jesus or of His servants, for the same principles apply; the principles that governed our Lord Jesus Christ in His service in this world remain, and are to characterise all who are in the service until the end. So that what I have to say will be applicable particularly to those who are in active service, as we speak. The service is within the range of all; no believer should hold himself exempt from the responsibility of service, and I may add what may perhaps be new to some, that in this service, however small, the idea of being representative of God should never be out of sight. This, I need not say, lends dignity to the service, a dignity proper to it. The very youngest may thus find himself or herself representative of God in service, and from what I hope I may be able to say, you will see that for this you must make room for the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God is viewed as coming into the believer, indwelling him for inward power and enjoyment, and also as coming upon him for dignity, far different from that which marks so-called religious power in this world.
I want to show how this power works, firstly, against the power of Satan in the world; secondly, against the power of Satan in death; thirdly, against the power of Satan in the flesh of the believer; and fourthly, in the government of God in the ordering of His house, in the exercise of which, as I have already said, Moses was the great and honoured instrument; and then finally and collaterally with what I have been saying, there is the exercise of power, as seen in the ark, in patient love without the assertion of any official authority. Without this last -- named feature, the former ones must be of little value. So I wish you to bear in mind, as to the subject before us, that there are two collateral lines; that which is connected with official authority and that which is connected with self-sacrificing love, the love that will serve without a commission where need exists.
{301}
First of all, Moses, like each of us, had to be disciplined and educated into the exercise of his great office; and it is in the understanding of what he went through, that you will follow what I have been saying, and what I hope to say. He had experience on the mount with God. As he was about to be commissioned and sent into Egypt, he had peculiar experiences. He is directed by Jehovah to cast his rod upon the ground -- a very remarkable thought -- a rod which he had been accustomed to use in his varied experience with sheep, but which being cast upon the ground, became a serpent. What an extraordinary thing that I have been using that which is capable of being turned into a serpent! The capabilities are sorrowful -- that one may be engaged in service or in some employment that can be thus turned into a directly adverse power. This is very solemn; but it was an educational matter, and the direction was to take the serpent by the tail, which Moses did, and it became a rod in his hand. It is something first of all released -- and who is there here that has not experienced something of being released from the control of God? The desire for it is natural with us, and so the colt of which we have often heard was well tied, referring to young christians or the young children of christians. The position is irksome, and the desire for release is strong, but God would remind us that release from legitimate, wholesome, godly control means that I may come under adverse control -- satanic control.
But the rod is taken back by Moses; it is taken by the tail, and becomes a rod again -- what it had been, something useful. It is thus taken back as recovered and brought under divine control, to be used of God. It is manhood restored -- again in the hand of God, in subjection and dependence. This is in Christ, and now in the believer through redemption. Henceforth this very rod is to be the symbol of the authority of the great Mediator. It is humbling but wholesome to have
{302}
to admit that one has been under the power of Satan, but how great the moral victory that, as taken back by the hand of God in Christ, one is now a vessel of His power. And so Moses has to say to Pharaoh with this power. Each of us has to say to the god of this world. It is a question of having to do with satanic power in the world. We are released from its control through the gospel, and in coming under the authority of Christ we get the Holy Spirit. All this is implied in the rod taken back, and hence it is a symbol of the power by which Satan's power in the world is overcome.
It is an experimental matter, not merely theoretic. The power of Satan in the world is a very real thing, and believers have to do with it, and can only hope to cope with it as overcoming it on this line. The details are well known to most of us, if not all, as to how Pharaoh's power was broken. Young believers do well to notice this, that it is a question of overcoming the power of Satan in the world; then as regards servants, they should see that in their service they are not to encounter the enemy in a timid or hesitating way; they approach by the front door, so to speak. Moses is directed to face Pharaoh as he came down to the river. The river was the source of his strength and glory, and in the very presence of it Moses faces Pharaoh and declares that the issues are between God and himself, and that the rod that he had in his hand, would cause the river to become blood -- a gruesome and terrible thought, which in result became a fact. One could say much about it; it is alluded to even in the book of Revelation, but I only refer to the exercise of the power of God in the saints against the power of Satan in the world.
The next thing is the power of Satan in death. I fear many christians are afraid of death. In speaking of death thus, I include the Jordan, for the Red Sea and Jordan coalesce in this respect, but it is still a question of power in the believer. Power in Christ, of course,
{303}
for it was through Him as entering into death that Satan's power by death was annulled. But the power that raised Christ from the dead is the same power that works *in us*; so that the overthrow of Satan's power in death depends for its *realisation* by us on the power of the Spirit. It is not a mere matter of light. Light points to it, but it is in the power of the Spirit that I am free, and I see that Satan is overthrown in it. At the Red Sea, while a way through was made, the waters -- death -- were still visible; but when I come to the Jordan they are out of view. There was no ark at the Red Sea. Not that Christ was not there; typically, He was there. But it was the exercise of *divine authority* in Christ that overcame there; in Christ risen the believer sees a way out. Death has invaded the rights of God, but the resurrection of Christ has overthrown its power, and Satan's power through it, so that a way through is made for faith; hence Israel crossed the sea by faith, but at the Jordan death is not in view at all. The believer, in the power of the Spirit, apprehends that he shall never see death, as the Lord said in @John 8: 51. He shall neither taste it, nor see it. It is a very great matter, especially for us who are getting on in years, but for us all -- to become accustomed to the immensity of the overthrow of Satan's power in death.
The Red Sea alludes to death in its *extendedness*. It reigned, we are told, "from Adam until Moses", @Romans 5: 14. That is the idea. It is a great extended thought; its long hold upon man seemed to give it a power that could not be broken. We see in the history from Adam to Moses a man living nine hundred and sixty-nine years, but he dies; the power of Satan in death seemed to be without dispute, but, extended as it was, it gave way typically before the power symbolised in Moses rod -- it was the power of God. The Jordan is not an extended idea; it is a rather condensed one. It is death overflowing its banks, but it is invaded, not by Moses rod; but by the "ark of the covenant of the Lord of
{304}
all the earth". I cannot pursue that; the scriptures which treat of the crossing of the Jordan are familiar to most of us, I only wish to indicate the line upon which believers are to learn the power of God in relation to Satan's power in death.
The next thing is the power of Satan in the flesh. This is something that many of us suffer from, and we do not know just what is the occasion of the suffering. Amalek represents, as we have often heard, and we do well to be always reminded of it, the power of Satan in the believer's flesh. It is really a hidden affair. Joshua comes into view at this point; Christ Himself is beginning to appear in a spiritual way. It is a great day when a believer begins to be spiritual, to get a spiritual glimpse of Christ in this hidden way. The Israelites had tempted the Lord; they had said in effect, Is the Lord among us or not? How often such a query as that arises, especially in young believers, as much as to say the Lord is not among us, and that is exactly what Satan wishes to convey. He wishes to create that sort of atmosphere amongst the people of God, and young ones are, alas! very prone to be on his side in this. The spirit of complaint, the spirit of temptation, the enquiry as to whether the Lord is among us or not -- what a poor state of soul that is! Anyone in such a state needs to see to himself, for Satan is working in his flesh; that is the truth. So we have the rod of Moses again.
Now, whether it be Moses as a type of Christ, or whether it be the intercession of the brethren, especially of the servants who watch over the souls of the saints, it is the same thing, it is a question of authority, of the rod. It is a question here of patient intercession for the young, for all indeed, but especially for the young amongst the people of God. It is a most exercising matter. There is no military glory attached to the service of Moses in this type; military glory attaches to Joshua, who is the leader in the conflict, Moses being a priest on high with his rod. As you are allowing the
{305}
flesh thus to tempt and provoke you, leading you to complain, the Lord would speak authoritatively to you; He would reprimand you. Not indeed that there is much of this in this section of Exodus, but I am speaking practically now. The rod means that in those circumstances will is at work, there is a want of subjection; the authority of the Lord is involved, and we are not stronger than He. But then, His strength here is not against us, but against Satan in our flesh. The great war at Rephidim is that between Joshua, the spiritual leader of the saints, and Satan in the saints -- in this sense. It may seem anomalous to have to speak of Satan in us in any way, seeing we have the Spirit in us, but Satan gets in through the spirit of complaint, and very often through ignorance or want of teaching as to how God has dealt with sin in the flesh. The grand analytical lesson of @Romans 7 is required in order to understand what I am speaking of. But what I am stressing is the power of intercession, the great need for intercession. Moses arms were weak indeed and needed the support of Aaron and Hur; and that may be the case with most of us, but the intercession for the young is to be persevered in. It is not weakness in Christ; He intercedes continually for us and the testimony depends upon it. If we are not preserved, what will become of the testimony? I mean, looking at it from the point of view of needed material, and hence the need for unceasing intercession for the saints that Satan may not succeed. It is an undulating matter, as we well know, but Joshua prevailed. Let no one be discouraged; the intercession of Christ is unceasing on high, and we may reckon on the intercession of the saints; only let our prayer meetings be *indeed* prayer meetings, places where prayer is wont to be made, prayer for the young, that they may learn to use the Spirit of God indwelling them, against Satan, according to the word "ye are not in flesh, but in Spirit, if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you", @Romans 8: 9.
Those of you who have read this chapter 17 of
{306}
Exodus carefully, will have observed that it does *not say* the people drank of the rock here. In @Numbers 20 it says they drank and their cattle, but not so here. It would appear that the Spirit of God would hardly give us credit for drinking, when there is such a state with us that the enemy can invade us and cause complaining and questioning, as to whether the Lord is among us. But then the principle is that the Holy Spirit is there, and we should be touched by this that it is the Holy Spirit come in, not here through a glorified Christ, but through a *suffering* Christ. It is through the sufferings of Christ that the Holy Spirit comes in in @Exodus 17; Moses is to take the rod, and stand by the rock and smite it. This ought to touch our hearts, that the Holy Spirit which we have as power to overcome the flesh, to put to death the deeds of the body, has come to us as the result of Christ suffering for sin. It is solemn to recognise, but He suffered for that very thing that I am allowing the enemy to use within me.
The next thought, as I remarked, is the power that is available for the government of God, the order of God in the assembly. I can only touch on it, but it enters into @Numbers 11. That chapter is one of complaint; and we have to see with sorrow that even Moses is not exempt from the spirit of complaint, reminding us that the most honoured servant of the Lord may at times join in with the complainers against Him. The complaint of Moses brings out what I wish to note, namely, that God measured the requirements exactly, in furnishing him with power for the great service entrusted to him in the house of God. God has measured the exigencies of the testimony, in the assembly. He measured what was needed at Pentecost, what was needed under Paul, what has been needed for every phase of the assembly's history up to the present time, and He has measured what is needed now -- He has made no miscalculation. The error of Moses here, was in assuming that God miscalculated, and that in
{307}
His miscalculation He was unfair. How sorrowful that was! And yet we are not immune; the most spiritual of us is exposed to coming under the influence of the enemy in this way.
So God says, Now I am testing this matter out. But in doing this how considerate He is of His servant! He said, Gather seventy men known to you to the door of the tabernacle and "I will come down and talk with *thee* there". That is, God will always make the most of His servant. He may have to humiliate him or rebuke him, but He will duly respect him. He will be the last to say an unkind word as to a servant; He will be the first to defend the servant. The knowledge of this saves us from looking elsewhere and encourages us to leave ourselves entirely in His hands. So He says, "I will ... talk with thee there". He does not say He would speak to him and the seventy, although they are to be the joint sharers of the power; He says, I will speak to you. That is like God and very beautiful. But while He honours His servant, He would show that He has furnished him liberally for the service; that His measurements were exact; they must be exact. The physical universe is a testimony to the exactness of God's measurements -- and so, too, the tabernacle. So, in meting out to Moses what he needed for his service, God measured with the utmost accuracy, and, we may be sure, gave him more than was necessary; it was, indeed, the Holy Spirit as the passage shows. As to ourselves the power that works in us is the same power that wrought in Christ when God raised Him from the dead. So, the power is taken from Moses and put on the seventy elders. We cannot assume that these seventy men were equal to Moses; they were not, but the power given them was taken from him. It is as if God were to say; Moses, you have misjudged Me, I am not bringing in one atom of power more than I gave to you at the beginning. So it is, beloved, we must not misjudge God, He has furnished us with all
{308}
that is necessary -- and more -- to carry us through. The power He took from Moses was not theoretic, it was real, so that immediately it comes on the seventy they begin to prophesy. God never intends His power to be dormant in His people. He expects it to be active in us, and so they prophesied -- even the two in the camp prophesied.
In conclusion, I want to say a word about the ark. I have already touched upon it. It is one of the greatest subjects in Scripture, for it is a type of no less than Christ, but Christ in a peculiar way. Its measurements are governed by a half; it is a small vessel comparatively, but always suggesting something *more*, and how true that is of Christ! However He is presented, there is always something more in Christ. But I want to show that the first movement of the ark is recorded in this passage in @Numbers 10. Here it does not move by rule or by prescription like the directions given in relation to the tabernacle. It formed part of the great system, and its dignity required that it was to be carried carefully on the shoulders of the Kohathites; not to be leading forward, but in the *midst* of the camps as they moved. But instead of that prescribed movement we have here a beautiful witness, I may say, to the *informal activity of the love of Christ*. His love is too great to be merely formal. The Lord would love to bring Himself before our hearts in this way, that His love moves aside from what I may call ordinary formality. Formality may be right, of course, but love must go outside of bounds of order. I mean to say, love is itself, and the more we give it scope and leave it to itself, the better off we shall be! As the bride says in the Canticles, Do not awaken love "till *it* please" (chapter 2: 7). That is literally how it should read -- it is personified. Were we to know the Lord better in this light, we would be more restful, and more ready to give Him opportunity to serve according to His own way. He said to His own, "I am among you as he that serveth", @Luke 22: 27.
{309}
I do not suppose you could put one single limitation to that. I believe the Lord Jesus would do anything for His disciples that was to be done; and He will do anything that is to be done now for us. It is a question of letting Him move as He may please, and so it says that as Israel moved from the mountain of Jehovah, "the ark of the covenant of Jehovah went before them in the three days journey, to search out a resting-place for them".
It is a very beautiful passage, as showing how divine love moves before us and with us as we journey according to the will of God. It is a principle with God that, as we move, He moves. Of course, He moves before we do, or we should not move at all according to Him, but as we have *light* indicating that we should go forward, and we do so, He goes before us. Thus, under given circumstances, it is your move next. When Israel was to go out of Egypt, God had chosen the time, and made it plain that they were to go; but the next move was theirs, and as they made it, the cloud moved, and not before. Many are waiting for the cloud, and it is right in a sense, but if your way is plain, take it; and, as soon as you take it, you will see, not the cloud only, but the *pillar* of cloud, a volume of testimony that God is there and that He is clearing the way for you. The pillar is the symbol of His presence, and what could be more comforting than the sense that God has moved into your path. You are moving in it, and God moves into it, and leads to a sure issue. And so here, Israel journeyed. Moses would ask Hobab to be eyes to them in the wilderness, but that was a poor thing. How great and glorious it is under such circumstances, as we see the way and move, to see the love of Christ showing itself. For indeed, it is a question not only of guidance and power, but also of love; but then power is there indeed, for the ark is said to have been the power of God and the glory of God. The glory of God is leading. How beautiful is the shining out of God in
{310}
the movements of Jesus! So I would say to anyone, if you have a little bit of light, move in it, and the ark will go before you, so to speak. What company you will be in! What a Leader!
How beautiful is the well-known corresponding passage in the New Testament, in Gethsemane, as Judas came with his band, the Lord knowing all that was going to happen. He knew well what was before Him, but He moved out; He came out to them; and we note sorrowfully that "Judas ... stood with them". The once disciple now stands with the enemies, and when the Lord said, "I am", they "went backward and fell to the ground". He said, "if therefore ye seek me, let these go their way" -- that is the love of Christ expressing itself, but it is the power of Christ, too. It is the glory of God and the power of God, and so here, as they journeyed, "the ark of the covenant of Jehovah went before them in the three days journey, to search out a resting-place for them". I know of no passage, in a way, like it. It is a symbol, as I said, of Christ in His love going out unsolicited, but because you are moving, because I am moving, He moves, and if He moves, the enemies have to go. Thus we need not fear, as we are in the path of the will of God.
Moses comes into priestly function here. As the ark set out, he said, "Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thee". That is a priestly service by the Mediator. Then, consequently, the ark rested -- where can it rest save in a satisfied heart? I can conceive of no resting-place today for the ark save in the satisfied hearts of those who love Christ. Moses said, "Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel". Let us not be afraid of the thousands! God is accustoming us to the thought, we are coming into numbers. Let nobody have any fear as to that, for "Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel?" @Numbers 23: 10. We are coming into numbers, but then,
{311}
what kind of numbers? Those that love God, the thousands of those that love God. How glorious they are! What a company! What society! Very largely the enjoyment of heaven will be because of the presence there of those that love God. What an atmosphere it will be! Christ the centre, and around Him the myriads of those who from Him have learnt how to love, and are formed in it! They are lovers of God, and the lovers of Christ, and the lovers of one another! We shall go up together, as the scripture says: "caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air", to be with Christ, full of holy love, and to be free for ever in that love! As we often sing:
<blockquote>"Nor what is next Thy heart <br>Can we forget; <br>Thy saints, O Lord, with Thee <br>In glory met". (`160:8)</blockquote>
God would accustom us to these things and teach us how the Lord Jesus, having done everything that love could do, comes into His resting-place even now, and as Moses, our Priest says, "Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel".
May God bless these thoughts to us.
{312}
THE HOUR OF LOVE
@John 12: 27 - 30; @1 John 2: 18, 27; @Luke 22: 14 - 20
You will observe the presence in these scriptures of the word "hour". It is because of its presence and significance in them that I have read them, being at the same time, desirous of freedom from mere arbitrariness in the use of words employed in Scripture. Scripture is calculated, not only to instruct the believer as such, but to furnish material for the service of the levites. In both respects it is wonderfully designed, so that the minister finds himself in possession of an inexhaustible supply of material for the ministry to the saints.
The word "hour" in these scriptures is a suggestion of condensation of events into a comparatively small compass of time. Amongst the divisions of time, the hour stands out and is often used for a long period literally, but the word is used to convey to the mind that the period is marked by condensation of thoughts or events, sometimes crises; and what I have in mind is that we should become accustomed to this. We have, for instance, in regard to divisions of time in the book of Revelation a remarkable allusion to the history of Asia, the dreadful darkness of which has so often pressed in upon believers, and why such conditions there should exist and exist so long. Revelation speaks of four angels that are bound in the river Euphrates, "which were prepared for the hour and day and month and year" (chapter 9: 15). Everything is scheduled with God, and however much apparent delay there may be in His public ways, the believer is taught that even in great dark Asia things are scheduled even to the hour. So that as that hour arrives, everything will be manifested, and the universe will see that in His wise government God has held things as they are.
I refer to it because of the word 'hour', and what an
{313}
hour can be as entering into the great public ways of God, soon now to come to full fruition; for the book of Revelation is intended, among other things, to bring us into accord with His mind as to what is now imminent. Great public occurrences are now near, and that book is intended to bring the saints into accord with God, as sitting upon His throne and dealing with those nations belonging to the world of Noah. His public relations will be according to His covenant with Noah; for the rainbow is there, and everything will be seen in all those dark places of the earth to work out in perfect accord with that rainbow, with the covenant that it represents -- God's faithfulness to His creation. There is already a testimony to it in the assembly, for the commission, according to Mark, given to the Lord's servants as He ascended up to heaven, was that they should "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation". There are two distinct thoughts there, the one involving opposition and suffering, and the other involving the faithfulness of God with His creation.
Now, if we are to be with God as to His public ways, we shall need to learn what I am speaking of; we shall need to understand compression of thoughts, and of circumstances, whether good or bad, and we shall need to learn how to go through them -- for we are called upon to go through them. Some, indeed, we shall not go through. The Lord specifically promises the assembly at Philadelphia that He will keep her (implying the whole assembly) from the hour of trial. That is a terrible hour. It is not exactly Jacob's trouble, although, like it, it is a trial that is to come upon all the world to try those that dwell upon the earth -- a very solemn matter, a warning indeed to all who are disposed to be earth-dwellers. There is a terrible hour of trial imminent, coming upon all such, on all earth-dwellers, but to the faithful seen in Philadelphia, that is, the one of the seven phases of the assembly marked by love for Christ
{314}
and keeping His word, there is a promise that they will be kept out of that hour; they will not be called to pass through it. The intimation, indeed, is clear enough, according to the Lord's way of intimation in those symbolical addresses in @Revelation 2 and 3, that He means the assembly. The assembly is near to His heart, and wherever He finds two or three in accord with it, He can bring in the whole thought. So that, "where two or three", as He says, "are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them", @Matthew 18: 20. He promises to keep us out of the hour of trial which is to come upon all the world to try those that dwell on the earth. That is a comforting promise, and implies that the Lord personally will come and rapture us, as we often have it -- a thought which should be ever burning in our hearts. He will come Himself. Rebecca brought to Isaac is not a type of the rapture; the servant of Abraham is a type of that service which brings us to Christ *now* in the assembly, but presently the Lord Himself, as He says, shall descend -- He comes for us.
I want to enlarge on this thought from the sacred and holy theme of the Lord's own sufferings in Gethsemane and on the cross. Hardly, indeed, am I able to deal with such a subject, for, as has often been remarked, it is more for holy contemplation than for ministry, but still it is part of the truth relative to Christ; and the sufferings of Christ are one of the greatest and most extensive themes in Scripture. Scripture is full of them, and so one would seek from the Lord grace to say a word, so that we might learn from Him, as we have to in everything; how to be in a crisis, how to go through it -- for this involves not only the entrance into it, but the going through it, and the coming out of it. We have had already before us today, dear brethren, the Lord entering into *His* hour; this hour He speaks of as causing soul trouble to Him, and how unspeakable were the events before Him, events that stirred Him
{315}
to such depths. His soul was troubled, but we noted that, in entering upon this solemn moment, He spoke to His Father. Entering into Gethsemane, we are told that He disposed of His disciples, saying to them, "Sit here until I go away and pray yonder". The Lord would thus call us, as it were, into nearness to Him; He would honour us in disposing of us, according to His wisdom, in the scene of His sufferings. Then He makes His selection; that is to say, He always reserves His sovereign right in regard of us, and there must be no complaint as to this, for it is in infinite wisdom. He selects three, Peter and the sons of Zebedee, trusted ones, to be with Him, and so He enters into Gethsemane. I speak of Gethsemane in this way so as to make the scene vivid to your minds, and to enlist your sympathies with the Sufferer, for we are to be brought to His side, as it were, to learn something, and to breathe the atmosphere of the place. There is no place like Gethsemane; it stands alone; it is the place of supreme pressure to Christ, and I speak of it, as I said, to draw you into it, so that we might breathe the atmosphere of His sufferings.
John, whilst he does not mention Gethsemane, mentions what it means, and, in accord with the thought of the inwardness that was his as in the bosom of Jesus, presents the thought in this setting. The Lord says, "Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour; but for this cause came I unto this hour". I wish you, dear brethren, just to picture the setting of this from the beloved disciple. It is surrounded with the greatest events and suggestions. We have the resurrection of Lazarus; we have the Lord's acceptance outwardly in Jerusalem as He entered into it; we have the Greeks coming up, and the Lord's remark, "The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified". That is a deferred hour, another hour, not the one I am speaking of. It is a deferred hour, an hour when He would be accepted in
{316}
Jerusalem -- glorious anticipation -- an hour when the gentiles will own His rightful sway, and when the saved of the nations will acknowledge Him. But then He says, "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone". He would have remained alone aside from His entrance into death, falling into the ground and dying -- a remarkable figure of the reality of His death: "but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit". All these great things enter into this position.
So the Lord proceeds to say, "Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour". You see how He entered into it. He entered into it with the appeal to His Father, and, as we learn from Luke, as He comes out of the forsaking, He again says, "Father". So we have the example from Himself as to how to enter into and come out of crises. He says, "what shall I say?" How this challenges one's heart! If one has a definite purpose in this world, determined to go through and reach his end, he has got only one mind, and that is to do his own will. But not so Jesus. Whilst He rightly and holily recoiled from the hour, yet He says, "Father, glorify thy name", and "for this cause came I unto this hour". There was a definite purpose with Him to carry out the Father's will, and, dear brethren, we shall go through every crisis in our histories and glorify God in them as we proceed on these lines. As we weigh things over in the presence of God, how wholesome it is to challenge the heart: "what shall I say?" The Lord says, "save me from this hour", but then He further says immediately "for this cause came I *unto* this hour". What for? To glorify the Father. Every crisis in our histories is to that end.
I want to pass on to the hour that John presents in his epistle, he is speaking to the little children. John under the guidance of the Spirit divides the saints into grades, and addresses them as fathers, young men, and little children, and what he says to the little children
{317}
involves an hour. The character of the hour is danger, and it is "the last hour". You may say it has now lasted centuries. Yes, but in the mind of the Spirit it was the last hour, and the evidence of it was that antichrist was known to be coming, and that already there were many. This is a word for young christians peculiarly, for they are exposed to anti-Christian influences, especially teaching, more than older ones. It is a great general matter, running on to the end, and in it the little children are called upon to take note of the dangers involved. It is an hour including most extraordinary events. We are now at the end, and condensation marks the moment. The rapidity with which things happen and change in the world; the rapidity with which things change in the religious world; the succession of great events involving changes -- these things are in view and pass on to the multiplication of antichrists: "many antichrists", he says. Now, the young are called upon to face this. It is a question of danger, of being deceived, of darkness, of the enemy's power to divert the young by what seems to be like Christ -- antichrist taking on the form of imitation.
You will understand that this is a very different matter from what I have been speaking of. It is not the Lord's sufferings now, but it is a crisis, and the young are to learn from the Lord how to face this, how to approach the Father; and so John says to the little children, "I write unto you ... because ye have known the Father" (verse 13). One of the most precious heritages is that even the youngest believer is regarded as knowing the Father. The fathers know Him that is from the beginning; the young men are strong and have the word of God abiding in them, and so the apostle not only writes to them as to their immediate circumstances, but he says, "I *have written* unto you, fathers ... I have written unto you, young men ..."; but he does not say it in this formal way to the little children. It is as if he were to say to these, Every word
{318}
I say to you must have a present bearing; you are so exposed, you need to be exhorted as to current dangers; I am not writing something to you in a book to place on your shelves -- you will not read it -- I must speak to you directly; I must keep on speaking to you. That is the principle. We may thank God for the things that *have been* written. I do. I am sure every spiritual brother and sister here thanks God for his bookcase, full of holy ministry that has been written, but the Spirit of God would urge us to *read* it. Many do not read. The pressure of the time, indeed, interferes with reading, but then in a crisis I must face the difficulties. The difficulties are owned but *overcome*; and if we face the difficulty as to time for reading, we shall overcome it, and we shall learn to be fathers and young men; that is to say, those who have things written to them and left with them as it were. Would to God that the profitable things that have been written were more circulated, and that there were a better appetite for them! They are foundational, they furnish us with this very thing that I am speaking of in view of the "last hour". The bearing of them is the "last hour"; the precious written ministry of the last hundred years is a great heritage. The apostle John says, "I have written unto you, fathers ... I have written unto you, young men". What has been written is provision for us in the continual conflict for the truth. That John does *not* say, in the same formal way, I have written to you, little children, is a suggestion that young people do not read much, that they cannot be trusted to read, that they must be spoken to as to current circumstances. It is not, indeed, to suggest that they are not christians, for he says that they have the unction (verse 27). In this address, from verse 18, he would encourage the little children by saying that they are really christians, they know the Father, they can speak to the Father, and they have the unction. He speaks of that two or three times. He says, "I have not written unto you because
{319}
ye know not the truth, but because ye know it". There is not a young christian here that does not know the truth; and that you know it adds to your responsibility; the Spirit of God is speaking to you because you know it. Then the knowledge of it is to be maintained and kept intact. The unction renders this possible. The Colossians were in danger of adding other things. They knew the truth; and the apostle praises them for the order that marked them; but he saw they were in danger of "philosophy and vain deceit". Not that I would say they were little children, but even they were capable of being influenced by the corrupt products of the cultivated human mind, and that is the point here -- what the antichrists are saying. So the apostle John in our scripture urges on the young to pay attention to the Holy Spirit which they had received, the unction which they had received from the Holy One. Look into your hearts, young people, and see what state is there, whether the Holy Spirit is grieved or whether there is a holy abode for Him.
This is how the christendom-wide crisis is to be met. It has been on since John's time, and you can understand how acute it is now. These little children are somewhat like the Thessalonians; and it is a matter of interest and instruction that it is to the Thessalonians the apostle Paul writes about antichrist. Bright and marked christians as they were of a few weeks old, they were distressed by false teachers; and that is the danger with all young people. So I would urge that you face this matter, bringing the Father and the Spirit into it by prayer. The Lord Himself said, "when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret", @Matthew 6: 6. That is the great way of meeting Satan's efforts through the antichrists, and the Spirit gives understanding. The Thessalonians are touchingly taken account of by the apostle. He does not address them as an apostle; he says, "Paul and Silvanus, and Timotheus" --
{320}
men known to you, men who have been amongst you, men whom you have loved, men whom you know have the tenderest feelings for you, these are the ones writing to you. They are addressed as "in God the Father", and not only in God the Father severally, but as an assembly in God the Father. They had learned to walk together, young though they were, and to have part in the assembly, to work out assembly matters together -- how pleasing to the Father!
That is the position in this crisis, and what is urged, dear young people, as I said before, is the unction. It is what you have *received*, and if you have received it, what use are you making of it? Why did you receive it? 'What have you in the house?' was enquired of old by Elisha, @2 Kings 4: 2. It is for you to look into this matter and see what you have to meet the crisis. So, in verse 27, the apostle says, "yourselves"; that is, there are those outside who are under anti-christian influence. What kind of people are they? The apostle says, "They went out from us". Why? Because "they were not of us". The apostles represented God. But then, he says later, "*We* are of God" (chapter 4: 6), and not only so, but he says as to the saints, "Ye are of God" (verse 4). Let us not take any other ground; let us not begin to say, I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, I am of Luther, I am of Wesley. No, we must not say that. If we do, we do damage to our souls, and, indeed, in this respect become like the anti-Christian world. The great thing is that we are of God. The apostles say "*They* are of the world", the anti-Christian teachers; but then he says, "Ye are of God". What dignity! So the apostle Paul says, "of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption", @1 Corinthians 1: 30. How independent of the world we are as "of God"!
So verse 27, as I said, brings in "yourselves". How suggestive that is, meaning christians, those who have the unction, those who have the Spirit! It is beautiful
{321}
to see young men or young women as together conversing about divine things. And in what manner? As having the unction, marked by Spiritual dignity in their communications. How different from the rubbish that is often common amongst christians! "Yourselves" have the unction, and you do not need any other. The Spirit of God is the preservative from the antichristian world. Through Him we are the preserved in Jesus Christ.
In closing, I must refer to the well-known passage I have read from Luke. Perhaps I have read it as much as anyone here, and I never tire of those verses 14 to 20. It is a very different hour. Not now the hour of Christ's sufferings, nor the hour of antichrist; it is the hour of *love*, and how attractive it is! And how compressed things are in it! I will tell you what will come out presently as the fulness of those verses -- the heavenly city; what will illumine the universe and, in a sense, fill it, is the outcome of those verses, and so, I just invite you to look at them for a moment -- they present the hour of love. There is such a time. Outside there is murderous hatred; inside, the calendar has on it this hour. Let us get into it; let us live in it. Why should it be made a matter of three or six months? In the spiritual calendar this hour is weekly. Luke looks at it thus and says: "the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread", @Acts 20: 7. I wonder if anyone within the sound of my voice here is not in that "we". I urge you to get into that "we". I am quoting from the New Translation. Luke includes himself, and lets us see what great persons were there, persons that we shall all meet in heaven; we shall sit down with them, and speak of love known in a world of wickedness and hatred, but now in its own place, for love has its home. This world is not the home of love; it is an exotic in it, and yet it is sustained in this world. It is a great triumph that love, which is of God, is present and operative in this world.
{322}
The love of Christ which passeth knowledge is known in and by the assembly.
Luke in @Acts 20 tells us of certain persons that were present on the occasion of the Lord's supper being celebrated at Troas, and he says there were many lights in that upper room. It was a glorious affair, not like Belshazzar's feast with its iniquitous conduct of debauchery and worldly glory. No, it is the place of holy love, where divine light shines, and where Paul, the representative of heaven's best, discourses till midnight. Did anyone there, outside of Eutychus, complain of the length of the address? There is no evidence of this. Alas for Eutychus! -- and yet not alas! for, after all, love made the most of the matter: "love never fails". How important to be in the realm of love even if you fail; it will do its best for you. See what it made of that boy! He became enfolded in the arms of love, and love of the best quality. It was no less than that of Paul, and he delivered him to them, but he was alive -- his life was in him; he was resuscitated in the power of love, and brought back into the hour of love. They took him away "not a little comforted", not now a youth, but a *boy*, that is, a great potentiality, the outcome of the energy of love.
I would urge everyone here to get into that realm, the place of love. So "when the hour was come", we are told in these verses in Luke, the Lord placed Himself at table "and the twelve apostles with him". You may say, Why the apostles? Why not Mary Magdalene, and all the rest? There is wisdom in it. The Lord virtually says to us, I want you to know what this hour really is, and to that end you must have accredited *witness* to it, so that it may never be misrepresented or marred. Those men are seen in @Acts 1, in the upper room in Jerusalem, and their presence is the guarantee that nothing contrary to Christ will be admitted. Later, Jude has to say, "These are spots in your love-feasts" (verse 12). They could not have been where the apostles,
{323}
Mary and the other women, and the brethren of Jesus had their place. That is the reason, as I understand it, why He places Himself at table with the twelve apostles; He has accredited witnesses. We must have the thing as it was; and, so that it should be so amongst the gentiles, the Lord gave it to Paul, one thoroughly trustworthy, who delivered to the Corinthians what the Lord delivered to him. There was nothing added to it. Thank God, we have it now, stripped of all man's superstitions and additions. The Lord has done it, and it is delivered to us so that we might have the conditions of this hour of love, and that we might grow in love and become ready for the great time of love in its own home in heaven. That is what is in view, beloved brethren, in these last days. Let us be awake to it, and let no one ignore this hour, for it is in truth the guarantee against the hour of antichrist of which I have been speaking.
The hour, as you will note, is after the passover, for Luke carefully distinguishes the passover from the Lord's supper. Of course, the hour here is primarily that for the passover, but the Lord has taken it on, and has made it the hour of His supper for us. It was a great hour in Israel, but the Lord is here putting into it what never had been there before. He is transferring it into the time of His supper, which is to continue; the hour into which His love for the assembly enters and God's love for His people, that is to say, the bread and the cup, the presentation to our hearts of the love of Christ for us; and the love of God for us. The Holy Spirit coming into it, the latter involves a ministry which is called the ministry of glory: "how shall not rather the ministry of the Spirit subsist in glory?" @2 Corinthians 3: 8. It is the love of God made effective in our hearts in this hour, and it garrisons us in view of the general darkness and prepares us for that eternity into which we are about to enter. The day of eternity is spoken of, for God graciously comes into our way of thinking. But eternity *is* eternity; it is, in a sense,
{324}
*God*, for we are to be "filled even to all the fulness of God", @Ephesians 3: 19; that is our home in eternity. It is what God is in Christ. He is on God's side and on our side. Think of having Him on our side! This time of love is Christ on our side; He comes in and is with us. He placed Himself at table with them. He places Himself alongside of us and would lead us into the realm that He knows so well, that eternal home of love.
May God bless these simple thoughts to us in view of the last hour!
{325}
*Pages 325 - 427 "We have an Altar". U.S.A. and Great Britain 1934 (Volume 120)*.
"WE HAVE AN ALTAR" (1)
@Hebrews 13: 10 - 16; @Genesis 8: 20 - 22
J.T. I was thinking of the subject of *altars*, that is, the various thoughts connected with the altar as seen in Scripture. Perhaps we may confine our remarks in the main this morning to the New Testament, and then touch a little on this first mention of the altar in the Old Testament, leading up to the great features of it running through Exodus, which, for want of time, will have to be the terminus of our enquiry; indeed what follows throughout the Old Testament is largely detail as to what is found in Exodus. Genesis and Exodus furnish the needed instruction as to the subject.
W.M. What do you think would be the corresponding teaching of the altar to the gentiles?
J.T. It is a question of worship. There are other things, but generally, as in @Hebrews 13, it is what christians have as over against what is current among men. The idea of the altar was prevalent among the nations as well as among the Jews, even to the extent of applying it to the Unknown, an altar "To the unknown God". The general thought is that it is a symbol of worship, but worship involving sacrifice on the part of the worshipper.
W.M. That verse in Philippians would correspond: "For *we* are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh", @Philippians 3: 3.
J.T. Yes, "We are", it is what "we *are*" there. In Hebrews it is what we *have*. That is, you have the idea of the worshippers and that in connection with which they worship. So that in Revelation the altar is measured -- the temple and the altar and the worshippers. The altar is what is before us now.
{326}
W.M. What is the altar we have?
J.T. It is the outward symbol of worship. It involves the Lord's supper. That is how it works out. It is well to keep the expression here in its own setting. It is in Hebrews, having the Jewish mind in view, but in addressing gentile believers the apostle assumes that they understand what is attached to judaism. He says to the Romans, "for I speak to those knowing law", @Romans 7: 1. It is assumed that we understand, so that the epistle to the Hebrews is not confined to Hebrew christians. It requires, however, that we become intelligent in the vocabulary of the types.
E.G.McA. Nehemiah speaks in chapter 13, of certain who could not speak the Jews language. This he regarded most seriously; but he says, "I purified them from all foreigners".
F.I. Is the altar in Hebrews as high a thought as in Genesis? In Hebrews it is connected with our eating, whereas in Genesis it is more the thought or offering up.
J.T. There is nothing said about Noah having part in what was offered; it was all for God. @Hebrews 13 contemplates that those who have the altar eat of it; others have no right to do this. The Jewish system is treated by way of contrast generally in this epistle, but sometimes types are treated as such, and christians are supposed to be intelligent. What stands so much in our way sometimes is that we are *not* intelligent in these matters, as to the vocabulary of the types. We find that in writing both to the Romans and the Corinthians, the apostle assumes their knowledge of the typical scriptures. And hence we christians of the nations come into the "we" here -- "We have an altar". The point is that we might get into the great heritage that has come to us in such expressions. There are two phrases in the book which help to open it up to us "Let us" and "we have". "We have" is a question of possession, of heritage, and "let us" is that we appropriate
{327}
it and move accordingly. It tends to make us exclusive in shutting out what is current in the way of worldly religion, but embracing all that is of God.
J.C. This would produce the quality you were speaking of in your prayer.
J.T. Exactly. It brings out the thought of exclusiveness. The word is much used as meaning what involves *quality*. The altar here is exclusive in this sense. So verse 9 of our chapter says: "Be not carried away with various and strange doctrines; for it is good that the heart be confirmed with grace, not meats; those who have walked in which have not been profited by them. We have an altar ..." It is a question of eating, but in an exclusive way. To make that clear we might refer to @Leviticus 10: 8: "And Jehovah spoke to Aaron, saying, Thou shalt not drink wine nor strong drink, thou, and thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tent of meeting, lest ye die -- it is an everlasting statute throughout your generations, that ye may put difference between the holy and the unholy, and between unclean and clean, and that ye may teach the children of Israel all the statutes which Jehovah hath spoken to them by the hand of Moses. And Moses spoke to Aaron, and to Eleazar and to Ithamar, his sons that were left. Take the oblation that is left of Jehovah's offerings by fire, and eat it with unleavened bread beside the altar; for it is most holy. And ye shall eat it in a holy place, because it is thy due, and thy sons due, of Jehovah's offerings by fire; for so I am commanded. And the breast of the wave-offering, and the shoulder of the heave-offering, shall ye eat in a clean place, thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee; for as thy due, and thy sons due, are they given of the sacrifices of peace-offerings of the children of Israel", @Leviticus 10: 8 - 14. The holy place and the clean place and the altar are brought together. It is a question of eating, and it is eaten in an exclusive way. We have an apprehension of our great calling and the food that God supplies;
{328}
the food is to be eaten in an exclusive way; according to the directions, in a holy place, beside the altar.
A.N.W. Is chapter 13 an advance on chapter 10?
J.T. The former is the outside position. Chapter 10 is the entrance into the holiest. That is not for eating, that is more for contemplation. Young believers are apt to be distressed at times because of the smallness of things, and overlook the exclusiveness, in the sense of quality, of what we have.
A.N.W. Are you connecting our eating with worship?
J.T. Yes. It is worship in the general thought of it; what was offered on the altar was for God, but those who offered had part in it. It is what *we have*. We shall see in the types, in Genesis and Exodus, how the truth works out towards God, but if we can keep in view now that it is what we *have*, the young people amongst us should get encouragement because of what they have come into. The epistle stresses this, and the altar is amongst the things we have. We have an altar that others have no part in. Each should see what it is and that he has part in it.
W.M. It is an exclusive fellowship.
J.T. Quite so. It is a fellowship which involves mutual responsibility and loyalty to each other. The general thought is that God has part in the altar, but here it is what *we* have.
F.R.A. What gives us the right to eat?
J.T. It is what "we are". It is what this epistle teaches us as to what we are, as he says: "... holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling", @Hebrews 3: 1.
J.C. In @Psalm 26 we have the thought of exclusiveness: "I will wash my hands in innocency, and will encompass thine altar, O Jehovah". Then he goes on to say: "Jehovah, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thy glory dwelleth".
J.T. Hebrews brings out what we have. Both what we have and what God has are brought out in the types.
{329}
For instance, what God has, as food, is developed in @Numbers 28 and 29. Those two chapters provide food for God, speaking reverently, for the whole year. That is for His year as He reckons it. God's year in those chapters is six months and one-half -- ending on the fifteenth day of the seventh month. Of course the daily, weekly, and monthly offerings would run through the solar year, but the holy convocations ended in the seventh month, which has a spiritual significance. He requires or claims *His* bread and *His* offerings. First the morning and evening lamb each day, then His meat-offering and drink-offering, and then the sabbath. The daily portion is not to be diminished because it is the sabbath. The sabbath is increase. Then He has the first of the month -- "In the beginnings of your months", there is an additional offering. Then He has the fourteenth day of the first month. Then "the day of the first-fruits, when ye present a new oblation to Jehovah, after your weeks ...", @Numbers 28: 26. Then He has the first of the seventh month, the tenth of the seventh month, and the fifteenth of the seventh month. That is, during the whole year He has a supply of food.
W.M. All that indicates *God's* part in the altar.
J.T. Yes. *My* bread, the bread of *My* offerings. It is not here the convocations exactly, although they are mentioned, but of the supply of food that God has in the offerings of His people. It is very touching that He has the whole year filled out from us in this way. This passage in Hebrews is *our* side: what *we* have, and that others have no right to it. The pope has no right to it, nor the cardinals, nor has anyone who serves the tabernacle a right to eat of it. It is to bring out how exclusive the true saints of God are, what God has provided for us. It is what *we* (that is, all true saints) have.
S.McC. Would the apostle have that in mind in @1 Corinthians 10, the gentile setting, in bringing out the thought of eating and communion with the altar?
J.T. Exactly. The Corinthians were in danger of
{330}
forfeiting the exclusiveness of the position. He says, If an unbeliever invite you and you are inclined to go, go. But it is a poor thing to be minded to go. He is pointing out that they are in danger of bringing in loose principles by example. Eating of what had been sacrificed idolatrously, this being pointed out, might lead others to think lightly or favourably of idolatry.
Rem. What you are saying would shut out the idea of getting food outside. We are apt to go beyond the borders of that in connection with which food comes to us, whereas this chapter would limit us.
J.T. That is right. What is offered on the altar is to be eaten in a holy place or a clean place. You do not eat it in defiled associations.
A.H.P. Would the altar in Scripture generally be the answer to divinely given light?
J.T. Yes. You can picture how the matter stood when this treatise was written. The christians in Palestine would still contemplate the great system at Jerusalem. A low state of things having crept in amongst them, they would be looking and thinking of what was at Jerusalem. What a big affair it was! Even the apostles said to the Lord, See what stones, what buildings! The Lord says, "Not a stone shall be left here upon a stone which shall not be thrown down", @Matthew 24: 2. This epistle is to provide for those who had faith in view of that. The system at Jerusalem was about to be destroyed, but it had not yet been destroyed. It was there, and the christians evidently were in danger of going back to it. So the epistle is to dignify christianity in the sight of those who have part in it, to bring out its greatness and exclusiveness. The Jewish system was not only judged, but there was something *better*. "Better" is a key word in Hebrews.
Rem. Our chapter says, "Wherefore also Jesus, that he might sanctify the people by his own blood, suffered without the gate", verse 12. Was it that He might sever them from what was inside?
{331}
J.T. Yes. You can see how the Jewish christians were in danger. Look at the Lord suffering outside the camp. Picture the scene in Jerusalem when He went out bearing His cross. He bore it Himself; "he ... suffered without the gate". See who were there. There were jeerers there. There is one group looking at the Lord when He cried, "Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?" They do not understand the very words He says. They say, "This man calls for Elias", @Matthew 27: 47. They did not understand the vocabulary. The Lord did not say 'Elias', but "Eli". That indicates their state and attitude toward the holy Sufferer. Then there is a group of women in the distance. Who are they? They had followed the Lord from Galilee. What do they understand? They understand in measure what is happening. He is suffering there and they are thoroughly with Him. They are outside the camp with *Him*. They are exclusive. They are only a few, but they are there. There were also those who having seen the things that took place smote their breasts and returned to Jerusalem. They did not go outside with *Him*. Then there was another group. The centurion, a Roman officer, was in charge of the crucifixion, and there are others "with him". They, having seen the earthquake and those things that were done, feared greatly, saying, "Truly this man was Son of God". No doubt they noticed that the Lord twice cried with a loud voice. In this He was a different Man from any the centurion had seen die before. And those that were with the centurion take notice of it, "Jesus, having again cried", it says, "with a loud voice". The Spirit of God says that the centurion and those with him were affected, so that they said, "Truly this man was Son of God", @Matthew 27: 54. That is, persons being capable of conversion, of being *immediately* affected by the great facts of this transcending event. So there are the three groups, but the group from Galilee is outside the whole system. If you go and
{332}
converse with those women you will find that they are exclusive. They learned exclusiveness from Jesus. That is the idea here. We must belong to *that* group.
W.M. Exclusiveness was forced upon them.
J.T. They had gone out. They were at a distance, but they had gone outside. They were thoroughly with the Lord, and all that opened up, unfolded by the Spirit, after that, was for them.
Rem. The sisters at Bethany were exclusive when they made *Him* a supper.
J.T. Quite so. It was for Him. Lazarus, Martha, and Mary are the only ones mentioned by name, but there were others present.
W.M. There is a tremendous contrast between these few women who had been absorbed with Him in His rejection, and the great system in Jerusalem.
J.T. Well, I thought the young people should see in the circumstances at the cross what they are brought into, what "we have".
W.M. Hebrews does not speak much of love. It emphasises grace.
J.T. They were in a low state. The writer in the way he presents the truth seeks to lift the Hebrew christians out of their poverty, to acquaint them with their riches, the things they had.
G.McP. Does it show that the exclusiveness of the position is only maintained on the basis of sacrifice?
J.T. Quite so. It is going forth unto Him. There are those women from Galilee. However few they are, we must be with them. The centurion and those that were with him are an indication that the numbers are going to *increase*. A military officer is brought in, as it were, at once. He is the first gentile to acknowledge the Son of God.
W.M. He went beyond the thief in his confession.
J.T. The Spirit of God would not mention it otherwise, "Truly this man was Son of God".
{333}
G.McP. The truth of His Person was established in that testimony.
J.T. Quite so. But the group from Galilee stands out as representative of those who go forth unto Christ without the camp, bearing His reproach. They went the whole way -- outside the camp where He was suffering. The group that did not understand His language say He was calling on Elias, but He was not calling on Elias, not on a man. They suggest that the Lord belonged to a mere human religion, that He was calling on a man. Today we have this in those who call on Mary, or some one like that. He was not doing that -- He was calling on *God*. That is true religion, that is true christianity. He says, "My God". There was a Man able to say, "My God", as dealing with sin. That is the link. Presently He is going to say, "my God and your God". That is the position true christians are brought into.
F.R.A. Would the groups you speak of give us the thought of fellowship or association?
J.T. Yes. Those women from Galilee represent the fellowship which is according to God. John gives you a somewhat different view from Matthew. He gives you the names of the women who were there and he includes himself. It says, "Jesus therefore, seeing his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved, says to his mother, Woman, behold thy son. Then he says unto the disciple, Behold thy mother", @John 19: 26, 27. The Lord from the cross is ordering the fellowship and the family links which were to exist between His mother and John. The point is to be with Him outside the camp where He is suffering. In that position He is ordering things for us. They "stood by the cross of Jesus".
S.McC. Would it not seem in Matthew's gospel that the Lord is ordering these women, not in relation to Jerusalem, but Galilee, in that the appointed place was Galilee?
{334}
J.T. That is right. It is to call attention to our true position, which involves reproach. Matthew, in view of the assembly, is aiming at detaching the people of God from Jerusalem.
G.McP. These women ministered to Him of their substance. There should be living spiritual conditions with us, so that the Lord should be ministered to.
J.T. That enters into the altar. There is sacrifice. They followed Him, and if you follow Matthew's account you will find that, as having followed Him from Galilee to Jerusalem, they are now outside the camp, and the principle in Matthew is that we go to Galilee. The Lord's message to His disciples is, "tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me". So that, according to Matthew, the christian system began in Galilee. This is in view of the assembly, as already said. Luke places it at Jerusalem in view of the gospel. The preaching was to begin at Jerusalem. Those women, we may say, are outside the camp bearing His reproach.
W.M. Those who served the tabernacle would not have thought much of them.
W.N. So the great necessity for intelligence as to that of which the altar speaks.
J.T. I think we should appreciate the scene that Matthew depicts. Matthew gives the extremeness of the sufferings and how faith seen in these women accepted it; and then how God was working in relation to it in the centurion and in others. That is the way the dispensation is going on now. There are those outside the camp, and others are being converted by the concurrent testimony. It does not say they joined the women, but God was working in them. Then Joseph of Arimathaea came. He was not equal to those women, but he did what they could not do. He buried the Lord in a suitable sepulchre and with fine linen. He fulfilled the prophecy that He should be with the rich in His death. Having rolled a stone to the door, Joseph went away.
{335}
But "Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary" did not go away. They remained "sitting over against the sepulchre". They represent the normal result of the work of God.
G.McP. Would this be in keeping with Moses as having pitched the tent outside the camp?
J.T. Yes; the exclusive position is in Exodus, where the tent is taken by Moses and placed afar off from the camp. Everyone that sought the Lord went out *there* -- "*to the tent of meeting which was outside the camp*". That is the position.
Ques. Would the exclusive position involve affection or intelligence?
J.T. Both. But the intelligence of these women had to be illumined, so that the chapters that treat of the resurrection, especially in Luke and John, show how they were brought into accord with the whole position. Mary had to be brought into accord with it intelligently, but the affection was already there. You can see the nucleus of the assembly as outside the camp in Matthew.
W.M. Do you not think that the Hebrews were weak christians and therefore were exhorted to go forth? They were not fully identified with the reproach of Christ.
J.T. They had seen better days. Thus they are exhorted here: "Remember your leaders". What they could remember! What glorious times they had had with the apostles!
W.M. They remembered Pentecost.
J.T. And what you find is not simply the revival of what was at Pentecost; there is a tinge of Paul all through this book. That is the recovering element now.
Ques. In the book of the Acts, subsequent to Pentecost, how would the idea of going forth and having the altar work out?
J.T. God in His patience continued on with the Jews, but with Peter and all the others the principle of going forth was there. They were content to stay in
{336}
relation to the temple to carry out the patience of God. You could not attribute it to them that they were a part of the system. They were in the position of these women. They had gone forth. John adds to that when he says that they were standing by the cross of Jesus. The Lord was regulating everything from the cross. All that would enter into Pentecostal days, but it does not bring out the greatness of Hebrews. It does not bring out that the saints are the brethren of Christ and partakers of the heavenly calling. The golden thread of Paul's ministry runs through Hebrews and the writer says, "We have an altar ..." He is linking himself with them.
Ques. "Let us go forth ..." Hearts having been touched by the love of Christ would respond.
J.T. "We have", and "let us". "We have" is the heritage, "Let us go forth ..." is responsibility in regard of it. It is true leadership. The writer certainly *had* gone forth. He was, as it were, in the position of the women that followed the Lord from Galilee, and he is calling on others to follow.
J.C. Does outside the camp suggest an exclusive position in that way? As standing by the cross they were actually at the altar.
J.T. You can see the position. Those women that came from Galilee had gone forth without the camp. That was their position. There was Christ on the altar -- offering *Himself*. The heritage of those women included all that entered into that position. Exodus and Leviticus open up typically what was in that position. The altar was anointed seven times in Leviticus to call attention to it. And these women have that; we have that.
F.R.A. Would the thought of the camp be that those there had settled down and were not moving?
J.T. Just so. There is no exercise needed in the camp in that sense. Going out is exercise. "Let us go forth". Following from *Galilee* was exercise. So the Lord would keep that up, and He sends a message
{337}
through some of these women that His brethren would see Him in Galilee. The link with Galilee is to be kept up. In Galilee you do not settle down; the Lord came up to them, it says, saying, "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth. Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations ...", @Matthew 28: 18, 19. There is to be no halting; there is continual exercise.
Ques. Referring to Noah, had you in mind the exclusiveness of the position, and hence his altar was in keeping?
J.T. Yes. He represented exclusiveness. Peter says, "into which few, that is, eight souls, were saved through water", @1 Peter 3: 20. That is the "few" of exclusiveness. There were millions, no doubt, that missed it, but Noah and his house were saved in the ark.
W.M. The camp today is regulated with as much military precision as it was in the days of judaism. It is simply man's ordering.
J.T. It is judaism or paganism revived, allied with certain features of christianity. It is a camp where there is military precision, but the exercise belongs to a few. The hierarchy take on the responsibility mainly. It is comforting to nature to be able to hand your matters over to others, but the movement of the women coming from Galilee means that everybody is to be moving as responsible.
A.P.T. "Going forth" is forward movement, not backward. It is to Him.
J.T. You are very definite in what you are doing. You are to go forth against pressure. The whole setting of the altar, that is, in Gethsemane, where it is fully seen as anticipating the cross, indicates that there was terrific pressure there. When they entered Gethsemane, the Lord says, "Sit here until I go away and pray yonder", @Matthew 26: 36. We are to see Him in this pressure and consequent agony, "He takes with him Peter and James and John, and he began to be amazed and oppressed in spirit". He said, "My soul is full of
{338}
grief even unto death". We see the movement of a Man in pressure. We have to understand Gethsemane and the cross to understand the altar. Indeed, what transpired from the time of His arrest until He died especially enters into it.
G.McP. Do you think the Lord contemplated the pressure that would be marshalled against the assembly when he spoke of "hades gates"?
J.T. Quite so.
W.M. Would Peter leaving the ship be Matthew's way of presenting going forth unto Him?
J.T. Exactly. What we should see here is what we have, how it is illustrated in these women, how they had gone forth and what was opened up to them. Exodus, for instance, would, in due course, be opened up to them. The Lord, on the morning of resurrection, begins to open up the truth. It is a question of opening up the truth for those who have gone forth. While the truth corrects us, we never apprehend it fully until *we are in the position to which it applies*. How can people in human systems get the truth of the assembly? It is only when we are in the position to which it applies that we can apprehend it. The Lord began to open up the truth in resurrection, and this service, by the Spirit, goes on all the time.
J.C. Do you suggest that exclusiveness works inside as well as outside in the thought of quality?
J.T. The altar is public. It is properly in the court. It is a public position we are in. People say, See how small you are! You have no bishop nor anyone of any account amongst you. Well, the intelligent christian says, We have something of infinite value that you have *not*, nor can you have where you are. Besides having Christ as the altar, referring to His power in the endurance of suffering, we have Him as Great Priest and Minister of the sanctuary, and this infinitely outweighs the bishops, cathedrals, and choirs.
A.H.P. Do you think we have to learn the altar
{339}
in the way these women had, that is in the Lord Himself in His holy sufferings?
J.T. Yes. He began instruction from the cross itself, as we have noted. The whole area is impregnated with suffering. It is a suffering scene, "Wherefore also Jesus, that he might sanctify the people by his own blood, *suffered* without the gate, therefore let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach". The suffering goes on, but in the suffering there is instruction. He regulates John, He regulates His mother, He regulates the thief, and then as soon as He is risen from the dead He continues His instruction, and it goes on now.
Rem. In @Acts 14 it says, "But there came Jews from Antioch and Iconium, and having persuaded the crowds and stoned Paul ...", verse 19. Is that identified with what you are speaking about? The enemy uses against Paul the same forces that were used against the Lord in the days of His flesh.
J.T. Just so; suffering attaches to the position.
A.P.T. "Bearing his reproach" -- that indicates that there is something in me.
J.T. Yes. The allusion is to His cross. He bore His cross. Then Simon, a Cyrenian, had part in that. Not evidently voluntarily, not what he had premeditated, but he was brought into the great honour of bearing the reproach of Christ at that time. He was father of Alexander and Rufus. So that he was the progenitor of men evidently prominent amongst the saints. I think the allusion is to the acceptance of reproach. If you bear reproach God will honour you.
W.M. It says that they *compelled* Simon.
J.T. Yes, but he bore the cross. He came into this honour. Many of us come into advantages we have not sought after. I should like to have borne that cross! Many of us here can look back and see how we have been brought into privileges. We had not thought of coming into them. It was not premeditated. Simon was coming from the country, and they put the cross of
{340}
Jesus on him, and he bore it, "Bearing his reproach", is really an allusion to the cross. How great a thing it is to have part in that reproach, the reproach of Christ! Jesus bore His own cross, but Simon had part in it. Of Moses it is said, "esteeming the reproach of the Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt", @Hebrews 11: 26.
F.R.A. The four hundred men that went down to the cave of Adullam went down to David. They accepted the conditions in which David was found.
J.T. That is the thought there.
F.I. What "we have" enables us to take up the suffering; "therefore", it says, "let us go forth ... bearing his reproach".
J.T. The position is defined, "We have an altar of which they have no right to eat who serve the tabernacle"; then the sufferings of Christ in the type: "for of those beasts whose blood is carried as sacrifices for sin into the holy of holies by the high priest, of these the bodies are burned outside the camp. Wherefore also Jesus, that he might sanctify the people by his own blood, suffered without the gate: therefore let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach: for we have not here an abiding city, but we seek the coming one. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise continually to God, that is, the fruit of the lips confessing his name". That is christianity. The teaching here includes Leviticus -- the sin-offering, whose blood was carried inside the veil by the priest and put on the mercy-seat. The bodies of those beasts were burned outside the camp. It is God's terrible judgment against sin. That is what enters into this position.
A.P.T. That distinctly links on with the gospel of Matthew. The Lord's expression on the cross, which one utters very feelingly, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" That enters into this side of it, does it not?
{341}
J.T. It contemplates that the believer is brought to understand the full bearing of the sin-offering -- the judgment of God as to sin. The blood of some of the sin-offerings was not carried inside. The priests had such offerings as food. The sin-offering is sometimes brought within our range and connected with the believer's apprehension. The more I know God, the more I see that it refers to Him. It is a question of the majesty of God, and that requires that the bodies of those beasts be burned outside the camp. It requires the forsaking. It is Matthew's side of the truth. Christ was forsaken of God; His judgment required that. Very few believers apprehend that. Our altar carries all that with it, the full apprehension of the bearing of the death of Christ. It is not merely a partial apprehension -- what relieves my conscience -- but what has appeased the majesty of God. This affects the worshippers profoundly.
A.N.W. Would you say a word to distinguish between the thought of eating and offering?
J.T. Offering is God-ward, but eating would allude to the part that came to the priests. For instance, the sin-offering whose blood was carried inside was burnt wholly outside the camp. There were other offerings that were not, the priests had them as their own food. So that what is offered to God is a sacrifice, but I have part in some of it. Some of it comes to the priests. So that when Aaron failed to eat it, Moses reproached him because of his failure, particularly with regard to the sin-offering. We must not fail to eat what belongs to us.
A.P.T. Why?
J.T. Because it is our food. It is to maintain us spiritually according to the position. It is to maintain us in our souls. I believe the secret of the poverty of our worship is that the sin-offering is not understood. Then it goes on to say: "By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise continually to God, that is, the fruit of the lips confessing his name. But of doing
{342}
good and communicating of your substance be not forgetful, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased". That is caring for the saints, the needy, and the like. It all comes under this head. It is remarkable how the idea of the altar runs on to meeting the needs of the saints, "for with such sacrifices God is well pleased". It is practical christianity that the writer is dealing with.
Ques. Is eating the sacrifice connected with service?
J.T. It is. It gives you constitution for the position. If we are to be in the sanctuary we must be supported in it. "They that attend at the altar partake with the altar", @1 Corinthians 9: 13. We live of it. It is remarkable how it works out in giving to the needs of the saints, "with *such* sacrifices God is well pleased". God has part in that. If you give a brother something that he needs, God has part in that. This brings it within the range of every one of us.
Rem. We are exhorted to do so by the example of the Lord Himself. "For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that for your sakes he being rich became poor ...", @2 Corinthians 8: 9. It seems to give colour to the whole idea of giving.
J.T. Yes. All this is that we might see what "we have". It is an exclusive thing, but it is a positive thing. "By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise continually to God, that is, the fruit of the lips confessing his name. But of doing good and communicating of your substance be not forgetful, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased".
W.M. "For we have not here an abiding city, but we seek the coming one".
J.T. The heavenly touch really is connected with Paul. It is Paul that brings out the heavenly city as our *mother*. John deals with it afterwards by itself, and brings it down. It is Paul that brings the thought out properly in christian doctrine. In this book, which probably he wrote, it is said, "for he waited for the city which has foundations, of which God is the artificer
{343}
and constructor", @Hebrews 11: 10.
W.M. He also was a sufferer.
J.T. He aimed to fill up that which was behind of the sufferings of Christ, for His body (@Colossians 1: 24).
W.M. It is not merely conjecture that Paul wrote this epistle. Peter says that Paul "also has written to you", @2 Peter 3: 15.
J.T. The allusion to Timothy, in @Hebrews 13: 23, would also indicate this.
A.P.T. "For we have not here an abiding city, but we seek the coming one", is in keeping with Paul's way of speaking.
{344}
"WE HAVE AN ALTAR" (2)
@Genesis 12: 7, 8; @Genesis 13: 18; @Genesis 22: 9 - 14
J.T. Perhaps the brethren will bear in mind that we did not touch chapter 8 this morning, that is, Noah's altar. It is well to keep it in view because it is the first altar in the Scripture and therefore is important, for in the first mention of anything in Scripture we usually have the general thought of it. We should bear in mind also that, entering on the Old Testament, the thought is just to see what the varied features of the subject are. The basis of our inquiry is the altar that "*we* have". We dwelt on it in the New Testament this morning, although there is much there that we did not note. In general, what came before us is what the christian's altar is. The Old Testament Serves to open up the subject. The practicality of the subject in the New Testament is seen in @Matthew 5, where a believer is contemplated by the Lord as offering a gift at the altar and remembering that his brother has something against him. He leaves his gift there by the altar and goes and is reconciled to his brother, as if the idea is necessarily marred unless those who have part in the altar are one, are united. We have the idea in Matthew again, the altar sanctifying the gift.
W.M. The altar is greater than the gift. The altar sanctifies the gift.
J.T. Yes. In @Matthew 23 the Lord refers to what the scribes and Pharisees said: "Whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gift that is upon it is a debtor", and says, "Fools and blind ones, for which is greater, the gift, or the altar which sanctifies the gift? He therefore that swears by the altar swears by it and by all things that are upon it", @Matthew 23: 18 - 20. This shows how great a thought is conveyed in the altar.
{345}
R.W.S. Did you say this morning that it works out in the Supper?
J.T. I think so. It is the public side. The altar is in the court of the tabernacle, which is in view from without.
A.N.W. Do we have the altar in the tenth of 1 Corinthians, and the Supper in the eleventh chapter?
J.T. That is right. It is the public side of the truth. Therefore it stands in a general way for christian worship. Genesis will help us, I believe, in the order in which we should look at the subject, first in Noah, then Abraham, then Isaac, and then Jacob, each of whom had his altar. Then in the book of Exodus, which indicates the *divine requirement*; things are not left with us in Exodus, but in Genesis the altar is left with the builder, meaning that spontaneity is contemplated, God taking account of our measure and honouring our growth.
W.M. After redemption is accomplished, we have the details of the altar, whereas in Genesis it is the spontaneous side.
J.T. Genesis is to bring out the work of God, what it is in itself. We have to take account of it in that way. But it cannot be left thus indefinitely; so that as God has His people in the wilderness on the ground of redemption He puts forth His requirements. That commends itself to faith, which owns that "of him, and through him, and for him are all things", @Romans 11: 36.
A.N.W. How does Abel, whose offering was acceptable, differ from these that have an altar?
J.T. Abel is not said to have had an altar. The offering was there. The position is not as great as Noah's because the altar is greater than the gift, as we have seen. So that you have an advance in Noah in that he built an altar of his own volition, and that is what Genesis brings out -- what the work of God is as left in that way. If a brother or sister does only what he or she is *required* to do, so far well, but that is
{346}
apt to be legal and of very little moral worth. But if you see him doing something according to God that is not required of him, that indicates the work of God in him. Many do things because they are required to do them, but you have to get behind that and see what marked them before. The work of God always shows itself; there is always a result from it and if people are to be tested we should inquire as to them before special responsibility is imposed.
Rem. In @Revelation 11 you get the temple first and then the altar, before you come to the worshipper. There is moral order.
J.T. That is right. The idea of the altar is what Christ is as enduring judgment, so that Abel was not on the same level as Noah. Noah marks progress in faith.
W.M. I suppose the whole world stood around Noah's offering.
J.T. The creation stands around it yet. The creatorial position of God is in that setting. That stands. He is a faithful Creator, but now He smells a sweet savour which He did not have in Eden.
Ques. "God so loved the world", @John 3: 16. Is that based on the recovery through the death of the Lord Jesus, so that He can really see it in its original idea, that is, as He saw it in the beginning?
J.T. I think so. It is the world taken up afresh. It is an abstract thought. He loved the world. It is what He had in His mind; He is going to fill it with living persons. He made it to be inhabited.
F.I. Would you help us in regard to what you said, that the altar is Christ and therefore it is greater in Noah's case than in Abel's? Does not what Abel offered speak of Christ?
J.T. The *offering* is His intrinsic worth, expressed in the Lamb of God; the altar is moral worth, His enduring power in suffering. It is how He endured suffering; it is Gethsemane really -- Gethsemane and
{347}
the cross. What He is as seen in the altar underlies the expression of His intrinsic worth God-ward. It is difficult to make one greater than the other when both refer to His Person, but His own words would make the altar greater, if we may make comparisons. It opens up a very wide inquiry and is most instructive and needful, for it is doubtful if any of us understand much about the altar. The gift is simpler. The altar is what can sustain, and hence it is made of shittim wood covered over with brass. The shittim wood would denote the bearing power of Christ, and that bearing power went as far as to sustain all the judgment of God executed upon Him. The altar received all the offerings year after year, the fire always burning upon it.
Rem. Even before the Lord died, was not the idea of the altar seen in Him when He said, "Neither do I condemn thee", @John 8: 11? He moved along in His spirit in the light of what He was about to do as the victim.
J.T. Yes, what He would have to sustain. It intensified as He drew near to Gethsemane. It was the power that sustained the pressure that came upon it; without that the offering could not be made. You must have the altar first. The Lord is capable of bearing that pressure, of going through it. Hence the altar is said to have been anointed *seven* times. It is not said that Moses was told to sprinkle the anointing oil on it seven times, but he did (@Leviticus 8: 10). It is one of the instances that bring out the spirituality that was there. You see what is to be endured, you concentrate on that. The altar being there, Christ "by the eternal Spirit offered himself spotless to God", @Hebrews 9: 14. The altar, Priest, and offering are thus seen in His own Person.
G.McP. Mark says that He taught His disciples that He must suffer (@Mark 8).
J.T. The teaching is important. The Lord would teach *us* as to His sufferings.
{348}
F.I. Does the moral worth, as represented in the altar, go as far as the cross?
J.T. Gethsemane is anticipative of the judgment. It is the pressure of Satan in view of it, but the actual judgment was on the cross.
W.M. He "endured the cross", @Hebrews 12: 2.
A.N.W. In @Philippians 2 we have who He was, "subsisting in the form of God ... taking a bondman's form", that would be who He was essentially and "becoming obedient even unto death, and that the death of the cross" would be what He was morally.
J.T. "And that the death of the cross". He went the full length required whatever Sufferings this entailed.
W.M. When He took a bondman's form, is that a moral idea?
J.T. Yes, it was preparatory to all that the will of God required in Him as Man.
A.N.W. I was thinking of the *He, who* He was, then what He did, then what was done to Him -- God having raised and exalted Him.
Ques. A believer "bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus", would that be an altar feature as seen in Paul?
J.T. That is right. It is the idea of what you are sustaining -- "*bearing* about in the body the dying of Jesus", @2 Corinthians 4: 10.
A.N.W. Why must the altar be first?
J.T. Sin having come into the world, you must have bearing power in man to sustain God's judgment in view of redemption. No creature could have that. The more you dwell upon it, the more wonderful is the bearing power of Christ when you think of the judgment *of God*.
W.M. "The Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world", @John 1: 29.
J.T. It brings up the whole question of His sufferings, what He bore. "Who himself bore our sins in his body on the tree", @1 Peter 2: 24. It was not by another.
{349}
It was Himself -- who alone could do it. He does great things otherwise, of course, but everything hinges on this. Without this there could be nothing -- without this great bearing power in the One who could go to the cross and bear the forsaking of God, redemption could not take place.
G.McP. "Jesus Christ, and him crucified", @1 Corinthians 2: 2.
J.T. Just so, "*Him* crucified".
A.P.T. I think it might be helpful if a little more was said on @Matthew 5. It says, "first go, be reconciled to thy brother", @Matthew 5: 24. "First go". It seems to follow on *getting a look at the altar*.
J.T. That is right. "First go", would imply that something hard to bear has to be faced. Your brother has something against you. Maybe you do not deserve that he should have anything against you, but you have to face him. It is a hard thing to face an offended brother. The Lord immediately goes on to speak of "thine *adverse* party".
Ques. The altar is not mentioned in the eighteenth chapter, only in the fifth. Why is that?
J.T. The Lord brings the altar in as regards one offering a gift; as if the altar had reminding power. It brings something to our remembrance; "and *there* shouldest remember that thy brother has something against thee".
Rem. The value of "the brother for whose sake Christ died" (@1 Corinthians 8: 11) would come into our minds as we approach the altar.
J.T. Quite so. If you are a mere religionist, if you worship without spiritual exercise, the altar would not say much to you as you draw near to it. But if you are an exercised man worshipping God, the altar would speak. The altar itself speaks, see @Revelation 16: 7.
Ques. Does it imply that the offering would be unacceptable to God if we offered without having this matter settled?
{350}
J.T. I think so. The altar has its own voice, as we have seen. You leave the gift there. Somebody comes and sees the gift there and says. Whose is that? Well, the offerer has gone off to be reconciled to his brother before offering. There would be a very practical testimony to brotherly feeling and consideration for God in that.
Ques. Does the gift refer only to praise, or to service, too?
J.T. Anything that would take the character of an offering or sacrifice. *Now* it would, of course, be spiritual.
But coming to @Genesis 8, what I think is practical in the passage is *unselfishness* in the offerer. This great thought runs through the Scriptures and increases. It says, "Noah built an altar to Jehovah; and took of every clean animal, and of all clean fowl", (verse 20). He had no consideration as to whether any of the species would be impaired. He was considering for God and he offered of *every* clean animal and of *all* clean fowl.
G.McP. The Lord gave *Himself*.
J.T. The nearer you get to the cross the more unselfishness looms up in greatness, and it must mark every offerer.
F.R.A. What is the difference between Hebrews, "We have an altar", and Abraham and Noah building an altar?
J.T. Genesis is to bring out the work of God before He began to put His people under law. That is, what *they* are doing. If a brother applies for fellowship -- well, what has marked him hitherto? Sometimes you hear of people who wish to come into fellowship for some ulterior motive. Only recently has he begun to think about it. What had he been doing before? Now he is conforming to every requirement, but why so different before? Genesis is full of freshness, the spontaneity of life. That is a leading feature in Genesis.
So here we have the outcome of what Noah was, his
{351}
name signifying rest. He is true to it. Names are often given prophetically in Scripture. I think Noah's was. His father in giving it to him gave the reason why. If a name is given prophetically, then you look for the answer to the prophetic indication. So the odour is "an odour of *rest*".
W.M. It is remarkable how spontaneity is shown in the sacrifices. There was no instruction as to what was clean and unclean at that time, but he seems to know.
J.T. He had evidently learned from God as to what was clean and unclean. He walked with God and would thus know, in measure, what was suitable to Him. You can picture him building the ark from day to day. People would come along and jeer at him. He would be impressed with the uncleanness of men. In taking him up for the great service he executed, God would qualify him in every way.
Rem. Often there is not a verse of Scripture for doing or not doing certain things, but committing ourselves to the fellowship of God's Son, there ought to be a basis on which we can understand and discern instinctively.
J.T. You will be discerning as you answer to the work of God in you. As born again, normally you can distinguish between what is clean and unclean. It is to bring out the work of God. Looking back on your history you say: I had the instinct, I could not put a name on the thing, but now I see it. Now that I have come into the fellowship of God's people I am taught the names of things and I know them.
J.C. So Mary anointed the Lord intuitively.
J.T. She knew what to do. The act arose from herself and it fitted in there perfectly, and that is what you get in these cases in Genesis. What they did is commendable.
Rem. What she was *before* came into that anointing. We do not know how long she had kept it.
J.T. The book of Genesis is illustrated by persons
{352}
finding jewels. Diamonds are such in nature, pearls are such in nature. Well, Exodus is *setting* them, putting them where they shine best. They are not intended to be carried in your pocket. They are to be seen to the best advantage. In Exodus, God is putting them where they make the best showing, that is in His own dwelling. Where can the fruit of His works shine more beautifully than in His own dwelling -- where He is Himself?
G.McP. "The Sanctuary, Lord, that thy hands have prepared", @Exodus 15: 17. Do you think there should be some spiritual indications of contact with the altar amongst those who wish to have fellowship with us?
J.T. Yes. You want to see them when the saints are not looking at them. Is there some ulterior end in view, or is it because they want to be with God's people? Is there evidence of the work of God? Genesis is the spontaneous work of God; Exodus is the fellowship involving divine requirements.
G.McP. Can you tell us how we discern the work of God?
J.T. God makes much of discernment. It is one of the scarcest things among the brethren. It says in @Malachi 3: 18, "And ye shall return and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not". Ye *shall* do it. Discerning between good and evil is the outcome of the exercise of our senses, as we learn from @Hebrews 5: 14.
Rem. @Leviticus 11 distinguishes between the unclean and clean, going into great detail.
J.T. When you come to Exodus and Leviticus, God is not leaving it to us to determine the clean and unclean; His dwelling is in view and all must be according to His mind. But then Noah knew. There is no word as to how he knew, but he knew. He brought them in, too, the clean and the unclean. They all came into the ark. We can understand how God would
{353}
teach him in view of the great service he was to render and the place he was to occupy in the testimony.
Ques. Why was there a much greater number of clean animals -- seven -- and of unclean only two?
J.T. In view of the offerings, no doubt. Noah did not spare any species. He gave of "*every* clean animal, and of *all* clean fowl"; he sacrificed them to God.
W.M. Why does the Spirit emphasise that he took of all?
J.T. I understand that it is unselfishness. If Noah was thinking of the wide creation, all these creatures destroyed, he would say, We need them all, as many as we can keep, but he offered of all the clean species. Of course there were some left of each, for they went into the ark in sevens.
A.H.P. Do you find the same features worked out in David at the end of 1 Chronicles? It tells the abundance of the offerings they gave.
J.T. Quite so. There is great volume there -- thousands of them.
R.W.S. In the beginning Noah, without any instruction, offers the clean creatures only; and after all the instruction, in Malachi, they offer the crippled and diseased to Jehovah.
J.T. Malachi is a sort of terminus. It brings out what the Old Testament developed. It developed love in Jacob and unbrotherliness in Esau. It brought out what God loved and what He hated. He enlarges on the kind of offerings they were making. As you say, they were selfish. They did offer, but they brought the poorest things to God, and that is what Noah would rebuke. He did not consider that way at all. He considered for God, and the far-reachingness of his offering, too, comes in because it is the ground on which the physical creation has stood ever since. We are benefiting by it today, rain coming down, etc.; as the chapter says, "Henceforth, all the days of the earth, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter,
{354}
and day and night, shall not cease", @Genesis 8: 22. There is a fixed order of things. "I will no more ... curse the ground on account of Man". It ought to touch us -- how far-reaching in blessing an unselfish act of this kind may be.
S.McC. In the New Testament Peter speaks of those saved in the ark as *eight*.
J.T. Yes, they went over to a new order of things. That involves formation -- quality.
S.W.P. Is that why there is movement in connection with these Scriptures that you read? Abraham is marked by movement.
J.T. Yes. The worship of God calls for exercise. As already remarked, it is going forth. So that you get here what precedes this incident: "And Noah went out, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons wives with him. All the animals, all the creeping things, and all the fowl -- everything that moves on the earth, after their kinds, went out of the ark" (verses 18, 19). It was not a stagnant nor a dead state, it was living. They were moving according to what was right. Now that the judgment is over they are taking purified ground, they are entering a purified earth.
S.W.P. In Hosea it says, "the thorn and the thistle shall come up upon their altars" (@Hosea 10: 8), because of lack of exercise.
J.T. The worship of God implies a living state of things. People that are stationary are not worshipping -- they are not living. It is the living that praise God. So that, "let us go forth to him", and, "To whom coming ... as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ", @1 Peter 2: 4, 5.
Rem. In Mark the Lord "*goes* indeed, as it is written concerning him", @Mark 14: 21. He is going forth.
J.T. When you come to Abraham you have another thing -- an *appearing*. The work of God is seen throughout Genesis acting of itself, and then able to appreciate
{355}
divine movements, and able to notice what God is doing. This marked Noah, but he did not have an appearing. @Genesis 12: 7 says of Abraham, "And *there* he built an altar to Jehovah who had appeared to him". That is the next thing. In virtue of the work of God in me, I am able to notice how God shows Himself. That is a test to young people. What are their motives? Why are they moving in this direction? Have they an impression of a good meeting when there is a divine manifestation? Are they affected by that? Some talk of what is said, but what is the impression you had? Abraham is the first of whom it is said that he had an appearing.
Ques. Is that the outcome of soul history?
J.T. Yes. The next thing that you do will indicate that you had discerned it. The altar is built to the God who *appeared* to him.
G.McP. Do you discern the appearing in the gospel? The apostle speaks of the grace of God appearing to all men (@Titus 2: 11).
J.T. That is His grace, but still God shines there. But there is more than that in Abraham. It is a question not simply of the gospel but of counsel, the great thoughts of God for you, "Go out of thy land, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, to the land that I will shew thee" (chapter 12: 1). Abraham represents that side of the christian -- God calls him out and tells him about things. He has intimate relations with him. It is a distinct advance on Noah. Later He says, "and there offer him up for a burnt-offering on one of the mountains which I will tell thee of" (chapter 22: 2). And he built an altar to the God who *appeared* to him, as already said. It is the God that appears to me. If I get an impression of this kind I am different at the next meeting I attend.
A.N.W. I am not only thankful now that I am saved, but I have an impression of the One who saved me.
J.T. And I know that He is so interested in me.
{356}
For after all, Abraham was a man of like passions as ourselves. His history is to teach us how God is interested in every one of us. There is no one in this room that God would not appear to. He is so interested that He will show Himself to you, and He has in mind that you should move according to the impression conveyed in the appearing. He first appeared as the God of glory to Abraham -- so that he should get out of his country and move into the land of Canaan.
Ques. Do we get that with the two on the way to Emmaus? They returned and found the eleven.
J.T. That is right. The Lord showed Himself to them. Their contribution the next time they attended a meeting was the outcome of this. The Lord's path on earth was marked by meetings with His own. "The men who have assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us ...", @Acts 1: 21. @Luke 24 speaks of the next meeting and the two from Emmaus have a contribution.
Rem. Is there not a contrast between the previous chapter where it says, "And Terah took Abram ..." (chapter 11: 31), and this chapter where it appears that God is taking him now. He is going to be set free from natural influence.
J.T. It appears that Terah is the leader of the expedition, but God said nothing to Terah about getting out. Now God is taking Abraham on, and He is impressing him with appearings.
E.G.McA. Are there different characteristics in the three passages read?
J.T. Certainly. The first is the appearing, God's *interest in me*. It would establish confidence between Himself and my soul. Then the next thing is what Abraham did at Hebron: "Then Abram moved his tents, and came and dwelt by the oaks of Mamre, which are in Hebron. And he built there an altar to Jehovah", @Genesis 13: 18. That means I am moving on to establishment. I see another world. It is *Hebron*. I am getting
{357}
a view of another world. Later instruction shows that Hebron implies this.
S.W.P. Is appearing connected with revelation? What is the difference?
J.T. It is a question of what the appearing meant, "The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham ...", @Acts 7: 2. The idea is there, that it was *God*. At Hebron there is no appearing. It is now a question of the *place*.
F.R.A. When the Lord appeared to the two on the way to Emmaus they moved.
J.T. Yes. There is movement in every case. In the twelfth chapter, after the first altar is built, it says, "And he removed thence towards the mountain on the east of Bethel" (verse 8). He is not yet at Bethel; in fact, Abraham is never said to be in Bethel, but he is in proximity to it; the idea of it enters into his movements. Then Mamre is that I am looking into another world. It is stability. Division had taken place, for Lot had left him; but he is stabilised.
Rem. The design of each appearing is to influence us in the right direction. Abraham retrograded here.
J.T. He does not go down to Egypt after the altar at Mamre.
A.N.W. The appearance of the Person and what He says makes a great impression on the believer.
Ques. Do you get advancement with Peter in the two appearings, the one at the end of Luke and the one at the end of John?
J.T. In Luke the Lord turned and looked on him, and he went out and wept bitterly -- the second conversion. But in the twenty-first of John he is probed, and gets his commission restored and enlarged. I think that establishment is in connection with Peter: "when once thou hast been restored, confirm thy brethren", @Luke 22: 32.
W.M. When Abraham moved to a certain place, Bethel was in one direction and Ai in the other, Bethel
{358}
being the house of God and Ai the city of defeat and disaster.
J.T. Quite so. Thus the believer in his early movements often does things by instinct, but afterwards he understands that they are under God's ordering. After-history shows what each of these places signifies -- Bethel meaning the house of God and Ai meaning disaster because of self-confidence in the people of God. The mountain which lay between would denote elevation and strength -- these marked Abraham.
E.G.McA. It says, "and there he built an altar to Jehovah, and called on the name of Jehovah" (chapter 12: 8). There is nothing said about his calling on Jehovah at the time of the first altar. Calling on the name of Jehovah is a very great thing. You are showing by your prayers that you are not self-reliant. Calling on the name of the Lord means that I am trusting in His power, not on my own or that of the world. "The name of Jehovah is a strong tower", @Proverbs 18: 10.
J.T. The principle of calling on the name of the Lord came out in Seth. He saw that his son was just a dying creature. What good will he be if God does not do something for him? As Seth calls his son Enosh, "Then people began to call on the name of Jehovah", @Genesis 4: 26. So that Paul says, "for when I am weak, then I am powerful", @2 Corinthians 12: 10.
W.M. If we see stability in the altar, we see weakness and dependence in the offerer.
J.T. Young believers think they can do this and that, not understanding that the flesh profits nothing, but when Enosh is understood as applying to me, I say, If God does not do something, all is hopeless. Thus I begin to call on the name of the Lord.
A.H.P. This would mark those that have come into fellowship.
J.T. Yes. They attend the prayer meeting. They see the needs. What lists of petitions we should have when we come to the prayer meeting! You prove
{359}
through the week how hopeless our position would be if God does not stand by us and act for us. The prayer meeting in an especial way is where we call on the name of the Lord.
A.H.P. Would that be essential to the continuance of the idea of the altar at Hebron?
J.T. Yes. Calling on the name of the Lord brings you to stability, the oaks of Mamre. God has a world of His own, set up on unshakable foundations, which Hebron represents. I am afraid our prayer meetings are often set, religious affairs, whereas we should come with lists of petitions, knowing that *God* can do things for us.
W.M. I remember Mr. Raven saying once that he did not go to a prayer meeting. He said, I go to a meeting for prayer.
J.T. I think we should keep in mind the place where prayers are wont to be made, where they *have been* made, answers to which have been received. God makes us joyful in *His* house of prayer. That is the place where He is. He hears our prayers and He will answer them. It may take years to answer some of them, but you have the assurance in your soul as being heard, that God will answer them.
E.G.McA. At the time of Ezra it says, "And they set the altar on its base; for fear was upon them because of the people of the countries", @Ezra 3: 3. They offered up burnt-offerings to Jehovah. This brings out what the altar is.
Rem. Tell us a little more about the fixed idea in connection with Hebron.
J.T. Hebron means another world which the Lord calls "that world, and the resurrection", @Luke 20: 35. Things are immovable in God's world. There is to be a world set up on the principle of resurrection.
W.M. Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt (@Numbers 13: 23).
{360}
A.P.T. Would that correspond with the epistle to the Colossians?
J.T. Yes. Colossians is Hebron. God had it in mind and now it is established in Christ risen.
E.G.McA. Is that seen in connection with the altar in the twenty-second chapter?
J.T. We can see there the progress that Abraham is making. He had built all these altars of himself. We are not told what he offered up. You will observe that in chapter 12 it is just, "he built an altar" (verse 7), and in verse 8 he "called on the name of Jehovah", and in chapter 13: 18 "he built there an altar to Jehovah". But there is nothing about his offerings. Now God is going to bring out, typically, at least, in this man the greatest thought of offering, the greatest truth as to it that we have. God is going to test him as to offering. God does not say anything to him about building an altar, but He says, "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest, Isaac, and get thee into the land of Moriah, and there offer him up for a burnt-offering on one of the mountains which I will tell thee of" (chapter 22: 2). What will he do? It says, "And Abraham built *the* altar there" (verse 9), which is, I think, remarkable. First of all, he has the wood with him. Isaac is bearing it. It says, "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest, Isaac, and get thee into the land of Moriah, and there offer him up for a burnt-offering on one of the mountains which I will tell thee of. And Abraham rose early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son; and he clave the wood for the burnt-offering, and rose up and went to the place that God had told him of. On the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw the place from afar. And Abraham said to his young men, Abide ye here with the ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you. And Abraham took the wood of the burnt-offering, and laid it on Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand,
{361}
and the knife, and they went both of them together. And Isaac spoke to Abraham his father, and said, My father! And he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood; but where is the sheep for a burnt-offering? And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself with the sheep for a burnt-offering. And they went both of them together. And they came to the place of which God had told him. And Abraham built the altar there ..." Notice that he built *the* altar there. It does not say *an* altar. The Spirit of God puts these things down to show how faith progresses. You come to the great thought of sacrifice and you must have an altar. But it is not simply *an* altar, but *the* altar. There is only one really. This great occasion requires the *full* thought.
Ques. Is the thought of exclusiveness here in that the young men were to abide with the ass?
J.T. I think so. It is going to be between Abraham and his son. It is a wonderful picture. The wood is there, the fire is there, and the knife is there. There is nothing to minimise the ultimate sufferings for someone, and Isaac is carrying the wood himself. It is very remarkable that the victim is himself seen carrying the wood.
W.M. Do you not think there is one thing that differed with Isaac in that he had not the apprehension of what he was to go through?
J.T. Of course he is only a type of what God had in mind; and we cannot say what went on in the young man's soul. It is a wonderful picture of unity between the Father and the Son. "They went both of them together". It is said twice. And it is a place that is shown. It is the first time you get this. We should note also that Abraham uses the word "worship".
W.M. Do you not think the terrible apprehension and suffering were on the father's part?
J.T. It brings out the sacrifice that God made. He "spared not his own Son", @Romans 8: 32.
{362}
G.McP. It is remarkable that worship should be so closely allied to suffering.
J.T. That is what Abraham had in mind. All this enters into Gethsemane, and ought to be in our souls if we are to be worshippers.
A.H.P. Would this chapter correspond with the Lord's words, "the Father seeks such as his worshippers", @John 4: 23? I wondered whether the book itself develops this wonderful feature of the altar, in relation to which worship to God would be truly acceptable.
J.T. I think John brings out the Father and Son going together. The end in view is worshippers.
Rem. All the feelings connected with every expression God-ward would have for its basis this place, mount Moriah. The altar of Jehovah was built there.
J.T. It is a question of what is shown. We are nearing Exodus here, and we are nearing Solomon. It is a shown place, not God showing Himself to me, but of showing me a place.
A.N.W. "We worship *what* we know", @John 4: 22. What does that suggest to you?
J.T. The Lord was alluding to what was in Israel. It is very beautiful that He should say "we" there. The woman called Him a Jew. He did not deny that He was a Jew, but He refers to His deity when He says, "If thou knewest the gift of God and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water", @John 4: 10. He did not however say He was not a Jew. The "we" there would be the "we" of intelligence in Israel.
W.M. Would it be the "we" of identification in the exercises of God's people?
J.T. It was the intelligent worship which was there, so perfectly known to the Lord. So that at the last passover I suppose you get it fully, all that entered into that feast. The Lord would have in His mind Exodus and
{363}
onward. There never was such a passover as that. All that it meant was there. So that He says, "I will not drink at all of the fruit of the vine" (He was drinking then, but He would not do it again) "until the kingdom of God come", @Luke 22: 18.
G.McP. All that was for God's pleasure in Israel was centred in Christ.
J.T. The Father was looking for something *more* than that. "But the hour is coming and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth" (@John 4: 23), and that is what the Lord had in mind in John. Abraham says, "I and the lad will go yonder and worship". What a pair they were!
A.P.T. Are you viewing Abraham as one like ourselves?
J.T. He rises to the type of the Father here, but he is a type of the believer, too. You can see how Abraham stands out. God would try him, but in the trial he rises to a type of God Himself. So that you get, he "piled the wood". We must not in our minds mitigate the sufferings. The fire was there to ignite the wood, but the wood is piled up, suggesting that there was plenty of it.
S.W.P. Does it suggest a moral climax in Abraham when it says, "And they came to the place of which God had told him", so that he "*piled* the wood"?
J.T. I think so. Faith would apprehend what God had said about the place and what His present mind was about it. God is watching that place and what is going to happen in it. It is typically a scene of the most transcending importance. Think of Jesus on the cross! "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" It is the perfection of obedience and yet retaining His relation with God. He says, "My God". He has not given that up. In all the terribleness of God's judgment Christ addresses Him as His God! But He was conscious of being forsaken.
A.P.T. He was heard on account of His piety.
{364}
R.W.S. What is the force of the third day in @Genesis 22?
J.T. There you have another thing. It is a full testing period. He did not do it on the second day. The spirit of obedience *continued*.
W.M. He did really offer up Isaac.
J.T. Yes, he bound him on the altar and took the knife to slaughter his son.
A.N.W. What does the binding suggest to you?
J.T. I think he had committed himself to it. The type would mean that the Lord Jesus had committed Himself to it in Gethsemane. "Not my will, but thine be done", @Luke 22: 42. That is irrevocable. It would be morally impossible for Him to go back from that. As the Lord commits Himself, God accepts Him. The judgment is to be unmitigated.
Ques. What relation has the forsaking to the Father? On the cross the Lord says, "My God, my God".
J.T. "Neither does the Father judge any one", @John 5: 22. God in that relation does not judge any one.
Ques. Does the relationship of Father not go right through?
J.T. That would not do. That would not be absolute abandonment. We cannot say that God is one and the Father is another. The judgment, the forsaking was by God *as God*.
A.P.T. What would be the meaning of "caught in the thicket"?
J.T. I think that would mean the will of God. The Lord was held by that, as we see in Gethsemane. It was a ram. A ram is a sheep in a sense, but it is the idea of progenitiveness. What is to come out of all this is in view.
Rem. The figure changes from Isaac to the ram in willingness.
J.T. The ram is held by its horns, which means
{365}
Jesus was held by the will of God. It is seen in Gethsemane.
Ques. Would the thicket represent the Roman Empire and the Jews, etc., and all that surrounded Him?
J.T. I think so. It would be God allowing them. Christ being delivered up by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God was by the hand of lawless men crucified and slain (@Acts 2: 23).
Ques. Would it suggest His suffering love?
J.T. I think it is His committal. He is held by it. "Not my will, but thine be done". Morally He could not revoke it.
A.H.P. That would enter into the intelligence of the worshippers.
J.T. All these things have to do with worshippers. The weakness of our worship is most distressing. Our altar has to do with the worship of God, and in order to be worshippers, we have to understand all these things.
E.G.McA. You emphasise "*the* altar". Would the other two altars not be great enough to carry on this?
J.T. No. Faith has come to the great idea here. The gift itself and *the* altar, the full thought of it.
Ques. Do the thoughts of the altar and the only-begotten Son coalesce here?
J.T. The chapter brings out that Abraham in offering up his only-begotten son rose into correspondence with God. God gave His only-begotten Son for us. Another sense in which believers may correspond with God is in loving Christ with the love with which He loves Him. The Lord says, "that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them", @John 17: 26. That is the most exalted kind of love. Having it, I love Him, in measure, as God loves Him.
A.H.P. Would the thought of spiritual feelings enter into this worship, too?
J.T. Yes. This chapter is full of feelings. I do not
{366}
know of any chapter in Genesis so full of holy feelings as this.
Ques. Have you any suggestion as to why Abraham names the place?
J.T. Faith is able to put a name on things, "And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh; as it is said at the present day, On the mount of Jehovah will be provided" (verse 14). This links on with Exodus "The mountain of God ... Horeb", @Exodus 3: 1. Not that this was it literally, but it is the place of divine resources.
Rem. The apprehension of all these things means soul movement for every one of us.
J.T. The next thing is that heaven is noting Abraham in a new way. Isaac is not said to have come down. Abraham goes down to his young men, but Isaac has gone up, as it were. Rebecca is now mentioned (verse 23). Christ risen and, we may say, glorified, and the assembly thus, in type, enters into this wonderful chapter.
{367}
"WE HAVE AN ALTAR" (3)
@Genesis 26: 23 - 25; @Genesis 35: 1 - 15
J.T. The thought of the altar in @Hebrews 13 embraces the whole subject before us. It is what christians have. In principle it embraces all that preceded. God anticipated the assembly in all that preceded. What was written was written for us. The prophets had some thought about it, as it says, "searching what, or what manner, of time, the Spirit of Christ which was in them pointed out, testifying before of the sufferings which belonged to Christ", @1 Peter 1: 11. It was revealed to them that the things they ministered, they ministered to us and not to themselves. So that all is embraced in what *we* (true christians) have. If it be the altar, these references all enter into it. They are just features of it.
A.N.W. We reach finality in what we have.
J.T. Just so. This is a very important matter for christians to see. We have had Noah's altar denoting unselfishness, and the offerings on it which became the basis of God's creational relations. The relation in which He stands to creation now is not merely creational but on the basis of Noah's altar and the offerings thereon. That is, He smelled a sweet savour. That savour, as anticipating Christ's sacrifice, has never ceased. It is carried through, one might say, on these altars. In Abraham it became identified with a family, an important part of Genesis. We have spoken of Genesis as the work of God by itself. In general, He makes no demands and gives no instructions as to the altars. They are the evidence of His work. But in the altars that follow on Noah, we have the idea of worship seen in a family. That is what is before us at this meeting. It is the continuance of Abraham, so that Jehovah, in speaking to Isaac here, links on what is developed with Abraham. He says to Isaac: "And I will multiply thy seed as the
{368}
stars of heaven, and unto thy seed will I give all these countries: and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth bless themselves -- because that Abraham hearkened to my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws" (verses 4, 5). So that the instruction is continuous. In Abraham we have God in relation to a particular family. So that, in that sense, we are now on more exclusive and higher ground. Abraham looked out toward heaven and earth -- the stars of heaven and the sands of the seashore. But with Isaac it is the heavenly side, so that we are gradually becoming narrowed. This chapter is the heavenly side, and the altar is in that relation. Then in Jacob we come down to earth again, and see not the heavenly side but the earthly.
W.N. Will you distinguish between what you mean as to the earthly side and the heavenly side of the altar?
J.T. Abraham looked in both directions, the stars of the heaven and the sands of the seashore. In chapter 22, which we dwelt on yesterday, he is on the high level, the mountain, as shown by Jehovah, which in a way is the highest level we can speak of. He was to take Isaac and offer him up. Isaac is offered up, in figure, and does not return according to the chapter. That is, it is the heavenly side that comes into view first and is carried through here in chapter 26. The scripture does not say he returned with his father, at least that is how the matter stands in the chapter. It says, "And Abraham returned to his young men, and they rose up and went together to Beer-sheba. And Abraham dwelt at Beer-sheba", chapter 22: 19. Isaac is not said to be there.
A.N.W. But Rebecca comes into view.
J.T. That is the thought, appears immediately, in the next paragraph. It is the heavenly side. Isaac is to be regarded as the heavenly man and his wife comes into view.
{369}
Rem. That side is seen in @Hebrews 3: 1: "holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling".
J.T. Yes. Hebrews has that in mind. It is to lift the saints in christianity out of judaism. The heavenly calling is brought in in Hebrews. It is pursued in Genesis in Isaac who is distinctively the heavenly man in this book. So that the word is: "I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven" (verse 4). It is the heavenly side. It is the heavenly man in this chapter pursuant on chapter 22. In chapter 24 Rebecca is to be brought to him. He is not to go out of the land. So that the altar in this chapter is worship in *that* relation.
F.I. The altar that Isaac builds is built spontaneously, which is in contrast to Jacob. It says of Isaac that "he built an altar there, and called upon the name of Jehovah" (verse 25), whereas Jacob is told to build it (chapter 35: 1).
J.T. Yes. It says: "And he went up thence to Beer-sheba. And Jehovah appeared to him the same night, and said, I am the God of Abraham thy father: fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake. And he built an altar there, and called upon the name of Jehovah". I think the altar here implies that he is in a position now that answers to the mind of God.
F.I. You mean he is *intelligent* as to that?
J.T. Yes. Beer-sheba is the place of the oath. Abraham dwelt there according to chapter 22, and now Isaac comes to that point. The faithfulness of God enters into it (compare chapter 46: 1 - 3). He appeared to him *the same night*.
F.I. Do you infer from that, that we must be intelligent as to the oath and the covenant before we are prepared to build this altar?
J.T. I think so. It is a movement of intelligence. Hitherto in the chapter he is guided by God as to dwelling in the land, first in the land that He would *show* him. It is a protective chapter, to keep him from
{370}
going to Egypt. He was in danger of going there and God intervenes to prevent this. It says, "dwell in the land that I shall tell thee of", and then, "Sojourn in this land". Then the promise of the seed, the denial of his wife, and the conflict with the Philistines as regards the wells, until he reaches the point where he has *room* -- Rehoboth. Sometimes we are kept limited because of the danger of external circumstances in which we would be liable to breakdown, even going so far as denying our relation with the assembly. Then we come into conflict and we succeed in the conflict and we name the experience, such as 'quarrel', 'opposition', etc. We are able to name the experiences we have gone through. Then God gives us plenty of room. What will you do now? The next movement here is to Beersheba. He is not branching out for himself like some sons; Isaac pursues the line of his father. That is, he is respecting the covenant that God made with his father. He is not independent. Even if we are adding to what preceded us in the testimony of God, it is very important to link on to it.
Rem. In Proverbs it says: "Remove not the ancient land-mark which thy fathers have set", @Proverbs 22: 28.
Ques. Is that on the same principle as "Remember your leaders"?
J.T. A good deal. Not branching out to do exploits that nobody else did before you. Not that this may not happen, because you get new phases with all these men of faith, but God connects Isaac with Abraham here. He says, "I will perform the oath which I swore unto Abraham thy father".
G.McP. Would that be to arrive in our minds at what God had in His mind relative to the death of Christ?
J.T. Well, He started with Abraham. God is keeping Isaac on that line because, after all, the testimony is one, especially when it comes into a family.
{371}
Ques. Does he go a little further than Abraham? We read of four altars in Abraham's case, but we do not find him building an altar at Beer-sheba.
J.T. Certainly, there is something distinctive about each man of faith, and each christian, but the main thing is to keep in the line. There is a disposition in the young to branch out and do exploits. This chapter keeps you in the line. There will be plenty of opportunity for each to manifest the qualities distinctive to him according to God, but we must keep in the divine line.
A.P.T. The apostle says to Timothy: "Be not negligent of the gift that is in thee", @1 Timothy 4: 14. But he was to keep in line.
J.T. He had the gift according to the laying on of Paul's hands and also of the presbytery. You must pursue these lines. Paul's hands are distinctive. The presbytery are those of weight amongst us. There is that which is distinctive always, and then there is the presbytery.
A.P.T. "My true child in faith", @1 Timothy 1: 2. He followed the line.
J.T. That shows what we are speaking of, the character of the man. He followed in the line of the apostle, although no doubt later he had to contend with things that even Paul did not have to contend with. You get into circumstances that others may not have been in and you have to find your own feet in them. Thus you come to know God in your own way. Each one has *something* peculiar to himself. Timothy is the only one called a man of God in the New Testament, so that he stands out.
A.N.W. Personal distinctiveness is beautifully seen in Luke; he puts Paul forward strikingly in Acts: "Paul and his company", @Acts 13: 13.
J.T. He is very like the writer of the Chronicles, who makes haste, we may say, to get to David. He takes him out of his setting genealogically. Luke makes
{372}
haste to get to Paul. It is one of the greatest encouragements to see young men and young women coming forward, disregarding natural joys, comforts, and pleasures to be where the people of God are. But they are to learn from those longer in the path, "Remember your leaders", and "Obey your leaders" (@Hebrews 13: 7, 17), those that have gone and those that are present, and that is what God keeps in mind for Isaac here.
Ques. What are exploits?
J.T. The desire to do them is generally present in a young man who has ability. He wants to do something distinctive. Not that he should not do it in the true sense, of course, but to *want* to do it is great danger.
G.McP. Why is Isaac blessed "for my servant Abraham's sake"?
J.T. That is what I am speaking of. He is spoken of in relation to Abraham as Joshua was regarded in relation to Moses (comp. @Joshua 1).
Rem. Titus in visiting the Corinthian saints does not isolate himself from the apostle Paul.
R.W.S. Paul tells Timothy, "And the things thou hast heard of me in the presence of many witnesses", @2 Timothy 2: 2. I was thinking that Timothy stands in relation to Paul, as Isaac to Abraham.
A.H.P. Would Elisha be another example in the way in which he served with Elijah?
J.T. Yes. He clung to him. The word later was that he "poured water on the hands of Elijah", @2 Kings 3: 11. He did not wish Elijah out of the way. He wanted to accelerate his ability to serve. Although he was anointed to succeed Elijah, there is not the slightest evidence that he wanted his removal. He says, "My father, my father! the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof", @2 Kings 2: 12. That would be the power. Without the chariot of Israel and the horsemen, he could not do without Elijah, but with the chariot and the horsemen, Elisha can serve without Elijah. His
{373}
prowess would be by the chariot of Israel and the horsemen.
Rem. He wanted to keep as near as possible to Elijah while he was still here.
J.T. That is the idea: "if thou see me when I am taken from thee", @2 Kings 2: 10. Elisha's ministry is definitely linked with Elijah.
A.N.W. It was borne testimony to later that "The spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha" (chapter 2: 15).
Ques. What has the reference to Beer-sheba to do with what you are saying?
J.T. It is the place of the oath, suggestive of what God had engaged Himself to. God is pleased with his movement -- as coming to this place.
A.N.W. Why do you suppose it is a night scene here in connection with Isaac?
J.T. The day is not really complete without the night. "And there was evening, and there was morning -- the first day", @Genesis 1: 5. I apprehend that Isaac has full light as to what he is doing. The exercise is finished.
A.N.W. It had not been mentioned before. I thought there was a night to Isaac's experience there, and God's appearance would illuminate it.
J.T. Just so. God is immediately honouring him in his intelligent movement here. God is showing that He appreciates this movement. It is a question of God and His oath. It is a very great matter for young men and women, in their work, to see what God can do and what He has engaged Himself to do; for, after all, there is nothing done without Him. Unless we work with Him we labour in vain, "Unless Jehovah build the house, in vain do its builders labour in it; unless Jehovah keep the city, the keeper watcheth in vain", @Psalm 127: 1.
Rem. So it says that *he* went up. It is his own movement.
J.T. Yes. Verse 23 has to be read in the light of
{374}
the previous part of the chapter. What a chapter it is, typically! There is conflict, failure, and evidence that God did not trust him altogether. He was afraid he would go down into Egypt. We have to watch the young brothers -- what are they going to do? But here there is victory, for Isaac is where God would have him; He appears to him and Isaac builds an altar and calls upon the name of Jehovah.
Ques. Does it suggest that, as to his inability to do anything, he has arrived in his own soul that all rests with God?
J.T. I think so. He has to do with these Philistines. They mean the big men in christendom. They are the men that would blot out everything of God that had preceded -- what had been done through Abraham; and Isaac contends with them and finds God's help. What comes out is that he is a well-digger. That is the man -- he will succeed. He unstopped the wells that had been stopped up, and he does not give them names of his own. He does not say, This is what I discovered myself. A brother in ministering may say, 'I got that just as I went into the room'. Well, if you look it up perhaps you may find that, although he may have forgotten it, he *read* it somewhere. If Isaac were to quote Abraham, he would say, 'I learned that from my father'. He called the wells by the same names Abraham gave them.
J.W.D. Would it not be difficult to say something purely original?
J.T. No doubt. The things difficult to get are the most valuable. Gold is hard to get.
J.W.D. Things may seem to one at the time that they came direct, but as you were saying, they may be from the ministry of others, only they were living in one's soul at that time.
J.T. Just so. If you "roast" it yourself and make it your own, it is quite right to use what you thus have. Here Isaac unstopped the wells that Abraham
{375}
had dug, but owns them to be Abraham's wells. He called them by the same names. But Isaac dug other wells, which must be regarded as his own: Esek, Sitnah, and Rehoboth.
J.W.D. 'Original', as we say.
A.N.W. Anybody drinking of the unstopped wells would say, We owe this to Isaac.
J.T. Primarily to Abraham! In the same sense, what the saints have today has been *recovered*. Still there are distinctive features. Isaac's wells would correspond. Note that the first one is said to be *springing* (or living) water (verse 19). A true revival is marked as having a living character.
Rem. A great deal of ministry lies in books like wells of water. Mr. Darby's collected writings and many others.
J.T. There is something in that -- such wells should be unstopped. But properly, wells are more than books. You never see water flowing out of your bookcase. It is out of *you*. The Holy Spirit is not in the bookcase, but in believers. He will employ earlier ministry, but without the Holy Spirit there can be no idea of a well. We get no living impressions apart from the Spirit, even though we may know all the *Collected Writings*.
Rem. I was thinking of Samson, as to what bearing he would have on this.
J.T. You are now in the book of Judges -- not the family book. The book of Judges implies that God will take up a man anywhere. We must not assume that Samson was not with God. He judged Israel twenty years. He dwelt on the top of the rock Etam. He was bound there and delivered to the Philistines, and with a new jaw-bone of an ass he slew a thousand of them. God was with him. No doubt he was with God on the rock. And where did Jephthah get his thoughts? See the message he sends to the king of Ammon, whereas earlier his life was very questionable. If God takes up
{376}
a man He makes him all that is needed; he will be marked by originality and freshness. Thus Isaac not only unstops wells, but digs new ones, "And Isaac's servants dug in the valley, and found there a well of springing water. But the shepherds of Gerar strove with Isaac's shepherds, saying, The water is ours. And he called the name of the well Esek, because they had quarrelled with him". This digging involved conflict, "And they dug another well, and they strove for that also; and he called the name of it Sitnah. And he removed thence and dug another well; and they did not strive for that. And he called the name of it Rehoboth, and said, For now Jehovah has made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land". Is he going to rest there, or is he going to link on with the oath, with what God is doing, involved in the promise to Abraham? He did the latter -- he went to Beer-sheba. And God makes no delay, He appears to him the same night, as if to show him how pleased He is with him. In this way one who is prospering in his work shows that he is working with God. That is what is meant, I think, that Isaac comes to Beer-sheba. God appears to him that night and says, "I am the God of Abraham thy father: fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake. And he built an altar there, and called upon the name of Jehovah. And he pitched his tent there; and there Isaac's servants dug a well". So that there is now to be freshness, and plenty of it. "And it came to pass the same day, that Isaac's servants came, and told him concerning the well that they had dug, and said to him, We have found water. And he called it Shebah; therefore the name of the city is Beer-sheba to this day". Now we have definite advance, because Abraham called it a *place*, whereas it is called a *city* by the Spirit of God here. This means that an ordered condition of things had come in; it is now a place of administration. All that is most instructive for us as in the Lord's service.
{377}
E.G.McA. Referring to the two wells that were contended for, it says that Isaac pitched his tent in the valley of Gerar, but there is no mention of an altar, but after he digs the third well and comes to Beer-sheba, he first builds an altar and then pitches his tent.
J.T. That is good. His altar indicates a man's stature -- he is marked off as a worshipper of God. You mentioned yesterday that in the days of the return from the captivity "they set the altar on its base", @Ezra 3: 3.
E.G.McA. Then in the following part of this chapter we see that Isaac not only has peace but his enemies say, Do not do us any hurt. They recognise his greatness.
J.T. They recognise that he is progressing, that God was with him. As we have often noted, Abimelech now brings his *friend* with him as well as his captain. That is, a young man is doing well; he owns God in his service and he is honoured of Him. Can he be overcome by the social part of the world? "Abimelech, and Ahuzzath his friend, and Phichol the captain of his host" came to Isaac. Earlier he had gone to Abraham with only his captain, but now he brings one representing the social side with him. But Isaac overcomes. Then there is water, and the city is named.
A.P.T. It says: "We saw certainly that Jehovah is with thee". That should mark us.
J.T. Quite so. What was said last night ought to be borne in mind, that God is seeking worshippers. A man's altar denotes that he is a worshipper of God.
J.C. Verse 13 should be noted specially: "And the man became great, and he became continually greater, until he was very great".
Ques. Does he reach the height of his greatness when he builds the altar?
J.T. I think so. He is now a worshipper.
Now, perhaps we may go on to Jacob. The house of God is now before us. Jacob does not build an altar until he is told to, except the one he built at Succoth.
{378}
That is, he fails in this great matter at the outset. Although a man of faith, in building his first altar he is thinking about himself, as indicated in the name he gives it. He is not like Noah, he is not unselfish. Assuming to be worshippers of God is a very searching matter -- whether we are just connecting the idea with ourselves and our own aggrandisement, for at *times* there is temporal advantage in being a professed worshipper of God.
A.N.W. The woman in @John 4 says: "Our fathers worshipped in this mountain" (verse 20). The Lord emphasises *who* should be worshipped.
S.McC. The instructions to Jacob are to make an altar at Bethel "unto the God that appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother". Does God bring him back to the point whence he started?
J.T. He is helping him now by linking on Bethel with his earlier experience. In building an altar at Succoth he was not linking on with the beginning of his relations with God. He ignored Bethel, and called his altar at Succoth El-Elohe-Israel. Hence the disaster that follows, and God says, in effect, Bethel ought to have been in your mind. You are overlooking or ignoring the earlier days of your relations with Me; go back to the beginning -- a very important matter for young christians.
Rem. It says. "And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built himself a house, and for his cattle he made booths" (chapter 33. 17), whereas with Isaac it was noted that he built the altar first and then pitched his tent. With Jacob his own affairs were first.
J.T. Yes. He built *himself* a house, whereas the point is *God's* house. If he is not in accord with that, he is below his calling, and failing in testimony to God. That applies to every christian. My life as a believer is to be characterised by God's relations with me as He took me up.
{379}
W.N. Does going back to the beginning involve going back to first love?
J.T. What was the occasion? It was when Jacob fled from the face of his brother. To be fleeing from your brother is not very complimentary. That does not indicate very much love at the outset. God knows what is in Jacob's heart, but it is buried very deep. He says in effect, You have been down in Succoth and you have made a house for yourself, you are making a show, you are self-centred. You are not a worldly man exactly, but you are settling down on the earth, overlooking your great calling including My house, and you are connecting Me with you in all this.
Rem. Matters are unsettled with him.
J.T. Seemingly, the matter with Esau had been settled. Jacob might say, Why are you bringing up Esau again? We just met and kissed each other. God says, You were fleeing from your brother when I met you. God is going behind the settlement with Esau. That was succeeded by Jacob building the house at Succoth and that shows that Jacob did not learn very much in his own soul from the experience. There may be settlements and God may have to bring the whole thing up again; the roots, or some of them, were not judged. The whole course has to be gone over again. When we fail like Jacob here we have to go back to the beginning.
Rem. The settlement with Esau was very much on the surface.
J.T. I think there are a great many settlements among us that do not hold. That is, we have *not gained* through the exercise. They are often what you might call agreements to get out of difficulties. That is what this was in Jacob's case, so that God brings it up here. He says: "make there an altar unto the God that appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother" (verse 1), and then in verse 7 it says, "And he built there an altar, and called the place
{380}
El-beth-el; because there God had appeared to him when, he fled from the face of his brother". Now Jacob is getting help. The matter is being settled now.
A.P.T. Chapter 34 is a very serious one; it shows that he was not right with God. He still had himself in view.
J.T. Showing that he had not fully learned the lessons of chapters 32 and 33. Bethel was the great objective, and when he turns aside from the path. God says, as it were, We must go over the whole ground again.
E.G.McA. When God brought that up with him, it produced a general house-cleaning, and then they journeyed.
J.T. Matters had been bottomed, "Cleanse yourselves, and change your garments". Now what you come to is moral power in the man: "we will arise, and go up to Bethel; and I will make there an altar to the God that answered me in the day of my distress, and was with me in the way that I went. And they gave to Jacob all the strange gods that were in their hand, and the rings that were in their ears, and Jacob hid them under the terebinth that is by Shechem. And they journeyed; and the terror of God was upon the cities that were round about them". God is acting; the terror of God is in favour of the believer as he prepares his way before Him.
J.W.D. I was wondering if the idea of the terror of God was connected with God's hand of government now being openly in his favour.
J.T. That is right. His governmental hand was against him at Succoth, but now the government of God is in his favour and against his enemies, his face being in the right direction. Jacob is now judging the root of things.
G.McP. If the truth of the altar is recognised amongst us, God comes in and helps.
J.T. Yes. It is the house-cleaning that is necessary.
{381}
There is no settlement without a house-cleaning. Rachel had brought idols with her and lied about it. A terrible state of things in the household! These things were not settled, but God has now come in, and Jacob is subject and obedient to His word. He has power in his house now, so the household is cleansed. They give up the strange gods, etc., and Jacob hid them under the oak. He is in Bethel now, so that he builds his altar and calls the name of the place El-Beth-el, not the altar but the *place*. Bethel is furnished with an altar. Abraham did not build one there. Jacob had set up a pillar earlier, but a pillar is not an altar.
F.I. During his first visit he had not come into the full thought of the house. Here he says, "God of the house of God". That is, he first comes into the knowledge of God before he can come into the full thought of the house. God had made promises to him and now these are confirmed in the house.
J.T. Quite so. He knows God now, as the God of Bethel. After this experience the Spirit of God gives us a paragraph to epitomise the result. The whole matter is so pleasing to God that it is epitomised in verses 9 to 15 inclusive. It reverts back to chapter 32. It is to show the great result in the worshipper. How God is pleased with Jacob now! He is not now in the heavens and Jacob on the earth. God comes down and talks with Jacob in the house. Jacob sets up a pillar: "And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he had talked with him, a pillar of stone, and poured on it a drink-offering, and poured oil on it. And Jacob called the name of the place where God had talked with him. Beth-el".
Ques. What is the difference between the altar and the pillar?
J.T. A pillar is something to be seen. It goes back to chapter 28. He was a pillar-erector before he was an altar-builder. He set up a stone for a pillar -- an ordinary stone that he had lain upon. But now it is
{382}
not that exactly. It is "a pillar of stone". Not merely a convenient thing set up as a pillar, but something *permanent*, and he adds to it the drink-offering which he could not add in the first visitation. He adds the drink-offering which indicates that he is now conscious of being pleasing to God in the house. He has had to do with God, the altar is the result of this. He is a known worshipper now in the house. The house stands connected with Jacob.
J.W.D. What is the idea of the house?
J.T. It is the abstract thought here. There is *no building* yet. We get the structure with Moses and Solomon. But it comes in with Jacob as a great divine testimony. David has it in mind in speaking in @Psalm 132 of "the mighty God of Jacob".
Ques. What would answer to the naming of the place of the altar today?
J.T. When you come to the assembly and apprehend that it is God's assembly, you are impressed as Jacob was. He names it Bethel. Abraham was in the precincts, *near* Bethel. He did not build his altar in Bethel. Jacob's is in Bethel. You would expect that there would be names as soon as you come to the house. The house is a place of distinction. The subject of names comes up at once. "The crowd of names" at Pentecost denotes this. Each believer has a name. Elijah first formally calls Elisha by name in Bethel. You are known there. Jacob is *Israel* there. We "are being built up a *spiritual* house".
W.M. Is it not significant that the apostle calls the house of God the "pillar and base of the truth", @1 Timothy 3: 15?
J.T. It is the *support* of the truth, and it is to be *seen*.
E.G.McA. Is there the thought in the drink-offering on the pillar, that God is now getting something satisfactory from Jacob?
J.T. That is the meaning of it. God is pleased
{383}
with him now, as already said. He is in the house according to God's mind. So this paragraph from verses 9 to 15 is the Spirit's account of the *whole* position.
Ques. What is the oil?
J.T. The oil is *dignity*. I am to be in the house in a dignified way; as a spiritual man. But the drink-offering is what I am *God-ward* -- what God finds in me.
A.P.T. That verse in Timothy which was referred to would connect with the oil: "that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth", @1 Timothy 3: 15.
J.T. That, I am sure, would appear at Corinth when Timothy was sent there by Paul that they might be put in mind "of my ways as they are in Christ", @1 Corinthians 4: 17. We may be sure that he would move among the brethren in a sober, dignified way.
S.McC. Is it not remarkable that it says: "And God went up from him in the place where he had talked with him". Not *to* him, but *with* him.
J.T. Now Jacob is honoured in accord with his grandfather (compare chapter 17: 22 and 19: 27). Abraham went back to it: he "went to the place where he had stood before Jehovah". It is a beautiful thought -- the place where God talks with you. You never forget that. In that spot Jacob set up the pillar.
Rem. In chapter 28 he says: "How dreadful is this place" (verse 17); but here he talks with God.
J.T. As knowing God, he is now in His house in liberty. Perfect love casts out fear.
{384}
"WE HAVE AN ALTAR" (4)
@Exodus 17: 15, 16; @Exodus 24: 3 - 8
J.T. Our subject requires that we first consider Exodus as to the altars that Moses made of himself, without direction, and then those that come under divine direction.
It will be understood that we are now on *ministerial* ground, Moses representing those who minister among the saints. These two altars are in that connection. The christian is viewed as the subject of the work of God as in Genesis, and what he does as left to himself indicates the measure of that work in him, the place God has with him. It widens out in the family, so that the altars in Genesis stand in relation to men of families -- heads of houses.
W.M. Does the altar stand more in relation to God's house in Exodus?
J.T. Yes, before we come to the house we have Moses building an altar. He was a servant in God's house, but before he is actually seen in that light he builds altars.
W.M. That is, he is showing his capability to be a ministering servant.
J.T. Yes. He has the people in mind. These two altars are in relation to the people, the minister taking account of the people. That is, an altar is built by one who serves, not in his own house; whereas in Genesis the altars stand in relation to men who have houses of their own and whose houses have a great place, that is, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. It is the household setting, although culminating in the house of God as we had it with Jacob, not the house of God as built or organised, but just in the abstract. It is a matter of light, whereas Exodus brings out the *building* -- a habitation prepared for Jehovah. Before we reach that, however, we have these altars built by Moses.
{385}
W.M. Do you not think the idea of God's house was in Moses mind at that time? His song had anticipated that (@Exodus 15: 2).
J.T. It may have been, but "I will prepare him a habitation" is not generally accepted as authentic. The proposal is in chapter 25: 8: "And they shall make me a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them". The qualification of a man as a minister comes out in how he builds an altar without any direction. That is, it raises the whole question of those who minister among the saints -- how their worship works out and is seen -- the place God has with them in that relation.
W.M. Do you think the destruction of Amalek was the incentive for building this altar?
J.T. That is the setting of it. We might see what this altar means; what it means in the mind of the one who built it and what it means to those in relation to whom it was built; it is called "Jehovah-nissi".
J.W.D. Whom do you include in the expression, 'those who minister'?
J.T. In Ephesians we have, "But to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ", @Ephesians 4: 7. So that ministry in principle belongs to every christian; but then there are those who are qualified to minister in a special way, and Moses represents these. He represents those who are formally called into the ministry as qualified. Every christian is obligated to minister. For instance, Phoebe was "minister of the assembly which is in Cenchrea", @Romans 16: 1. That is to say, she qualified in that, but it was a question of herself -- of qualifying in that way. Moses is *representative of God*. The minister implies representation of God, as a commission in the army represents the government. The commission represents those who give the commission. A minister represents God, if he is anything at all. So that it is said of Moses, not that he should be *a* God to Pharaoh, but *God*, a very great thought.
{386}
W.M. Do you think the apostle Paul represented the Lord to the assemblies?
J.T. Exactly. He was representative of God's authority and that works out in all who are qualified of God for service, because there is the idea of a commission. There is the idea of doing what your hand finds to do and doing it with your might, but there is also the idea of representation. After all, what is anything here save the divine stamp is on it?
Rem. Although Moses had the secret of this early in his life, it was very late in his life before he became a representative. And on his way back to Egypt after forty years in Midian, he did not even yet seem to be right with God.
J.T. He had the thought that God would give Israel deliverance through him, but he took the work up too early and in a fleshly way. God conveys His mind to a minister early in his life, but he has to go through much before he receives his service formally, as, for instance, Saul. Saul was to be a minister, 'an appointed official servant', according to @Acts 26, but, as we learn later, not until he was in Antioch for some time and other things had happened is he formally in the service as representative. "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them", @Acts 13: 2. That was subsequent to Saul's conversion and calling. So with Moses. He had the thought in his mind that God would deliver the people through him. He did intend to do so, but not at that early stage nor in the way that Moses had undertaken to do it.
A.N.W. Referring again to Phoebe, the apostle uses the expression, "who is minister". Perhaps you will say a further word about that.
J.T. It is what she *was*, apparently not an official. The original word is "deaconess", but her service was more general and dignified (see footnotes). Phoebe is spoken of by the apostle in a complimentary way.
{387}
A.N.W. She would serve as a deaconess. It does not say she is *a* minister, but "minister".
J.T. Serving the assembly characterised her. Evidently she was a woman of means, and being devoted to the Lord, served the assembly as indicated.
S.W.P. Scripture says: "And Moses rose up, and Joshua his attendant" (chapter 24: 13). There were certain characteristic features in Moses, so that Jehovah could speak to him.
J.T. Quite so. God was acting through Moses. Joshua was his attendant. He had a great advantage in being the attendant of such a man, but he had a good way to go to carry his cloak, as Timothy would have a good way to go to carry Paul's cloak. Elijah threw his cloak on Elisha. All that is suggestive. When shall I be able to fill that cloak? I have to learn that I am not ready yet. God brings in a model, and He conveys to you that that is His ideal and you are not that yet. Even as Joshua succeeds Moses he is called 'Moses attendant'. So that Moses stands out in Scripture as the representative of this thought. But he had to be educated for this, and so, as failing in his own method of deliverance in slaying the Egyptian, he goes to Midian and *sits by a well*. What becomes of his activities? Typically he is saying in effect, I am seeing now that power for the work of God is not in me; it is of God and I am to avail myself of it. He sat by a well. That is the first thing mentioned of him as in Midian, meaning that he now recognises another power. It takes him forty years to come to that. There is great need for ministers among the Lord's people. There is the thought of what your hand finds to do, do it. There is that thought. You may be crude in it, but still you are doing it, and God values the man or woman who starts that way. The work is to be done and he is doing it as he can, but God intimates He has His own standard of service, and, although He may bear with you at the outset, there is a time when you should learn *how* to do things
{388}
according to Him. The levites were put into the work at twenty-five, although the standard was thirty. They were to be five years with experienced persons and would thus learn how to serve.
J.S. It has been said that Moses was forty years learning to be somebody, and then he was forty years learning to be nobody.
J.T. Yes. He was learning that he could not succeed on his own line. He began with the right motive but he could not succeed, not having learned God's way.
W.M. He began with exploits.
J.T. Yes; he killed an Egyptian and hid him in the sand. I do not know what the population of Egypt was in those days but it would have taken him a long time to kill them *all*! You have to see the futility of your efforts. So when he reaches Midian he sits by a well. He recognises *another* power.
R.W.S. It says: "And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which thou hast received in the Lord, to the end that thou fulfil it", @Colossians 4: 17. What does "in the Lord" mean?
J.T. The Lord can identify Himself with it. "In" implies the sphere and power of the ministry. Archippus received his ministry in *such* a setting.
A.P.T. Paul says of Tychicus, "the beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord", @Ephesians 6: 21.
J.T. That is the same form. "Prisoner *of* the Christ Jesus" (@Ephesians 3: 1) means that the *Lord*, as it were, had imprisoned the apostle, but in the next chapter it is "the prisoner *in* the Lord". The Lord can identify Himself with him. He is not in the prison as a felon. Marriage is "in the Lord"; it is in the sphere of His authority and power. Thus those in it have His protection and support: a very great matter.
This thought of sitting down by the well is what young men and women ought to see. God killed a good many Egyptians later -- *He* undertook to do the killing. But Moses effected nothing in the way of general deliverance
{389}
by smiting the Egyptian. When he attempted to reconcile his brethren he could do nothing. He had to flee. It is the "well", the Spirit, who gives me power. That is what the minister gets. I may have energy like Moses, but moral power is what I need if I am to be God to Pharaoh. How could he be that, save by moral power, by taking on the likeness of God? Every minister must have before him that he represents God -- and that is a solemn matter.
A.N.W. We have rather boasted that we have moved away from the idea of the minister, but perhaps we have gone too far on that line.
J.T. A clergyman is another thing. They use the word "minister", but let us use the word in its *scriptural* meaning.
Ques. Would you say that every minister should be sitting by the well and the burning bush?
J.T. The burning bush is the commission and the sitting by the well is the qualification for it. Moses sits by the well and certain persons come to the well to water their flock, as it were God bringing some opportunity of service to your attention. How are you going to serve? He does not slay the shepherds that interfered. He has learned his lesson in that respect. He does not slay the shepherds that wronged the daughters of Jethro. He *helped the women, and watered their flock*. He is a man that can *take part* in some useful work, and that is a good way to start -- that you are not doing it *all*. Then they went home to their father. He says to them, "Why are ye come so soon today?" @Exodus 2: 18. They say, "An Egyptian delivered us", but evidently there was no offer by those he helped of recompense, hospitality, or the like. He is not getting much recognition after all. That is a good experience, because there is nothing a young brother looks for more than recognition, for the brethren to say how well he preached! There is no evidence, however, that Moses tried to get recognition. Jethro extended Moses hospitality, and
{390}
he "was content to dwell with the man". After having been a prince in Egypt it would be a great come-down socially to be there; but he accepted his circumstances -- he was "content". That is the idea of patience, of accepting whatever the government of God opens up to you; and finally he is looking after the sheep of another. He never acquired a flock like Jacob, nor asked for wages. All this marks a minister who is approved of God. A clergyman looks for wages, like Micah's priest, @Judges 17. The very term "living" is synonymous with the clergyman's salary. After he gets a call, he gets what is attached to it. Moses never thought of anything like that. He is simply unselfishly doing the thing that has to be done, and at the end he leads the flock to the backside of the desert, to Horeb, the mountain of God. He came there and now he is in the position for God to give him a commission, and hence the wonderful appearing in the bush.
W.M. "The good will of him that dwelt in the bush", @Deuteronomy 33: 16.
J.T. He comes into that. I thought we might see that this first altar is by such a man as this. He is building it in relation to the brethren. It is a chapter that all the young saints should read, because the first great spiritual battle is the battle of Rephidim, the significance of which young people have to learn. This altar stands in that relation, "Jehovah will have war with Amalek from generation to generation". The altar built here is to stand; it is "Jehovah-nissi", Jehovah my banner. That is, I am a worshipper of God as helping me against the flesh. It is a question of the Holy Spirit, the Spirit against the flesh.
W.M. Every new generation has to understand this battle.
J.T. That is right. It involves @Romans 7. One would like to enlist the attention of the young in regard of chapter 17, because we have to understand this altar
{391}
if we are to understand Exodus, and profit by the ministers that God raises up. It says: "And all the assembly of the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, according to their journeys, at the command of Jehovah; and they encamped in Rephidim; and there was no water for the people to drink. And the people contended with Moses, and said, Give us water, that we may drink! And Moses said to them, Why do ye dispute with me? Why do ye tempt Jehovah? And the people thirsted there for water; and the people murmured against Moses, and said, Why is it that thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst? And Moses cried to Jehovah, saying, What shall I do with this people? Yet a little, and they will stone me! And Jehovah said to Moses, Go on before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel, and thy staff with which thou didst smite the river, take in thy hand, and go. Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock on Horeb; and thou shalt strike the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink. And Moses did so before the eyes of the elders of Israel. And he called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, because of the contention of the children of Israel, and because they had tempted Jehovah, saying, Is Jehovah among us, or not?" (verses 1 - 7). That is the state of things. Typically, the Spirit is owned as there, but it is not said that the people drank. If I have the Spirit, I have Him at the cost of the sufferings of Christ. Here it is a question of *smiting* the rock (Christ), so that we might have the Spirit, but it does not credit us with having drunk.
Ques. Is this answered in @Romans 5: "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts"?
J.T. In @Romans 5 the Spirit is brought in to fill out the truth. The apostle speaks, as it were, of his experience and that of others, without assuming that it was true of every Christian. It is characteristic of every true christian. It is a great general thought to fill
{392}
out the truth of the gospel. There is such a thing as that, the love of God being shed abroad in the hearts of people, including Paul and others that he knew of. I do not think this chapter goes as far as that. They are not even accredited with having drunk, although the Spirit is there. It is to bring out the small stature of the saints at this juncture and how, because of this, the enemy works through the flesh. Amalek is the enemy assuming that he has right of way. It is not an Ephesian position. It is to bring out the low state of the saints at *this period*, and how God provides for them.
Rem. At Ephesus they did not know the Holy Spirit had come.
J.T. They had not received Him. The same may be said of some believers today; others have the Spirit, but are not characterised by Him. Those who have drunk are characterised by Him. In @Numbers 20 the rock was smitten, but smitten contrary to the divine command. Yet, in spite of that, the water flowed and the people drank and the cattle drank. It stresses the *drinking*, and in @Numbers 21 there is the recognition of the Holy Spirit as springing up, not from a rock, but from a well. Here they are not accredited with having drunk. Of course they drank literally, but what the Holy Spirit does not say is as important at times as what He does say. The omission here is important. It alludes to the low state of the brethren, that although they have the Spirit, they are not in the power of the Spirit. The enemy knows it and attacks, and what comes out is that the ministers come into this. They have to bear the brunt of the thing. It says: "And Moses said to Joshua, Choose us men, and go out, fight with Amalek; tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the staff of God in my hand. And Joshua did as Moses had said to him, to fight with Amalek; and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill. And it came to pass when Moses raised his hand, that Israel prevailed; and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed" (verses 9 - 11).
{393}
Young people do not realise or admit, or know, that they are dependent on the ministers at this juncture. The idea is to get a true conception of the ministers -- what God provides -- and learn to respect them. You are, under God, dependent upon them.
A.P.T. Would the first epistle to the Corinthians fit in here? There was a low state prevalent among them, and the apostle says: "Thus there is not a wise person among you", @1 Corinthians 6: 5.
J.T. Just so; although they had the Spirit. They were babes, but babes in Christ, which is important.
A.P.T. The second epistle would perhaps be the "banner". The difficulty was met by the apostle in the power of God.
J.T. The epistles work out the importance of the ministers. Paul says: "Whether Paul or Apollos, or Cephas ... all are yours", @1 Corinthians 3: 22. The ministers belong to the saints, but then the Corinthians were despising them. Paul was ready to do anything for them, but they were despising him. There were certain ones there that would discredit and displace him -- a sure way of the devil to get rid of the true ministers of God!
S.W.P. In @Jeremiah 14 the prophet says, "And their nobles send their little ones for water, they come to the pits, they find no water; they return with their vessels empty; they are ashamed, they are confounded, and have covered their heads. Because the ground is chapt, for there hath been no rain on the earth, the ploughmen are ashamed, they cover their heads". Is that because of the breakdown on the part of the ministers?
J.T. That is included, as we learn in verses 13 to 16. The breakdown of the ministers is also seen in @Numbers 20. God says, I will give the water in spite of that. The clerical system has been standing in the way of the water. That is @Numbers 20, but here (@Exodus 17) Moses, Aaron, and Hur go up to the top of the hill and labour. What an arduous time it was for Moses!
{394}
If he gives way the battle is lost. Young people are not apt to think of this side of the position. God would have you understand that what He has provided must be respected and counted on, because Scripture says: "for they watch over your souls", @Hebrews 13: 17.
Ques. How do young people support the ministers?
J.T. The first thing is to respect them, as seeing that they are a divine provision.
Ques. What is the significance of the fact that we never hear of Hur again?
J.T. He represents an element in this setting -- His name is said to mean "purity". Young christians have to understand this. The enemy's power comes in very largely through impure motives, through the flesh.
W.M. This condition of things would be met in Romans.
J.T. Yes. Romans is the normal setting out of the truth. Chapter 5 is the full result of the work of Christ, as to the individual, before he enters Rephidim -- what has accrued through the death of Christ. It is on the side of the kingdom. It is what has come to us "*through* our Lord Jesus Christ". @Romans 7 has to be learned. That is the great "classic" for young people. It enables us to overcome in the battle of Rephidim. You will find that it opens up the way to the great thoughts of God. Chapter 19 says, "they departed from Rephidim, and came into the wilderness of Sinai: and encamped in the wilderness; and Israel encamped there before the mountain" (verse 2). That is the point, you leave Rephidim. After that battle they go on into the sense of God's thoughts for them. Now you are in the presence of divine resources, but you have to come to the recognition of them. The mountain really implies all that lies in the Spirit.
Rem. We may not appreciate the ministers because we do not realise our own helplessness.
J.T. Quite. Then we get Joshua. Moses says: "Choose us men". It is not a partisan matter, but
{395}
"Choose *us* men". It is a general thought; this war is carried on in relation to the divine economy -- what God has provided for the whole assembly. This is the first appearance of Joshua -- a very remarkable thing that he comes in here as a warrior. You get in him a glimpse of Christ as the spiritual Leader or Captain of Jehovah's host.
J.W.D. Would it work out in a practical way locally, that there should be exercise that gift be brought into the locality in the way of special meetings and addresses. Is there not a danger of being satisfied with what is local, of being too exclusive locally?
J.T. Making room for the ministers is a great matter. Where they are available, get them.
Joshua has a great place here. You learn more about him later. This chapter is initial in this sense; and so in @Romans 7 you begin with great regard for Christ, that you should "be to another". There is such a One that you should be to. Christ comes into your mind. He "who has been raised up from among the dead, in order that we might bear fruit to God", @Romans 7: 4. He comes into your mind. That is a sort of heading to @Romans 7. And then you enter the conflict. What a conflict it is. Some of us take years and years to go through it, but you begin with that and end with this, "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord". You also say, "So then I myself with the mind serve God's law". "I myself". You have found your feet as an individual christian in the conflict; you are not overthrown. That is the way it works out.
W.M. That is what the analysis has produced.
Rem. The believer connects himself with the right identity.
J.T. That is right. He has found his feet and he has decided in his mind that he is going to serve the law of God, but the deliverance is not through himself. It is through "Jesus Christ our Lord". "I thank God", that is giving thanks intelligently because of the deliverance
{396}
through a certain Person who henceforth is to be everything to you. This Person will be magnified in your life. So that you get later the idea of God magnifying Joshua.
Ques. Would @Romans 7 be like Moses building this altar?
J.T. Yes. You can see how God is before the soul, "So then I myself with the mind serve God's law ..." In principle a thanks-giver is a worshipper. From this point you go to the mountain of God. You are to fit into the great system that God has in mind.
A.N.W. You are referring to all this in principle now. You are beyond Amalek in @Romans 7, are you not?
J.T. Well, you have overcome. The overcoming is, "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord". That is what I understand. You have learned the great idea of warfare in yourself.
Rem. It says that "Joshua broke the power of Amalek" (verse 13), and you have made reference to young men. Have you any thought in connection with that?
J.T. That is what we should see at this point. It is a young man's book. So that in relation to the next altar you get young men officiating (chapter 24: 5). This is a young men's and women's matter because God is calling in the most distinct way to them to get on these lines. The testimony needs them. He is honouring youth. This young man, Joshua, goes through the wilderness into the land.
A.P.T. There is a reference to Joshua as "a man in whom is the Spirit", @Numbers 27: 18.
J.T. He begins here as representative of spiritual power.
A.P.T. You are applying it rather to all the saints here?
J.T. Exactly. This battle goes on all the time. You will find even when sitting down in the assembly, that the enemy will attack you. Wherever he has an open door he will try to get in on this line.
{397}
Rem. In Deuteronomy the people are told to "Remember what Amalek did unto thee on the way", @Deuteronomy 25: 17.
W.M. In connection with our brother's remark as to young men, it is interesting that John speaks of them as having overcome the wicked one.
R.W.S. Would this be the first book that was written, the book of the wars to be rehearsed?
J.T. This is the first formal mention of writing in Scripture. This fact by itself shows how important this subject is. It underlies the whole fabric of christianity in a practical way -- this altar, Jehovah-nissi. It is a question of overcoming by the power of God. There is no other way.
Rem. It says: "Write this for a memorial in the book" (verse 14).
J.T. The thing is to be remembered. It is to be rehearsed in the ears of Joshua. He is a spiritual leader in this respect. Every one of us ought to keep this altar in mind. It is Jehovah-nissi, *my* banner, "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord", and it is through this banner we carry on the warfare which is to be perpetual while we are down here.
Rem. It is a *personal* thing.
W.M. What is the force of the hand on the throne of Jah? Is that the rebellion of the flesh?
J.T. It is so near. In the most spiritual settings you are conscious that the enemy would try to get in. You may think he is far away, but he is not. The hand on the throne would be to dislodge the rightful Occupant of it. It is for the saint to keep the right Occupant on the throne.
G.McP. Would you connect the Spirit with the cloven tongues of fire in the Acts?
J.T. Yes; the fire would deal with the flesh, "For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh", @Galatians 5: 17. The *lusting* is of the flesh, but then the Spirit is against that. There is not only the
{398}
Spirit but the throne of Jah. It is a poetic allusion. That throne must always have its right Occupant. Christ must always have the place, and if He has, the enemy will not get the upper hand. The flesh serves the law of sin. That being the tendency of the flesh the enemy is always ready to take advantage of it.
Rem. Lucifer aspired to the same thing.
J.T. To get on the throne.
W.M. The hand would represent the ceaseless activity of the enemy.
J.T. The hand represents what one *can do* -- his power.
Rem. Also what you *grasp* after.
J.T. "If, by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye shall live", @Romans 8: 13. I have the Holy Spirit. Up to @Romans 5: 12 it is what is *through* Jesus Christ our Lord. It is what comes in through Him, it is His authority, and I want to keep Him on the throne. It says of Solomon that they made him king a second time. That is final. We want to come to finality as to the Occupant of the throne.
W.M. Those who tried to put their hand on Solomon's throne nearly met their doom.
J.T. That is conflict *within* -- the Lord seems to be always bringing us to it. So "Jehovah is my banner", expresses the believer's attitude henceforth. My warfare henceforth is to be in the power of God.
W.M. What do you think the banner suggests?
J.T. The banner is what is public, it is to be displayed because of the truth. It is that under which you fight. It is always victorious. The throne is that the Lord always has His place with you, and then the Holy Spirit is the power in you.
R.W.S. The bride in Canticles says: "My beloved is white and ruddy", or, as the footnote says, "lifted up as a banner", @Song of Songs 5: 10.
E.G.McA. Would the banner indicate that I am not yet defeated?
{399}
A.P.T. "Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth", @Psalm 60: 4.
A.N.W. Say a word about "Jehovah will have war with Amalek from generation to generation".
J.T. I suppose it alludes to His rights in each of us. It means that God gives no quarter to the flesh -- Satan acting through it. If we allow the hand of the enemy on the throne, we leave Christ out and ignore His authority. I think that is what is meant. It is a constant war.
A.N.W. How does this relate to God having condemned sin in the flesh?
J.T. Although in the types, that is thirty-eight years off, that truth is involved. What is seen here is earlier in the believer's history, having the authority of God in the soul in view; yet @Romans 8 enters into the working out of it. One has to learn that the flesh is *condemned* by God, "God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh" (@Romans 8: 3); not *destroyed* but *condemned*. It is there, but it is condemned.
Ques. Is that the setting of the fourteenth verse of this chapter? "And Jehovah said to Moses, Write this for a memorial in the book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua, that I will utterly blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under the heavens".
J.T. Yes. God has entered on that war and He will not desist while we are down here, for Satan is always active, through the flesh, against His rights. The flesh is dealt with *judicially* in its condemnation in Christ on the cross, but it is still here.
Rem. It is the Lord's battle in each one of us, working out God's judgment against sin in our lives.
Ques. Would you say something about the throne of Jah?
J.T. It is a poetic name of Jehovah. It is a question of spiritual understanding as to how deep it goes.
{400}
Probably, it is as near an expression as you can get as to the absolute existence of deity in the Old Testament, showing that it is a spiritual matter. This warfare is an entirely spiritual matter. God is a Spirit. He was against Satan before man was made. It is God against the devil but on new ground now, that is in man. But it is God in a spiritual way against the devil.
W.M. Do you not think that this is really Satan expressing himself through man?
J.T. It is new ground. God had to combat with Satan before man was made. It is the same God and the same Satan. Only the battle-ground is different. That is where my responsibility comes in; do I keep the throne clear?
J.W.D. It says: "And Moses built an altar". Is that the subject of ministry or what the minister is characteristically?
J.T. It is the minister, I think. "And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it Jehovah-nissi", meaning Jehovah *my* banner. He is in the conflict. Of course it involves the divine economy because Moses, Aaron, and Hur would denote the great intercessory system, whether it be Christ interceding, or the saints. It is those that watch for our souls. It is what God has provided for christians, so that we begin to see and value what He has provided.
E.G.McA. You have been applying this warfare to each individual. Why does the minister build the altar and not the individual?
J.T. Well, that is the place the minister has. It is the divine economy. Moses comes into evidence -- he builds it. It is the place God acquires with you as you see the results of your labours in the saints. You will find that constantly in the epistles; the ministers have in mind the results of their labours, (See @Philippians 2: 12 - 16 and @Colossians 1: 28).
W.M. Paul speaks of the gentiles being offered up through his ministry.
{401}
J.T. Encouragement in seeking to serve the saints is in results, and God is graciously showing that there are results among the brethren as they come into a clearer apprehension of the assembly. Thus the toil of the brethren "is not in vain in the Lord", @1 Corinthians 15: 58. It is the fruit of the ministry through one and another. It is not to occupy us with persons, but with what God provides. It is the outcome of the divine economy.
F.I. Is Moses, in building the altar, bringing into evidence what is supported? Does he bring in what is at the back of his ministry?
J.T. Yes. God's power; that is the banner the minister carries, so that Paul says in writing to the Corinthians: "that the surpassingness of the power may be of God, and not from us", @2 Corinthians 4: 7.
A.N.W. May I read a few verses in connection with that from @2 Corinthians 6: "but in everything commending ourselves as God's ministers, in much endurance, in afflictions, in necessities, in straits, in stripes, in prisons, in riots, in labours, in watchings, in fastings, in pureness, in knowledge, in long-suffering, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in love unfeigned, in the word of truth, in the power of God" (verses 4 - 7). Think of all these elements marking a minister!
J.T. Quite so. You can see how he carried this banner, displaying it for the sake of the truth throughout his letters. Certain men there were vying with the apostle, seeking to displace him in the affections of the saints; Satan having in view to displace the authority of Christ, which Paul represented. The hand was on the throne of Jah at Corinth.
Rem. They were speaking of the wrong thing -- He was despicable in his speech, they said, but "the kingdom of God is not in word but in power", @1 Corinthians 4: 20.
J.T. Now, in chapter 24 we see Moses building an altar in relation to the people again as committing
{402}
themselves to the words of the covenant. In chapter 17 the altar really implies the Spirit. It is the minister's work in that relation. The Spirit is recognised. It has that in view, that the power is of God, which means the power of the Spirit, 'Jehovah my banner' is the power of the Spirit, as in Romans, but in chapter 24 it is the saints coming into fellowship, as it were. You rejoice in seeing them committing themselves to the covenant. Moses does not write the words until they commit themselves to them. "And Moses came and told the people all the words of Jehovah, and all the judgments; and all the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words that Jehovah has said will we do! And Moses wrote all the words of Jehovah". I would like the brethren to notice that, it is *words* that the saints have committed themselves to. They are written. He sees them all coming into fellowship. At Pentecost there were three thousand, "And they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers". @Acts 2: 42. They are coming into the thing and it says, "And Moses wrote all the words of Jehovah, and rose up early in the morning, and built an altar under the mountain, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel". This altar suggests that Moses is looking at the effect of the work of God and bringing the saints into commitment to the covenant. There may be many among us now that have not definitely committed themselves. The altar is not reared up in regard of an individual, but in relation to all (the twelve tribes are recognised), because the fellowship is a matter of all the saints. It all lies in the words of the covenant, what God says in expressing His mind to us. How great a privilege to be brought into that! And the people say, We will go in for that.
W.M. The "all" is significant.
J.T. It is, "All the words that Jehovah has said will we do!"
{403}
W.M. We might accept what was pleasing to ourselves and omit the rest.
J.T. The altar here is in relation to the twelve pillars -- it is Moses appreciation of the position, twelve pillars meaning that in his thoughts he has included all the saints. It is a whole idea. He is not leaving any out.
S.McC. As chapter 17 suggests the earlier part of Romans, I was wondering if there would be a suggestion in @Romans 12 where the one body in Christ is brought in, as to what we have in connection with this altar?
J.T. All are brought into it, and then the idea of measure is there. It is a question of the measure of faith, and I believe that is the allusion here in the youths. There is a measure of growth there, not full-grown men, but there is the growth indicated in "youths".
Ques. Would the first verse of @Romans 12 be the committal: "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the compassions of God, to present your bodies ..."?
J.T. Yes. "Present your bodies".
W.M. It is priesthood coming out in embryo.
J.T. @Romans 12 is the definite beginning of priesthood. You have only your body to offer. It is not a spiritual sacrifice exactly, but it is an offering, it is something to *present* to God.
A.P.T. Would this chapter in Exodus go as far as John's epistle: "and our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ", @1 John 1: 3?
J.T. Pretty much. That is the apostles fellowship -- it is their fellowship. At Pentecost the three thousand converts came into that -- the apostles fellowship.
W.M. We have not fellowship with the Father and the Son.
J.T. No, the apostles had that, but we come into their fellowship. Moses here represents more the apostolic side. He had been on the mount with God and it would be the sense up there of 'God and I'.
{404}
God would convey that to him. So that Moses is representing God. He conveys all the words of God and the people accept them. And now he writes them down. What is written is fixed.
Rem. In chapter 17 he is told to write them in the book, but here he does it of himself.
Ques. What is suggested in this altar being built under the mountain?
J.T. The mountain had a great place in Exodus. It alludes to the place of resource -- where God will open up His mind to us.
W.M. Moses disclaimed being a good speaker, but he was a wonderful writer.
J.T. The Lord says: "But if ye do not believe his writings, how shall ye believe my words?" @John 5: 47.
F.R.A. What is the thought in the blood in basins?
J.T. It is *quantity*. Under these circumstances divine love flows out. @Romans 5 might be brought in here, it involves the covenant. The love of God is shed abroad -- there is a plenitude of it. There is a large quantity of blood; it is put in basins and sprinkled on the altar and on the people, and, according to @Hebrews 9, on the book, too.
F.R.A. It is the only basis on which we could have the covenant.
J.T. The fact that there is so much blood is to call attention to the volume of love.
Rem. It is not the blood viewed from the judicial side of the death of Christ, but the love of God.
W.M. Do you think the idea is that the book and the people and the altar were morally one?
J.T. The book was on God's part; the people and the altar stood together. The covenant is thus ratified by death. God and His people are thus in the bond of the covenant. This comes in between the two thoughts of ascension -- God directing them to go up and their going up (verses 1, 9). Between these verses you get the testimony to the committal of the people. God is
{405}
calling upon us today to commit ourselves. It is worth our while. As the people commit themselves, Moses builds this altar at the foot of the mountain.
Ques. Does the apostle Peter refer to this passage when he says: "by sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ", @1 Peter 1: 2?
J.T. Just so, to *that kind* of obedience, and the sprinkling of the blood, too.
Ques. Would you say a little in relation to the offerings? There are certain offerings that are omitted. There are just the burnt-offerings and peace-offerings of bullocks -- what is for God and what is for ourselves.
J.T. Burnt-offerings are for God, affording sweet savour. Peace-offerings mean that we are in a good state of soul and at peace one with another as before God. They indicate spiritual prosperity. A meeting like this conveys the idea; God has His part in it, but the peace-offering implies that there is a spiritual richness among the brethren.
Ques. Why the youths?
J.T. There is *growth* there. They are not children; they have got beyond that stage. Young men convey the thought of freshness and vigour, and these features appearing in the exercise of priesthood are quite in keeping with a scene in which divine love as witnessed in the death of Christ is typically set forth.
W.M. Moses appointed these youths for this service without instruction also.
J.T. Yes. We know what to do under those circumstances. Under the mountain is the place of resource. Much is going to follow on this. The mountain of God has a great place in Exodus. It is the place of resource as was laid down in @Genesis 22: "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided" (verse 14). That runs through.
Rem. "And Israel encamped there before the mountain" (chapter 19: 2).
{406}
J.T. They have come to the place of resource and divine disclosures. Moses had already been there, chapter 3, and they were to "serve God upon this mountain".
Ques. Does the breaking of bread correspond?
J.T. Yes; it is the covenant and our committal to it.
{407}
"WE HAVE AN ALTAR" (5)
@Exodus 20: 22 - 26; @Exodus 27: 1 - 8; @Leviticus 8: 11
J.T. It was made clear that the two altars Moses made of his own volition, had to do with the *ministerial* side of our position -- how the servant worships in relation to his service and its results.
This afternoon we may see that God is now putting forth *His* claim in regard of the altar. In connection with it there is the assertion of the rights of His love in the covenant. He puts in these requirements so that that love should be regarded and responded to by the saints themselves. The word is to them. "Thus shalt thou say to the children of Israel: Ye have seen that I have spoken with you from the heavens. Ye shall not make beside, me gods of silver, and ye shall not make to you gods of gold. An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me ..." God had asserted His rights in love in the early part of the chapter. He speaks of the thousands of those who love Him, at the beginning of the chapter, and He wants to retain those thousands, and add to them. They are to be preserved according to the requirements of love.
W.M. Why do you think the altar of earth is obligatory and the altar of stone is conditional?
J.T. The first is imperative; there is no worship at all according to God without that. The other is contingent on state or ability. It is a question of whether there is ability, but the altar of earth preserves us in our relations with God.
W.M. Even if we are not equal to the stone altar.
J.T. We shall see that -- the stone altar is something within our reach, but the altar of earth is imperative. God is not leaving it to us now as to what we shall do. He has already those who love Him. The book of Genesis shows that there are always lovers of God; the book of Exodus formally owns this and is to conserve
{408}
what there is, however small, and add to it, and maintain it in relation to God according to His own terms. God speaks of the thousands of those who love Him; not those that *ought* to love Him, but those who *do*. You have that here, they are what God has in His mind; they are the apple of His eye. So that He prescribes here the kinds of altars that He requires.
A.N.W. Why do you suppose that so much of this chapter is unknown to men, whereas other parts of it are known pretty generally? The first part is generally known.
J.T. Yes. The young man who came out and kneeled down to the Lord knew these commandments, and even assumed to have kept them. He did not understand the second part -- what relates to the altars.
A.N.W. Quite. He was not approaching with his altar of earth.
W.M. He had a god of gold!
J.T. He kneeled down. He was an attitudinarian. He was agile in running into the way and as agile in leaving because of the test. He did not accept the idea of the altar of earth. That is to say, Christ is the altar -- it is the incarnation, Christ as Man.
A.N.W. I wonder, too, whether he was not approaching by the steps and thus was exposed?
J.T. Quite so. He did not have any appreciation of Christ really, although he appeared to make much of Him -- calling Him "Good Master", but he did not understand the incarnation.
W.M. Do you look upon the altar of earth as referring to the incarnation?
J.T. Yes, Christ as Man. So is the altar of stone; it is the same thought carried on into permanency, into resurrection.
Ques. Does the altar of earth involve our disappearance?
J.T. Yes, through the sacrifice of Christ. He came by water and blood. He came to die.
{409}
Ques. What would you say of Naaman asking for "two mules burden of this earth", @2 Kings 5: 17?
J.T. That is the earth that Elisha had stood on, not Syrian earth. We have to discriminate as to what is meant. The Lord Jesus is unique; there is no other like Him. His is a humanity of its own kind.
W.M. Although He came into earthly conditions, it was *this earth* -- His own unique flesh.
A.P.T. What gospel would bring that out?
J.T. Luke particularly; he sets out the Lord's identification with man. You get it from the very beginning. The children being in flesh and blood He took part in the same (@Hebrews 2: 14).
Ques. Do you discriminate between Adam as earth, and the Lord's humanity?
J.T. Adam was the ordinary. What our brother alludes to in 2 Kings is "this earth". It gives it a distinction.
W.M. Do you not think that the thief on the cross was enlightened as to the humanity of Christ?
J.T. Yes, I do.
W.M. That was the altar of earth.
J.T. That is right. "This man has done nothing amiss", @Luke 23: 41. There was no such Man as that before, and his eyes were opened to that. Again, the centurion says, "Certainly this was a righteous man", @Luke 23: 47. In Luke he does not call Him the Son of God, but a righteous Man -- the kind of Man He was. "Wherefore the holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God" (@Luke 1: 35); not the Person but the thing -- the holy thing -- that is substantial. Holiness in Him was substantial; not merely external, as babes of christians are; they are holy, too, but only relatively, not substantially. There was never a substantially holy babe before. That has to be understood in this; it is written for us. Moses would not understand, perhaps; but it is written for
{410}
us, for those who understand the gospel of Luke. It is a divine requirement now.
G.McP. Luke enlarges on the peace-offerings, so that we have the peace-offering and the burnt-offering. "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men", @Luke 2: 14.
J.T. It will be well for us to keep in mind that God has the thousands of those that love Him. They are to worship in spirit and in truth. The epistle of John brings out those that love God, but we are in danger of turning to idols nevertheless. This altar would keep us from turning away from God.
Ques. Did Moses in the seventeenth chapter build this kind of altar?
J.T. We are not told. The earlier altars are left to the builders in that sense, but now God is stating what *He* requires. He has thousands of those that love Him, and He indicates the line on which they are to be kept. There is always the danger of idolatry. God's love has come to light, and we may be sure that the enemy would do all to turn His people away from Him. The practical thing is that we are among the thousands of those that love God and He wishes us to continue in that, and if we are to continue in it, we must have this altar.
W.M. How do you connect continuance with the altar?
J.T. It preserves the kind of humanity that is according to God. We get confirmation in the letters to Corinth. The apostle stresses the kind of Man Christ was. "For other foundation can no man lay besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ", @1 Corinthians 3: 11. It is not the Son of God there, but "Jesus Christ" -- the *kind of* Man. The Corinthians were not going on with that Man. Earlier he said that he determined to know nothing among them, but Jesus Christ and Him crucified. Here he says, "Wherefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry", @1 Corinthians 10: 14. We are in danger of it. We
{411}
are always in danger of it, and the corrective and preservative for us is the kind of Man that came out in Christ.
Ques. Do we get the idea in Peter: "for Christ also has suffered for you, leaving you a model that ye should follow in his steps", @1 Peter 2: 21.
J.T. We are sanctified "unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ", @1 Peter 1: 2.
W.M. Is it not more the order of the Man than the character?
J.T. Yes, the order; of course this is proved in what came out in Him.
Rem. The second Man out of heaven.
J.T. That leads us further, although in keeping with what we are saying.
A.N.W. It would involve the exposure of the kind of man I am. Does that go with it?
J.T. It does. The early part of the chapter is the assertion of God's rights, and in that assertion, the prohibition of all that is contrary -- prohibition in the ten words. The ten words judge the man in the flesh: "for by law is knowledge of sin", @Romans 3: 20. It is characteristic. "But the commandment having come, sin revived, but I died" (@Romans 7: 9); the commandment is the tenth. He was slain by the commandment.
W.M. Is it not rather remarkable that the ten prohibitions, when viewed spiritually, characterise those that love God?
J.T. They do. The Lord abridges them. He says: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy understanding. This is the great and first commandment. And the second is like it. Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments the whole law and the prophets hang", @Matthew 22: 37 - 40. So that you can see what is in mind in this chapter.
W.M. That is another way of looking at it. Would
{412}
you say that the order of Christ's manhood is hidden in those ten prohibitions?
J.T. I think so. You might say to Jehovah, You have talked about these thousands who love you. Where are they? But God says, I will give you an example of one person, and that is in the next chapter. The Hebrew slave is the first man that says, "I love". Look at what he does. God sets out His lovers *in Christ*. Christ is the great Model of the lovers of God. That is chapter 21, and that model is worked out in chapters 21, 22, and 23, the idea of love in the *most difficult* circumstances. Love is worked out in those chapters.
A.H.P. Would there be any correspondence between the altar of earth and "Jesus Christ come in flesh", @1 John 4: 2? We are told in the second epistle of John that there would be many that would deny that.
J.T. Quite so. "Every spirit which confesses Jesus Christ come in flesh is of God". That is the test -- what He is in flesh. John speaks of Him coming in flesh, Luke speaks of Him born, "that holy thing". We get the full thought of His humanity in Luke.
W.M. Would the thought of "Jesus Christ come in flesh", carry you back to His origin?
J.T. It is really an assertion of His deity. From John's point of view, the incarnation is an act of His own, but Luke has: "The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and power of the Highest overshadow thee", @Luke 1: 35. It is the act of God. It is the human side here -- obedience; growing up as a tender plant, so that you get every view of humanity in Him -- humanity in all its steps in infinite perfection.
G.McP. He emphasises the *Man* Christ Jesus.
J.T. Well, that is the first thing here, and I believe the Lord would especially stress the idea of lovers of God -- do we belong to them? God is conserving them. He is jealous of them that there should be no turning aside from Him. He says: "Ye have seen that I have spoken with you from the heavens". Elsewhere
{413}
He says: "ye heard the voice of the words, but ye saw no form", @Deuteronomy 4: 12. In this sense they were brought into a faith system; although it was not properly the time of faith. But @Hebrews 11 shows that the lovers of God always had faith.
A.N.W. Why are those two verses addressed in the plural? The rest of the chapter is "thou".
J.T. All these verses are addressed to the people really. I think it is not so much Moses as in chapter 25. You will find in the first part of that chapter that the people are to make a dwelling; they are even to make an ark, but otherwise all the way through it is "thou", that is Moses. You scarcely ever get the plural in the first part of the section giving the instructions for the sanctuary. It is all put on Moses; but when you come to the making of the parts you get the plural, meaning Bezaleel and others, all wise-hearted people. We have much recurrence of the words "he made", referring to Bezaleel. But here (chapter 20: 22) the word is directly to the people. There is not much difference between the "ye" and the "thou", save where the latter applies specifically to Moses or any particular person. In this God is dealing with the people expressly in view of idolatry, lest their hearts be turned aside. We know what they did later, according to chapter 32; it was there that the people turned aside. Aaron made the calf, but at their instigation.
W.M. It is the responsible side.
J.T. It is. Moses would take it to himself, but it is a general word from God to the people.
W.M. What would you say about: "in all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee"?
J.T. That keeps God before them, as it were, in freshness. Israel was not to have one appearing to Moses, and then a long period in which they would have to live on words, on what had been done or said. It applies to christianity, for christianity is maintained
{414}
*in life* by divine appearings, or comings. "I will come unto thee, and bless thee". It makes christianity a living thing, for it is christianity that is in mind here. Wherever God is, where His name is caused to be remembered, there He comes, and there He blesses His people; it makes christianity what cannot be claimed by any other religion; it is living, made so, of course, by the continual presence of the Spirit, but also by divine appearings, by the Lord's continuous comings.
W.M. So that saints do not choose the place where God is to be remembered.
J.T. *He* chooses it, He keeps matters in hand. He has a sharp look-out for those who love Him lest they turn to idolatry. His presence is a rebuke to idolatry.
G.McP. Would @Matthew 18 fit in here, where He speaks of two or three coming together and He being in the midst of them?
J.T. Matthew does not speak of coming. The Lord says: "And behold, *I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age", @Matthew 28: 20. That is a great general thought. Matthew does not speak of the Lord coming to us, but John does. That was not anything new, because it was His way during His life down on earth, to come in and out among the brethren. He inaugurated that principle. "The Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John" (@Acts 1: 21), meaning from the beginning. He continues that in a spiritual way. There was public ministry until He was received up into heaven. It maintains us in freshness, for every time He comes it checks any tendency towards idolatry.
A.P.T. The Lord says: "If ye love me, keep my commandments", @John 14: 15. Is that the responsible side? The privilege side comes in later when He says "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me" (verse 21). Is that the way it works?
J.T. The way the matter stands in @John 14 is: "If ye love me, keep my commandments. And I will beg
{415}
the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever, the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it does not see him nor know him; but ye know him, for he abides with you, and shall be in you". That is a divine Person. He is to come and stay. He does not come and go. The Holy Spirit is here during the dispensation, but it is on the principle of our keeping the Lord's commandments, as loving Him. The Lord says that the world does not see Him nor know Him. He shows that the world is unable to see Him or know Him, but yet we see Him. "For he abides with you, and shall be in you". Then He says to them: "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you" (verse 18). That is *additional*. The Holy Spirit is to come, to remain, which would be in accord with Matthew. He remains with us. But the Lord says, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you". That is another thing. Judas says: "Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself to us and not to the world?" That is the question. That requires spirituality; it cannot be understood by the natural mind. One can understand the Holy Spirit coming down and staying, but how will the Lord come? "I am coming *to* you". Not *for* you, but *to* you; that means that according to the appointed time we are to stay here. That is the position in John; we are to be here as lovers of Christ, the Holy Spirit with us, and the Lord will add to that. He will not leave us orphans, because the Holy Spirit cannot take the place of Christ in the sense of actual relationship with us, in the sense of parental care. It requires a Person, known among the disciples as Christ was. He says: "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him". It is a question of love. The link right through is love.
A.N.W. Would you carry the thought just one step further, "and we will come"?
{416}
J.T. The next thing is Judas question, how He was to manifest Himself to them and not to the world. So He says: "If any one love me, he will keep my word". By the keeping of the "word", I believe He means tabernacle conditions, and hence the Father and Son are free to come. It affords conditions for divine Persons.
F.I. Would that be connected more with the altar of stone than with the altar of earth?
J.T. @John 14 is a question of Christ risen. It is more the altar of stone.
F.I. I thought "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me", would suggest the idea of intelligence and desire so that the altar of stone is built although not demanded.
J.T. Yes. It is *if*; the "if" implies that God is making allowance for small stature among us. We are not unchristianised, nor unchurched by the absence of it -- we are still owned. "And *if* thou make me an altar of stone ..." It is a question of whether you *can* do it. If you can, do not let a human tool come upon it. Do not let the natural man in it at all. It is Christ risen.
W.M. It is seen in Colossians.
J.T. It is a question of being risen with Christ. "In which ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead", @Colossians 2: 12. It is thus a question of the power of God.
W.M. And in Colossians Christ is everything.
J.T. Colossians is the prohibition of the human tools and steps.
Ques. Why do you think that the altar of earth is unconditional but the altar of stone is conditional?
J.T. It is just what we have been saying, the altar of earth is imperative -- it must be, otherwise you are not on christian ground at all.
Rem. Yes, but you said the one is Christ in incarnation and the other is Christ in resurrection.
{417}
J.T. But God accepts us as on christian ground even while we are still in flesh and blood. We are not risen in Romans nor are we said to be risen with Christ in Corinthians, but in Colossians we are risen. We are said to be risen "through faith of the working of God", but we may not all be able to take that ground; God however does not unchristianise us because of that, nor does He prohibit our worship. But if you go on to Colossians He is the more pleased. We are however to see to it that no human tools are employed upon it and that we do not go up to it by steps. Human innovation is always a danger.
Ques. Like creeds?
J.T. That would be the expansion of it. Public christendom now is a sorrowful testimony to the wholesale disregard of these instructions.
W.M. What of the altar on the wilderness side of Jordan?
J.T. It was an altar of "grand appearance", for which there was no divine warrant. It was testimony on the part of the people who did not enter the land that they did not wish to go in, but would retain a title there. God does not care for that; He is insisting here on two kinds of altars, an altar of earth and an altar of stone, and He is refusing any human innovation. *If* there be an altar of stone, there must be no addition to it.
J.W.D. Why do you think that we do not all move on to the idea of the altar of stone?
J.T. It is a question of spirituality. I suppose in most of our meetings we scarcely ever get on to the altar of stone. It is a question of being "raised with him through faith of the working of God". That is to say, I believe that as Christ has been raised by the power of God I am raised, too. It is only a question of time. It can be thus laid hold of in assembly as God's mind for us. I take that ground. It is not merely theory, but *faith*. Besides being raised, we are said to
{418}
be quickened in Colossians. This is not said to be by faith; it is actual.
S.McC. In chapter 32 they prefer something carefully chiselled -- the golden calf -- which would stand in contrast to this. It was carefully fashioned with a chisel.
J.T. That is very striking. It is remarkable how God uses what He has set in His creation as a language. The word earth, an altar of earth, spiritually understood as acceptable to God could only be Christ. It could not be Adam. We arrive at the truth at times by the principle of elimination. It could not be Adam nor any child of Adam. What God accepted on that principle could only be Christ, and Luke gives us that.
A.N.W. The altar of earth is enhanced by what is placed on it. Not so the altar of stone.
J.T. Yes. "And shalt sacrifice on it thy burnt-offerings, and thy peace-offerings, thy sheep and thine oxen".
A.N.W. I was thinking that the altar of earth was outwardly of very mean appearance.
J.T. That is the thought -- a contrast to all the great things men have built up for show. The altar of earth is obscurity here, littleness. The altar of stone spiritually is out of sight; it is Christ apprehended as risen from the dead. It means permanency. Stone in Scripture in this sense is permanency; it abides.
A.P.T. Would Peter's confession of the Lord fit in with the idea; "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God", @Matthew 16: 16?
J.T. It would. There were both altars included in that. The Christ is what He was, anointed by God. The Son of the living God is what He is declared to be by resurrection; He is declared to be that. Faith is based on the declaration, but Peter had both these thoughts by revelation of the Father.
A.P.T. @Romans 1 gives you that. It sets you on a firm footing.
{419}
Ques. What is the difference between "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness" (@Genesis 1: 26), and the Lord Jesus as "image of the invisible God", @Colossians 1: 15?
J.T. The word "likeness" was added in Genesis, but it was never applied to Christ. He was always the image. He is representative of all that the invisible God is. He is representative of that here.
Ques. Was that ever seen in Adam except in figure?
J.T. He was made after God, after His likeness. There was a limited representation of God; Christ is this infinitely. I think what has been said about the altar of earth, practically, is that our worship is small, there is nothing showy about it. It is the humanity of Christ. We approach on that line, through Him, through Christ, once known here in obscurity, and put to death. But then there is the further thought of what He is in resurrection. That is, that Man died, but He is in a new and permanent condition now. He is raised by the glory of the Father. Peter says: "who has raised him from among the dead and given him glory, that your faith and hope should be in God", @1 Peter 1: 21. We are brought into a realm of spirituality, a realm of faith where we see things that men do not see, and we are content with that. All that is hidden; Colossians is what is hidden. It is not in public view. The danger was "philosophy and vain deceit", but faith sees no need for any addition. All the fulness of the Godhead is in Christ and we are filled full in Him towards God. Man does not see it at all. A person coming into one of our meetings may say, "God is among you", but he does not apprehend what we have in our position God-ward.
F.I. Would the altar of stone be that which would take us from wilderness conditions to the other side, or is the altar of stone on the other side of Jordan?
J.T. Yes. That is where it belongs. Christ risen is over Jordan. Joshua built "an altar of whole stones,
{420}
over which iron had not been lifted up", @Joshua 8: 31.
Ques. Going back to the altar of earth, does that extend to the question of fellowship? Are we obligated as christians to put our hand to all the responsibilities connected with fellowship?
J.T. Yes. The Lord's supper is *publicly* a dead Christ; that is our solemn position, involving fellowship. We show the Lord's *death* till He come. But the altar of stone is beyond that; it is Christ risen; thus we know Him in the assembly.
A.N.W. So that while the altar of earth is small, it is seen, whereas the altar of stone is hidden.
J.T. That is right. It is out of view of the natural mind. The Lord says, "The world sees me no longer; but ye see me; because I live ye also shall live". We are identified with what is poor and despicable. Look at Him on the cross, suffering the jeers of His enemies, and He went down into the grave. They did not see Him in resurrection. What He is as risen is a matter of faith, apprehended and realised by the Spirit.
E.G.McA. Do we get an illustration of that in the altar, "To the unknown God. Whom therefore ye reverence, not knowing him, him *I* announce to you", @Acts 17: 23? And then he brings in the resurrection, the altar of stone.
J.T. Yes. It says, "he announced the glad tidings of Jesus and the resurrection to them", @Acts 17: 18. The Greeks came up to see Him, saying, "we desire to see Jesus", @John 12: 21. That was intelligible to the Greek; but the Son of God -- they cannot go that length.
F.I. I should like to ask a question in regard to the dead Christ. Do we at the supper *remember* a dead Christ?
J.T. No. His death is before us; we appropriate it -- feed on it. But we remember *Him*, the living One who is absent. It is not at all the idea of *remembering* a dead Christ.
{421}
F.I. The public side is a dead Christ.
J.T. That Man died. "Jesus Christ, and him crucified", @1 Corinthians 2: 2.
W.M. We do not *remember* His death, we remember *Him*.
J.T. We remember the absent One -- the Person. The eating of the bread and drinking of the cup by the saints is a testimony; it shows the Lord's death till He come. God thus maintains testimony to the world's crime. Identification with Christ as put to death here marks our fellowship.
Ques. Is the altar of earth provisional?
J.T. Yes. The Lord Jesus became flesh and blood provisionally, not to stay in that condition. It refers to the days of His humiliation, what He was as humbled here, and that Man died; that is what we are identified with. Any one could see this testimony at Corinth. I have often pictured to myself the Jewish synagogue, the heathen temple, and the meeting room of the christians. A man comes into the latter after being at the other two. What does he see there? What altar have they? It is seen in the Lord's supper. Paul's ministry there stressed this -- Jesus Christ and Him crucified. The incomer may not understand, but nevertheless there it is. It is a testimony. But beyond that view, there is this other thing, the wholly spiritual side of the position -- Christ in resurrection; God is approached and worshipped on that line also. We get into association with a risen, living Christ.
Ques. What would answer to the steps today?
J.T. It is, I suppose, approaching God in a humanly convenient way. By this we are exposed.
W.M. In connection with the altar of stone, there are no directions given as to what offerings are to be offered.
J.T. Just so. It seems to indicate the kind of service we shall be engaged with eternally: "to him be glory in
{422}
the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages", @Ephesians 3: 21.
Rem. It is Himself. The burnt-offering and peace-offering suggest what He has done, but the altar of stone may suggest Himself.
J.T. The altar of earth does, too, but Himself in the lowly condition, here, the conditions in which He died. But the altar of stone is His permanent condition, what He is and ever will be. What He was in the early chapters of the Acts, He will be for ever.
A.H.P. "The stone which the builders cast away as worthless, this is become head of the corner", @1 Peter 2: 7.
Ques. What is the difference between the altar of stone and of acacia-wood?
J.T. That is another thing and which brings us to our next scripture, chapter 27. "And thou shalt make the altar of acacia-wood, five cubits the length, and five cubits the breadth; the altar shall be square; and the height thereof three cubits". This is Christ as *bearing* the judgment. It is the bearing power of the Lord, not now His humiliation, but the moral power He has to sustain even the very judgment of God to its utmost extent. That is another view of the humanity of Christ. "And he went out, bearing his cross", @John 19: 17. He is able to do that. "Who himself bore our sins in his body on the tree ...", @1 Peter 2: 24. It is His bearing power. The acacia-wood is supposed to have the greatest strength of any wood.
S.McC. Would there be a suggestion in @Psalm 78: 61, "And gave his strength into captivity, and his glory into the hand of the oppressor"? The strength that marked Him in Gethsemane.
J.T. Quite. It is Christ as the ark.
Rem. The glory is the gold that overlaid it.
J.T. Yes.
Rem. Here the altar is overlaid with brass, or copper.
J.T. The acacia-wood was in both the ark and the
{423}
altar. The same idea is in the ark of the covenant, covered over with gold -- bearing the testimony before men; all that God is was sustained there in a Man. But in the altar all that God is against sin was sustained.
W.M. "The reproaches of them that reproach thee have fallen upon me", @Psalm 69: 9.
J.T. God was there. "They have both seen and hated both me and my Father", @John 15: 24. It was all there, sustained in a Man. "He that has Seen me has seen the Father", @John 14: 9.
A.H.P. Peter got a glimpse of these two features in the Lord: "testifying before of the sufferings which belonged to Christ, and the glories after these", @1 Peter 1: 11. The One capable of sustaining the sufferings would be the One capable of sustaining the glory.
J.T. Quite so. The ark is Christ here. It is a question of Christ here in power sustaining all that God is before men, and incurring all the reproach which that drew forth, representing the power by which we are placed in the inheritance. The altar is of the same wood but covered with brass, or copper, and it is to sustain the whole weight of divine wrath against sin. Both bring out what He is as Man.
G.McP. Why are the dimensions of this altar given and none for the altar of stone or earth?
J.T. When you come to the divine dwelling there must be measurements. Everything must be according to the mind of God in accuracy. The measurements here would mean that Christ was crucified in weakness but lives by the power of God. The weakness would be in the five cubits, and the power of God in the three.
W.M. You say the five cubits represent weakness and the three His power?
J.T. That is what I understand. You will be struck with how normal everything was in all the facts related in the gospels, from the time the Lord was apprehended until He was put into the grave. There was nothing miraculous. When He said, "I am he" (@John 18: 6),
{424}
they fell to the ground, but He went through all as Man; so much so that He is said to have been "crucified in weakness" (@2 Corinthians 13: 4), but "the weakness of God is stronger than men", @1 Corinthians 1: 25.
W.M. What is the meaning of that?
J.T. It was real humanity, but in such power as to overcome. He *felt* it that He did not have any sleep that night; He could not have eaten much; He *felt* the buffeting; those awful blows of the Roman soldiers affected Him, they must necessarily have weakened Him. But He had strength to go through.
Rem. "If it be possible ...", @Matthew 26: 39.
J.T. That shows the *feelings* He had. He measured what the forsaking meant. It was moral perfection to shrink from that, but to take it up in His perfect knowledge of it was His perfection, too.
Ques. When He said, "I am", and they fell to the ground, does that exemplify divine power as seen in manhood? There has been some suggestion as to the thought of the Lord reverting back to the thought of deity as in manhood here.
J.T. He was God. The deity shone out when He says, "I am". "I am" is deity. "I am", in @John 8: 24 and @John 18: 8 really implies deity. If they sought Him, "I am", He says, and they went backward and fell to the ground. But generally He is the Man, He is the Sufferer. He was crucified in weakness. That is the position -- it is real humanity.
W.M. There was full testimony to the power that was there. An angel appeared from heaven strengthening Him.
J.T. That is Luke. That brings out what we are saying, that He was a real Man, and accepted all these ministrations.
J.W.D. Was His actual physical death the result of physical weakness?
J.T. No, it was not. The Spirit of God is careful
{425}
to guard that -- no one dying in physical weakness could give a loud cry.
Rem. He says, "Father, into thy hands I commit my spirit", @Luke 23: 46. Does that not show that He did it.
J.T. Yes. The power is in the loud cry. Matthew says, "having again cried with a loud voice ...", @Matthew 27: 50. The centurion noticed that. It was different from any death he had seen, and no doubt he had seen many deaths in such circumstances.
Well, there is a great deal that could be said about the measurements, the utensils, and all that. Every item has its meaning in this great subject; but what should be noticed in Leviticus is the appreciation of all this that evidently was with Moses. It seems to me that Moses was capable of appreciating something of what was there. One can understand that Moses in his measure at that time would think of these things -- What does all this measurement mean, what does this brass mean, what does this fire that is to be burning on the altar all the time mean? I think all that enters into his action in @Leviticus 8: 11. It says: "And he sprinkled thereof on the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all its utensils, and the laver and its stand, to hallow them". It seems as if he says, There is something there that is different. Although he was told to anoint the altar, there is no record that he was told to sprinkle the oil on it seven times. It is to bring out that there was one who had an appreciation of Christ as the Sufferer. It should be a word to us as to whether we have any little appreciation of Christ as the Sufferer. God must have instructed Moses in some way, so that he furnishes an example of one who has a great thought of this. He sprinkled the oil on it seven times. Moses says, There is something here that is different from anything else. It is a suffering Christ, One capable of sustaining the whole weight of divine wrath. That ought to touch every heart.
{426}
Ques. Did Mary of Bethany have that in mind when she anointed His feet?
J.T. She did. The Lord said: "Suffer her to have kept this for the day of my preparation for burial", @John 12: 7.
W.M. She expended so much that she was criticised.
A.P.T. Naaman had to plunge seven times in Jordan. Would there be a suggestion that he had to learn something of the sufferings of Christ in a full way?
J.T. The passage reads: "And Elisha sent a messenger to him, saying, Go and wash in the Jordan seven times ..." (@2 Kings 5: 10), or, as the footnote says, "bathe". In verse 14: "Then he went down, and *plunged* himself seven times in the Jordan ..." It is very like the action of Moses in going beyond what was required, showing how thoroughly he had taken it in. He would not miss any virtue that was in Jordan. I think it is in accord with Moses sprinkling the altar seven times. It shows how Moses mind was on it.
Throughout Moses writings you find things that he did of himself in addition to what he was told to do, as if God was bringing out the thought that, although it is a time of imperfection, one man was seeing things beyond. In @Exodus 12 he tells the people to use hyssop to put the blood on the lintel and door-posts. From verses 1 to 20 we have what the people were to do, and from verses 21 to 28 we have Moses epitome of it. He tells the people what they are to do from his own point of view, and he says, "take a bunch of hyssop" (verse 22). That is not found in the instructions. You may depend on it, it was the sense of his own littleness which he had. There are other instances of this kind. It is to bring out that the ministers are listening to things. Get your own view of it and give it out according to your own estimate of it. That is where the power lies. Moses has been going over the ground with God, and this one item strikes him peculiarly, and he sprinkles the oil on it seven times.
{427}
S.McC. He *adds* to what was required.
J.T. It gives spiritual touch and buoyancy.
Rem. Paul says something in @1 Corinthians 7 of his own, which is recorded as the holy writings.
J.T. Yes, he tells us it is his own judgment.
A.H.P. To provide the ointment that Mary had, she would value the Lord and all that He was to pass through.
J.T. She represents one that sees *beyond*, she anticipates His burial.
{428}
REVIVAL
@2 Chronicles 34: 31 - 33; @2 Chronicles 35: 1 - 5, 10, 15 - 19
These chapters speak of revival, and that is why I have read from them, having in mind to show that, in revivals according to God, persons and things are in their places.
The idea of revival in itself arouses interest, and opens up a wide field of inquiry, and as one inquires one notices that the need of revival is always current in the history of God's people. Even though there be a revival in a general way, the need of it in detail is always current, and is now. Although we have part in a general way in a great revival which has lasted a century (the most important perhaps in the history of the assembly) and which will, I believe, last until the end, it is a question of sustenance, and for this, *individual* revivals are constantly needed.
To illustrate, you find in a man like Timothy -- a devoted servant of Christ -- that he needed to have revival. He had to *rekindle* the gift that was in him; it had become dormant, and that is a word for all such as have served well, and yet not to the full measure. God looks for results and values them, however few, but He looks for *full* measure. In Timothy there was need for revival in regard of his gift. It had burned but now it had become dormant and needed to be rekindled. Also a spiritual assembly like the Philippians -- an assembly that is almost without peer for devotedness (according to the record) -- needed revival at a given time in regard of the great servant through whom the light had come to it. He says, "ye have *revived* your thinking of me", @Philippians 4: 10. It had lagged.
So in a man like Jacob, a spiritual man, who had weathered storms, and stood well at the time of the great exercise at the supposed death of Joseph; and what followed in the dreaded loss of Simeon and
{429}
Benjamin. His spirit evidently had drooped, however. An old brother is capable, indeed most liable to this; old age coming on with its discomforts tends to droopiness, and hence the need of revival. So that in Jacob we have an instance of one who was capable of revival. "And the spirit of Jacob ... *revived*", @Genesis 45: 27. It had not been what it used to be, but now it comes back and in power. His spirit revived as he saw the waggons, witnesses of Joseph being alive. So that, dear brethren, you see how the need of revival is constant with old and young, and I believe it is as this is recognised and felt, that there will be the sustenance of the *great* revival, the general revival. We do not want *it* to droop. I believe God has allowed many sorrows during the past hundred years to this very end, that the revival should be sustained. And it is obligatory upon us to maintain it, especially young ones coming on. The heavy burden, but the great honour, will soon be upon them to sustain the rich heritage that has come down in the way of revival, so that it should not taper out and be lost as the revival in Israel through Josiah was, after his death. It is to be continued, and to this end each one is to see to it that he is not losing in his soul. One has to look back from time to time on one's spiritual history, right back to the very beginning of it, and see whether there has been any retrogression -- any loss sustained that has not been repaired.
Now in this case we find that the revival began with the young. Josiah is a young person; he is on the throne at eight years of age -- an elevation which would tend to harm a boy apart from the preserving hand of God. A like case is Joash. He came into power at seven years of age, but he needed careful watching, which he had under God, and was preserved during the days of Jehoiada. God provides persons who care for us; they watch for our souls, and it is well for young people to recognise them. It is altogether out of the question to think that God would have lambs without shepherds,
{430}
so that we may be sure, as young, that there are those that are watching for our souls. So under Jehoiada's influence all went well for Joash, but he failed when Jehoiada's influence was removed. We do well, dear young people, to find our feet and learn to accept responsibility when we have such an advantage.
Now Josiah did not have that advantage as far as the record shows. He was eight years of age when he came to the throne, and he went on for eight years with little or nothing eventful. Nothing against him, thank God! Then he began to seek after the Lord. Then, at the age of twenty, after he had reigned twelve years, he thinks of purification -- of putting things right in his circumstances as the king of Judah; he purged Judah and Jerusalem, extending even to the territory of the ten tribes. At the age of twenty-six be began to think of cleansing the house of Jehovah and repairing it -- a most interesting phase in a young man at the age of twenty-six! How many there may be here who are about that age! It is well for you to take account of it and see what place the house of God has in your mind and calculations.
In this exercise he comes into a great discovery. That is, as we progress in the things of God, we are constantly recompensed, constantly enriched. So the high priest finds the book of the law. Had it been found earlier in Josiah's history it might not have received the same attention. He was not equal earlier to accord to it the attention that he was equal to at the age of twenty-six. The book was read to him and he rent his clothes. An important matter, and very necessary at such a juncture, that one rends one's clothes. There must be a cause for it in my circumstances. Things are not right. Things had gone well indeed, but the law was the assertion of the rights of love. God waits His opportunities for that -- to assert the rights of His love. But what could be more desirable, dear brethren, than that God should make known to us that He has rights
{431}
over us, and that these are not arbitrary, but the rights of love -- rights that will do the very best for us? And Josiah felt that things were not yet right -- after such a history of faithfulness. He rent his clothes. Rending one's clothes implies that one's circumstances are not right. Is it not wise to look around and see whether my circumstances comport with increased light? If God has caused the light to shine more clearly, and it has caused me to see things that I had not seen before in my circumstances, it is well then to change them. That is, in principle, what the king did. He got light, he would have a full understanding of this book. "Think of what I say, for the Lord will give thee understanding in all things", @2 Timothy 2: 7. These meetings are not merely for the few days we have spent together, but they are opportunities for the Lord to speak to us. What is said is to be considered, and the Lord gives understanding.
So Josiah sends some of his servants to the Lord. He does not name the immediate person to whom to go to obtain the mind of God. "Go, inquire of Jehovah", he says. And the servants inquired of a woman. That is to say, by this time the king had surrounded himself with men who knew what to do. An important matter, too, that his associates are men who know what to do in a crisis. We must go to the Lord, of course; but then, if the Lord has someone to answer questions, well then, that is the one to go to. The king's servants went to Huldah. Why should we go to a woman, one who resided in "the second quarter of the town", to inquire of the Lord? *They* knew. They are not governed by natural feelings of pride. Where those exist, we shall miss the way. This woman is said to be the wife of Shallum, who was the keeper of the wardrobe. The king had just rent his clothes; he will need another suit! The idea is to get a suit suitable to the new light.
Huldah was not, evidently, a woman of social distinction. She lived "in the second quarter of the town",
{432}
according to the better rendering. We have to be on the look-out for these things, and not make any such mistake in divine things as the observance of social differences. We hear people objecting about speech and dialect. They might have done that in Jerusalem when Peter was speaking. There were blemishes, no doubt, from the standpoint of language, but the divine *substance* was there. And the mind of God was there, "Give heed to my words", says Peter, @Acts 2: 14. Call me a Galilaean if you wish, call me an unlettered man, but listen to *my* words. It is not that we should misuse words, or not use right words. It is wonderful the language that the apostles acquired. Take Peter's letters -- what letters they are! They were written in Greek; they are not translations from a dialect, but written in Greek. God is capable of making His servants to speak better than the greatest human orators. But the point is the mind of God. Who can give me the mind of God?
Huldah is called a prophetess. There are several called prophetesses: Miriam, Deborah, Huldah, Anna, and the four daughters of Philip. It is not said that the latter were prophetesses, but that they prophesied. But this is a prophetess, and they went to her. If you have godly associates, such as you can trust, it is a great advantage. "Evil communications corrupt good manners", @1 Corinthians 15: 33. If Josiah had brought around him unspiritual men, he would have missed this woman. Jeremiah was a prophet; why did they not go to him? They went to Huldah. Whether she lived in a poor house in the second part of the city or not, she had the mind of God. Not that Jeremiah would not have had part in this had they sent to him. He says: "Thy words were found, and I did eat them", @Jeremiah 15: 16. Like Josiah, he had an interest in the find. Perhaps nobody enjoyed it more than Jeremiah. He ate the words of God and he says: "thy words were unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart". You will remember,
{433}
that, although we have a revival in Jeremiah's time, Jeremiah knew that underneath the surface the general state was that the people were far away from God, and hence he had to sit alone. But Josiah acted in his own part, as king, with perfect intelligence in deputing these men to move. They went to the right person. Zephaniah was there, too. Why not go to him? But they did not go to him.
What I am aiming at is to impress you with the fact that we are to be discriminating and not settle too much on persons of distinction. It is the person available -- the person known to be available -- the person that can answer, that is the one to go to. Huldah could answer. She had the mind of God. She sends a message to the king and he feels it, and now the revival, having started, is greatly accelerated.
The first thing is that the king is in his place. Now when I speak of the king in this way, he may be either a type of Christ personally or he may be a type of *royalty* in the christian. These two thoughts are in Scripture. Royalty attaches to the christian as well as to Christ, and whether to Christ or to the christian, it is royalty -- a great feature with God. When David danced before the ark, he was not a type of Christ. It was royalty in the christian, and that is what is so needed among us. We are said to be a "kingly priesthood", @1 Peter 2: 9. Kingship means a man of power. It means a man who says, "I can face that matter"; it is obligatory on me to face it, and I *will* face it. That is the idea of a king, and in facing it, he becomes like a lion; "mighty among beasts, which turneth not away for any", @Proverbs 30: 30.
The first thing is to be in *your* place. The king was in *his* place. If we are to have light, if we are to have evil dealt with, the King must be in His place. Christ is in His place in heaven, but He is not always in His place amongst us, for the reason that we do not give it to Him. Here He is in His place. If it be royalty in
{434}
the christian in the local company, how important it is that each should be in his place, that he should not waive his responsibility. It is his, and as standing in his place he becomes a lion, "which turneth not away for any", a king among beasts. He turns not away for *any*. "The lion which is of the tribe of Juda ... has overcome", says the Spirit of God, @Revelation 5: 5. That is the idea in Judah. He has moral power. He prevailed above his brethren in relation to Joseph and prevailed too before Joseph, as seen in @Genesis 44. There was great persevering power and an accompanying spirit that showed that he was prepared to suffer that a right thought should prevail. And so of him was the "chief ruler", but whether in the chief ruler or the under-rulers, for rule there must be royalty.
So the king is in his place, and what comes out is that he caused the people, all Israel that were present, to abide by the covenant. He was *really* king. He had power, he had influence, he caused the people to abide by the covenant. They were to walk after Jehovah, and to keep His commandments and His testimonies and His statutes, and he caused the people to do so. Kingship is almost lost nowadays; 'dictators' are rising here and there, but royalty is a great thought with God. Royalty according to God means that there is *ability to cause people to do what is right*. Besides this, Josiah cleanses the land here (verse 33).
Now I want to show in the next instance that the recovery is marked by the passover. In connection with this, I want you to keep in view this idea of each being in his place, because that is what is in my mind. Josiah had a passover. We have the remarkable tribute paid to him in the last verse of chapter 34 that "all his days they did not depart from following Jehovah, the God of their fathers". That is, he retained his kingly power all his days, and there can be no possibility of sustaining this great revival in which we have part, aside from the retention of kingly power -- the power that deals
{435}
with evil with unsparing hand and at the same time influences the saints for good. So that "all his days they did not depart from following Jehovah, the God of their fathers".
The next chapter begins: "And Josiah held a passover to Jehovah in Jerusalem; and they slaughtered the passover on the fourteenth of the first month". I just mention that, not to dwell on it, but to point out that the king is aiming at the full thought of God. There was a provision made, as you know, that under certain circumstances the passover could be kept in the second month. That is to say, there was a month of grace, but Josiah does not need this, which is a testimony to his spirituality. So that it is kept on the day primarily ordained in the law.
Then he called upon the Levites to put the ark in *its* place. That is the next thing. All the disciplinary power that the Lord has committed to us is essential and without its exercise we cannot go on. There cannot be a suitable place for the ark while there is compromise. So he says, "Put the holy ark in the house that Solomon the son of David, king of Israel, built" (verse 3). The question is, dear brethren, whether all of us have the ark in its place in our hearts. "And it came to pass when the ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up, Jehovah, and let thine enemies be scattered; And let them that hate thee flee before thy face. And when it rested, he said, Return, Jehovah, unto the myriads of the thousands of Israel", @Numbers 10: 35, 36. Where can it rest today? Where, save in the hearts of those who love God? Nowhere else! If my love grows cold, or I am deflected, the ark has lost its place with me, and this may be extended to all the saints in my locality.
So that in our subject the second great thing is that the ark is in its place. If the king is in his place, and true to his office, the ark will be in its place. And it is no longer the tabernacle in the wilderness, but the temple that Solomon, the son of David, built. That is
{436}
to say, it is a building by the Son; we come into the light of our place in relation to Christ and to each other; set together by Him, as a building, and hence a place for the ark. And it is called here, and here alone as far as I know, "the holy ark". A beautiful tribute to Josiah -- he calls it "the holy ark". How easily we lose the sense of holiness in speaking of these things, dear brethren! The Spirit of God would impress upon us the need of it. The *holy* ark is to be in its place.
Then he says: You are to be in your place, Levi, according to your divisions. You are to be in the sanctuary. That is the next thing. How many of us understand what it is to stand in the holy place, to be in surroundings of holiness as appointed? It is a question of the place of each as a levite. David ordained that they should be in courses, their service was apportioned to them, they had their places, and now they are to take them.
Well, the next thing is that "the service was prepared" (verse 10). That is a great feature of the revival, and what the Lord has been saying to us for many years past has reference to this very thing. The order of the Lord's Supper was very far from being right, yet it was celebrated and the Lord accepted it generally, no doubt. But, by His help, there has been great adjustment and I believe He owns this and is honoured in it. It is one of the great features of the truth the Lord has been emphasising for the moment -- that the service of God should be carried on "according to the writing of David, king of Israel, and according to the writing of Solomon his son". Things must be according to that, pointing to the ministry of Paul.
Is it in this exalted sense prepared for each of us? Do we know how to serve as we sit down in the assembly? Each is to be in his place. "And the priests stood in *their* place, and the Levites in *their* divisions, according to the king's commandment". Dear young people, let us understand these things, that in coming together in
{437}
assembly we are not members of a congregation; each has his function, but if he is to function he is to be in his place, not only as a simple believer in Christ, but as a *priest*. That is most important. The priests were in their places and the levites in theirs.
The next thing is that the singers were in their place. Verse 15 says: "And the singers, the sons of Asaph, were in their place, according to the commandment of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun the king's seer ..." First, the king is in his place. He is dealing with all that is evil, and he is influencing for good. Everybody is keeping to the covenant, and there is unity. Then the ark is in its place; Christ has His place in the hearts of His people. Then the levites are regulated according to the writing of David and Solomon -- these exalted principles. Then the service is prepared. All is ready now to move. The priests are in their place, and the levites are in their courses. What a fine meeting we are going to have! And is it too much to expect that all our meetings are to come under this? That is the aim of the Spirit of God at the present moment, that the great revival that God has blessed us with should continue; that it should not diminish and taper away, but go on to the end, "going on and brightening until the day be fully come", @Proverbs 4: 18. It becomes us, particularly the young ones here, to face these matters.
And now the singers; these are most interesting men. It is peculiar to David that he had seers of his own. He had persons around him that could see things. No one of us could see everything. David was wise enough to have seers around him; he had Gad and Jeduthun, mentioned here, "Jeduthun the king's seer" (verse 15). He was a singer, but he was also a seer. He was not only concerned about the music. The Lord would encourage us to have right music in the assembly, but then we must see at the same time that that is not the only thing. Jeduthun is the seer and he belonged
{438}
to the great economy which had the service of God in view, the greatest result for God which is most important. The great end in Romans, Corinthians, Colossians, and Ephesians is the great result that is to accrue for God. Ephesians shows this end: "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages", @Ephesians 3: 21. David had seers and one of them directed the singing. And the singers are in their place here. This is a great point, dear brethren, as to assembly service, that we are in our places as singers. The Lord is the Chief Singer.
It is the idea of a choir. Each has a place, so that there is no discordant sound, and the service is thus carried on at a high level. Is it not well to keep this going? It is wonderful that God has privileged even us to have part in it! And it is for you and me to put our shoulder to it and see that it goes on, and increases. We are told that there was nothing like this from the days of Samuel.
Before going on to the closing verses, we should notice the latter part of verse 15: "and the doorkeepers were at every gate; they had not to depart from their service, for their brethren the Levites prepared for them". Under these circumstances we are apt to have accessions that will not help us, they are extraneous, and hence the porters did not even leave their posts to eat. That means there is vigilance so that no foreign matter is allowed. It is over against the looseness that we have had to deal with all these years back.
Then it goes on to tell us: "And all the service of Jehovah was prepared the same day, to hold the Passover, and to offer burnt-offerings on the altar of Jehovah according to the commandment of king Josiah. And the children of Israel that were present held the Passover at that time, and the feast of unleavened bread seven days. And there was no Passover like to that holden in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet; neither did all the kings of Israel hold such a Passover
{439}
as Josiah held, and the priests, and the Levites, and all Judah and Israel that were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. In the eighteenth year" (Josiah was twenty-six when all this happened) "of the reign of Josiah was this Passover holden" (verses 16 - 19). That is, dear brethren, the comment of the Spirit of God and we do not want to be lacking of what He approves. The Spirit of God is watching; all these matters are under the eye of heaven and the comments of the Spirit will be made in due course -- what heaven thinks of what is current. It is wise to bear this in mind. We are relatively very few, but here it is all "Israel that were *present*", whether few or many. As present under these circumstances, we come in for these things and this wonderful comment of the Spirit, that "neither did all the kings of Israel hold such a passover as Josiah held". One would venture to say that the current revival in the assembly is peculiarly delightful to heaven.
There are elements of retrogression and corruption among the people of God, and God would impress upon us the great need of royalty: that *evil is dealt with*, that the saints are brought into the positive thing; that as far as lies in you and in me, the people of God stand by the covenant, that the priests and levites are in their places, that the service is prepared, and God honoured in its steady maintenance until the coming of the Lord.
{440}
THE WORSHIP OF GOD
@Hebrews 13: 10 - 15; @Genesis 8: 20; @Exodus 20: 24 - 26; @Numbers 16: 36 - 40
I have the worship of God in view, dear brethren, in reading these scriptures, a matter which God has ever had in mind; as our Lord reminds the Samaritan woman, "the Father seeketh such", that is worshippers who worship "in spirit and in truth", Having it as a primary thought, God has come back to it in peculiar force in recent times. It had been obscured, if not well-nigh lost, during many centuries; indeed the chapter in Numbers from which I have read contemplates, in type, an uprising in the history of the assembly which was calculated to rob God of His part in the assembly. That is why, I believe, these broad plates were enjoined to be made, so that the uprising should not recur. In the recovery of the worship of God, which the passage intimates, there should be a memorial, a testimony, in the broad copper plates, made from the censers employed by the rebels. Employed under divine direction, these would be a testimony amongst those who have part in the recovery of the worship of God, so that there should not be such a rebellion again. I hope to come back to the chapter, but I mention it now, so that you will understand how the matter stands -- that there has been a restoration of that which God had primarily in His mind, that is, His worship, the altar representing this.
You will find also in the chapter I alluded to in Numbers, that the judgment having been executed by God, Moses and Aaron went before the tabernacle; that is, they resumed their places as if the service must and would go on. Now that is how matters stand: there has been a recovery, and there is not to be a recurrence of the rebellion of Korah and his company in any measure amongst those who have part in the recovery or the restoration of the worship of God. So this passage in Hebrews comes in fittingly, conveniently,
{441}
as a basis for what I have to say; it comes in at the end of this remarkable letter written to Christians who had grievously fallen back, who had retrograded from a very high level in the service of God. At one time these Christians in Jerusalem and the province of Judaea were models (see @1 Thessalonians 2: 14), but they had seriously retrograded and were returning to what God had exposed and judged. So the writer, by the Spirit, reminds them that Christians characteristically have an altar -- "We have an altar ..." Not "ye", but "we". It is indeed one of the features, dear brethren, of this epistle, that Christians characteristically *have* certain things, and among these, an altar that is exclusive. It is in connection with it we have this remarkable allusion to the sin-offering, whose blood was carried inside the veil. There were sin-offerings whose blood was not carried inside; but of the sin-offerings whose blood was carried inside and sprinkled on the mercy seat, the bodies were burnt outside the camp; a very solemn allusion to the unmitigated judgment of God on sin -- there was no sparing of it.
God would remind us that, in relation to His worship, there is to be no sparing of sin, whether it be in self or in others. There was no sparing of sin or of sins when the Lord Jesus was on the cross; and God has not changed His mind; we may as well be definite as to that. There can be no change in the divine mind as to anything, and certainly not as to sin. It is unsparingly dealt with, and there can be no worship according to God, aside from the acceptance of this, amongst the people of God, not only in theory but in practice. So that in a general way the service is to go on, according to these verses, to which I hope to come back, but I refer to them now, to clarify the position, so that we might all see what we have in regard to the worship of God. We have an altar, not one of our own device, but such an one as is exclusive, shutting out those that are identified with the current religion of the
{442}
day. It is a very solemn matter that those who serve the tabernacle have no right to eat at this altar. The more we dwell on this subject, the more we shall see how wonderfully good God is to us, to put such an altar into our possession, for that is how it is to be regarded -- we have such an altar. We have many things provided of God which, alas, we do not use; but it is imperative that the altar which is provided should be used; it is exclusive.
Now I want to go to the Old Testament, as one always feels encouraged, in serving the saints, to turn to the Old Testament for detail and expansion. There is a certain exhilaration of spirit as one contemplates that what we are speaking about from the New Testament was thought of long before, and a certain setting was laid down in view of these things being brought in by the Spirit of God sent down from heaven. The Lord Jesus came down from heaven of His *own* volition; the Holy Spirit is said to have been "sent" down from heaven. He is here therefore -- wonderful fact! -- in entire subjection to the divine will, and provides us with the means of understanding, and gives us these terms that belong to the New Testament; but He also reminds us that He had been speaking about them long before.
The uprising that I allude to is really the great hierarchical uprising of christendom, dating back, I might say, to the second century. One of the most solemn things in Scripture is this great uprising of man in a methodical, systematic rebellion against the authority of the Lord Jesus and against His priesthood, by the assumption that, because men are nominal levites, or servants, because they have gift and because they teach or preach, they must be priests. It is a fallacy; and intended to deny the holy priesthood God has ordained, and which applies to every believer who has the Spirit of God. You can see how far-reaching it is, and how God would bring us back to this exclusive
{443}
thought, which shuts out all man's assumption. They have no right to have anything to do with it.
I want to show you how this altar, representing the worship of God, began, for initial ideas always give the key to the fulness of the thought. Noah was the first to build an altar; and I may say the altars of Genesis were not formally required of, nor were they specified for, by God. God is honouring His own work in the souls of men and women, in those early days; He honours the movements of their hearts towards Him. From the incoming of sin, God began the testimony; and immediately men began to respond towards God: a very beautiful thought appearing from the beginning of Genesis. This response began to increase, but in Noah there is a sort of ending to one course of exercise, and this is seen in the verses I have read. The history of Noah is one of the most interesting from this point of view, because it is a question of manhood, of maturity; the worship of God is connected with maturity, not with an infantile condition. And so what you find in Noah is a man that was perfect in his generations; not only perfect in a potential way in the mind of God, but *in his generations*. A man who had a family, a man who could do things and could face great matters. Think of the greatness of one man who could face on God's behalf the state of wickedness in a world which God was about to overwhelm in the deluge. He is called upon to do something that would bring down the ridicule of his fellow men, and he faces that; the building of the ark was a continuous matter for many years, but he undertook it.
It was no small matter, the ark was a great vessel, concerning which God had spoken to him, and of which He had given him the specifications, and so forth, and Noah unhesitatingly undertook the work. What God is looking for is men and women who face matters. Christianity was never intended to be an armchair order of things, it is marked by energy, it is
{444}
a question of energy and purpose, of facing and overcoming difficulties -- and that is seen in Noah. There he was, day in and day out, week in and week out, month in and month out, year in and year out, for many years, working away at something that must have brought down on him the ridicule of the men of his time during the building of the ark. But he completed it, and went into it. What you find is that all the circumstances connected with the ark suggest maturity, there are no young children or young creatures of any kind, said to be in the ark; the idea is of completeness; things were carried over in maturity, and that is set forth in Noah. He was a long time in the ark, and as he comes out of it he is thinking of God.
These are remarks that have a great deal to do with our worship; they are initial thoughts in regard to worship, that is, in regard to the altar. One of the most important things to notice about Noah is that he had discernment, he could tell between a clean and an unclean animal. There is nothing said about clean or unclean animals at the creation, nor is there any hint that God told him what was clean and what was unclean; the point is, he knew. And apart from this ability to discern between what is clean and what is unclean, there is no possibility of the worship of God. This was the condition into which the Hebrew christians had lapsed, in that they were unable to use their senses for the discerning between good and evil (@Hebrews 5: 12 - 14).
In coming out of the ark. Noah took of every *clean* animal -- of every one of them. He had discernment; and then he is whole-hearted in his sacrifices, there was nothing selfish about him; selfishness retards and interferes generally with the worship of God amongst His people; liberal consideration of what is due to God, whatever it may cost us, will always be honoured of Him. We can well understand, as Noah looked out from Ararat -- what a vista he had! Naturally, he would say, What a number of cattle are needed, what
{445}
a number of fowls are needed to replenish the earth! I must reserve them! He did not consider thus, but rather that the rights of God must be observed. Whatever the need of the earth for cattle or fowls, God must be considered first! That is a great point in the worship of God. It says, he "took of every clean animal, and of all clean fowl" -- he was liberal in his thoughts for God. And he builded an altar -- that is to say he sets up the worship of God on a renewed earth; and in connection with that, you have these important thoughts I have mentioned, and the chapter says, "Jehovah smelled the sweet odour". We can well understand it, it is God paying tribute to the fruit of His own work in a man of faith: the Lord smelled a sweet savour. This is a great thought that comes out afterwards in the service of Levi in the house of Aaron -- he puts sweet incense before God's nostrils. All that follows is just an expansion of what you see here; and, as I said, it requires a continuance of manhood amongst the people of God.
Now, I want to refer to Exodus for a further feature of this subject, that is, in chapter 20. The altars of Genesis, as I said, were voluntary; but in taking His people out of the world, that is, God disposing of us as taking us on to be His people. He would give us to understand that He loves us. He says, "I have borne you on eagles wings, and brought you to myself". He would impress upon us what He thinks of us; but then He would suggest to us, It is time for you to begin to think of Me; not only that I should be worshipped, but that I should be worshipped according to *My mind*. That is an immense thought for our days, that God has His own thoughts, and if He is to be worshipped, the worship must be according to these thoughts. Now that is Exodus: so that the first suggestion in these verses is the altar of earth. We do not get God's terms in Genesis, we get them in Exodus: and when we come to His requirements, the first thing is an altar of earth.
{446}
Moses had built an altar before, according to this book, which meant that the Lord was His banner, that he was to carry on warfare with Jehovah as his banner. But now Jehovah says, "An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me", He gives no dimensions, only just the material, as if He is calling attention generally to the kind of humanity that must underlie the worship of God. He says, "Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar"; this going up by steps is a very subtle thought; it gives you more prominence, you can call attention to the fact that you are worshipping. Every church steeple, every cathedral, every prominent system in christendom illustrates this; men distinguishing themselves humanly in the worship of God. But God has no pleasure in that; men's nakedness is exposed in it. "An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me ... in all places where I shall make my name to be remembered". Wherever there is that humble acceptance of what God requires, which is only seen perfectly in Christ as Man, God comes there. How blessed that is! 'Where I record My name I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee'. God thinks nothing of imposing buildings; He thinks of what came out in Jesus, the humanity of Jesus presented in this way, and He records His name in that connection. That is where God's name is honoured: He says, I will come there, and I will bless you *there*.
Then He says further, "if thou make me an altar of stone". The "if" makes a difference there, meaning that christians may go forward in their worship; that it is not only a question of the humanity of Christ, what He was here on earth, for it is said He was "in the form of God", and "thought it not robbery to be equal with God: But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men", @Philippians 2: 6, 7. That is, He was an ordinary man outwardly, making no claim to distinction; "taking his place in the likeness", not of *man*, but "of
{447}
*men*" -- such is the humility of Christ; such is the descent which the Lord made. He took His place "in the likeness of *men*". Well, that is the idea in the altars of earth, I apprehend; we value, we treasure, the thought of the humanity of Christ. But then Jehovah says, "if thou make me an altar of stone" -- that is a matter left to us. God will not cease to come to us if we fail of it, but He values the going forward in His thoughts. The altar of stone is, I apprehend, more Christ according to what He is *abidingly*. The idea in a stone is that it is permanent, and Christ's permanent condition is declared in resurrection; He is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead", @Romans 1: 4. See what opens up to the soul of the believer in Christ's resurrection! And surely if we love Him, we want to follow Him there, to follow Him on to that platform; yea, further, to apprehend Him as He is *in heaven*. But an altar of stone is Christ in His permanent condition, and that is attested in resurrection; so that we apprehend Him there, and we go forward. We should not stop short of that, it is what I may call the second part in our worship: it is put with an "if", that is, if you are equal to it. It is not a matter of giving out a hymn, but a matter of the apprehension of Christ risen from the dead, marked out thus as Son of God.
Well now, you see how all these things enter into the altar which we have. It is not an altar by itself, it is an altar that carries with it all the divine thoughts entering into the divine worship; we must not leave one out. And I would urge this in the worship, the thought of *if* you make an altar of stone; *if* you do it, do not add anything to it, do not use a sharp tool upon it. It alludes to the soul being brought into the apprehension of Christ as *He is*, man could never make Him anything. It is Christ as He is. We do not want Him otherwise. We are told in the gospels they took Jesus "as He was" in the ship; you do not want to add to Him,
{448}
and certainly not to subtract from Him! The Colossian christians were in danger of attempting to add, whereas the truth was that all the fulness of the Godhead dwelt in Him bodily. We want Him as He is, without additions! The more you come to know Jesus, the more you abominate the thought of anything different, you would not have anything different; it must be Jesus, as He is. Think of Him in resurrection! Think of Him on the first day of the week as He moved among the saints! It was Jesus as He was; not the condition He had been in, but a condition He has entered upon, which becomes more and more glorious the more you apprehend Him. If you go to the mount of transfiguration, you will see it, and if you go to heaven -- as we shall -- you will see it, the transcending glory of Jesus as He is! That is the idea, there is to be no tool lifted up on this altar of stone. How miserable are our tools, as attempting to detract from or add to the Lord Jesus!
It is a very wide and great subject, but I am confining myself to certain initial features, that must of necessity enter into the exclusive altar we have. God has recovered everything for Himself in principle; and Moses and Aaron going into the tabernacle, the service is to be continuous. Before passing on to @Numbers 16, I would remark on the further specifications as to the altar in Exodus. For, as we come to chapter 24, we have an opening up of the covenant; I mean we have it opened up in volume -- the volume of God's love is presented to us in the blood in the basins. It is on the ground of that we have the remaining part of the book. The book of Exodus, after chapter 24, is practically occupied with the tabernacle; except the chapters which relate to the golden calf, the whole book is a question of God speaking to the people of their giving, and how He would have them build a house for Him, and how He would like to dwell with them. In the specifications that He gives, He tells them He wants an altar, and
{449}
that this altar is to be made, of acacia-wood. This is a greater thought -- if I may make a comparison -- than the altar of earth. The altar of earth is humility, lowliness; but the altar of acacia, or shittim wood, suggests strength or bearing power. And it is a humanity of its own kind, there is no other like it. Then the altar is to be five cubits square -- a large thought -- and three cubits high, and it is to be overlaid with brass.
You can see, in the measure in which you apprehend these symbols, how it points to Jesus, not merely now in His lowly humanity, but in the strength of it. The acacia is a very strong kind of wood. So the mind is led on to Jesus in His power of endurance, and oh, how Gethsemane and the cross present that! How it draws out our hearts to Him, as we think of Him facing alone all that was involved, without any comforters -- forsaken of God -- what moral power was there! Then it was three cubits high, denoting death and resurrection; the power of resurrection was in it. Then, another thing we should bear in mind in our worship is, that the brazen altar was anointed with the other utensils of the tabernacle; but in addition to that, it is said that it was sprinkled with the anointing oil seven times. Now, if we follow these thoughts, and hold them in our souls by the Spirit as we sit down in the presence of God, we shall profit by them, and we shall be more powerful in our worship, more reverential and more holy.
Then finally, this uprising of Korah introduced the wrong thought, typically, that the priesthood of God should be in the hands of certain men; there was Korah and his band, the word "band" is used, having its own significance. There were two hundred and fifty men "of the children of Israel, princes of the assembly", "men of renown": typically men who in the later history of the assembly acquired great reputation in its councils, men noted in church history. Now these men arrogated to themselves the priesthood, they
{450}
arrogated to themselves the authority of Christ -- and all this remains, it is all around us today, the effect of this same character of uprising. So these men were to have these censers -- God ordered it, a remarkable testimony brought in! And they were to present themselves, but instead of doing it, they gathered together the whole assembly against Moses and Aaron; instead of humbly bowing to the testimony, and accepting the exposure and humbling themselves, and judging themselves and returning to the truth, they gathered the whole assembly against Moses at the door of the tabernacle.
In answer to all this "the glory of Jehovah appeared" -- there was nothing else for it. Moses could not cope with it -- the *glory* met this wicked uprising. Terrible judgment was meted out on these men, and then it says, as I have already remarked, "Moses and Aaron went before the tent of meeting", the way is opened for the resumption of the worship of God. And moreover it says, "the cloud covered it, and the glory of Jehovah appeared" -- as if God were to say, in the presence of all this, I have Myself taken charge of the testimony today; I have taken charge of the *whole* of it. It is not a partisan matter, it is a question of the tabernacle of testimony. Then Moses and Aaron came before the tent of meeting, so that the service goes on. And these sinners who forfeited their lives are for ever after to be a testimony to the sin of man in the flesh in assuming the priesthood; and so these broad plates are to cover the altar. I mention them because they are worthy of careful attention in our meetings, for this uprising of Korah finds an answer in every one of our hearts; it is not in these men only, it is in the natural, religious heart: if I allow my natural proclivities, if I allow myself to aspire to a position amongst the brethren, this is what in principle ensues: I want to take priestly things over because I have gift, because I have ability, and these broad plates are to testify against that. They
{451}
should be on all the altars of the saints, it is continuous testimony against this uprising, they are a testimony that the authority of Christ and the priesthood of Christ must remain untouched; and that the priests are the true sons of Aaron, that is, *those who have the Spirit of God*.
Now I want for a moment to bring all that forward into the passage in the New Testament in @Hebrews 13 -- "We have an altar"; among many things we are said to have in Hebrews is the altar. It may be there are some here who have never taken up their privilege at the altar, it may be there are some here who have to do with the tabernacle, that is, with the current system of worship I have spoken of; but, if you are a christian, it belongs to you, the "we" in Hebrews is the "we" of *real* christians: "We have an altar of which they have no right to eat ..." -- it is an exclusive one. And then we have, as I was remarking, the solemn allusion to the day of atonement particularly, when our Lord Jesus was seen typically as made sin for us. The sin-offering offered, the blood was taken into the holiest and put upon the mercy-seat, the carcase was burnt "outside the camp". What a solemn, touching allusion, dear brethren, to the atoning sufferings of Christ! God would remind us that there can be no toleration of sin, no quarter for it, in the assembly; that it must not be permitted in relation to His service. And so a new thing comes in -- "let us go forth to him without the camp" -- He "suffered without the gate". One would follow Him as He wended His way with His cross through those streets of Jerusalem.
What a spectacle for heaven! What a spectacle for faith! He went outside the gate. He suffered outside the gate: it was no accident. God intended to base a great principle on it, as we have it here, so that our worship should be outside the camp. If there is one here who has not done it, the appeal is to you -- "let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach".
{452}
What did He bear? *His cross* -- that is the allusion: "he went out bearing his cross". Another was privileged to bear it for Him. One who came out of the country had the privilege of bearing that cross on which Jesus was crucified; it is your privilege and mine to bear it now -- "bearing his reproach". So, outside the whole system of the accredited religion of this world, we have part in the service of God. "Let us offer the sacrifice of praise continually to God". How much of it is carried on in our households? The households of believers are, I may say, hallowed, they are certainly "clean" places; and the service is to go on continually, not merely once a week, "Let us offer the sacrifice of praise continually" -- and shall we not do it? "Bearing his reproach" -- the very thought endears Him to our heart. As bearing His reproach you are standing by the cross with those devoted women of whom John writes, and the sacrifice of praise is to go up continually; as it says, of the disciples, they "were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God", @Luke 24: 53.
There is, of course, much more that could be said as to the worship of God, but I confine myself to the altar as representing it, and to the main features that should be present in all our meetings for this purpose.
{453}
THE HOUSEHOLD OF GOD
@Ephesians 2: 18 - 22; @Genesis 32: 9 - 12; @Genesis 33: 1 - 7; @Genesis 35: 9 - 15
J.T. The subject of the household of God may, under the Lord, be of help to us. We have the truth in this respect presented as the believer's household, and the household of faith, and the household of God; the first two merging in the household of God. The first, the household of the believer, may be connected with Noah; the second may be connected with Abraham, who indeed is said to be the father of all believers; and the third is, as we see in these chapters, connected with Jacob: and the Lord may help us to arrive at an understanding of the passage in Ephesians by our consideration of the subject. It is written in @Ephesians 2: 18 that through Christ, "we have both access by one Spirit to the Father" and that "ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God". This being the case, it is obvious that each of us should inquire as to whether he has practical part in the household of God, for that is where our blessings are in this provisional time; it is where the music and the dancing are, where the brethren are apprehended in their heavenly relations although upon earth, and where the Spirit is thus free to bring in the joys of heaven. And I thought that the section in Genesis, well known to most of us, beginning with chapter 32, would help us to see how conditions that hinder our entrance into house-conditions and house-enjoyment are overcome, for chapter 35 is intended to show that the believer finally reaches the house, and reaches it as pleasing to Him whose it is -- pleasing to God; the drink-offering denoting the divine pleasure in the believer.
Ques. Is the household of God a distinct thought from the house of God?
{454}
J.T. Well, it brings in the persons who form it more, there is more of a family touch to the word "household". I think it is the family side where the activities of love have scope; there is room for each to have his part in it. "Whose house are we", @Hebrews 3: 6. Of course the house is the saints, but the household, I think, involves the family touch, more the family side.
E.J.McB. I thought perhaps the house of God was more characterised by what God is as having *His* house, but when we come to the household, it is more the kind of people that compose it. Would you say a little as to the thought of Jacob being taken up as illustrative of this?
J.T. He typifies the believer in connection with the house; it is in connection with Jacob that it appears first in Scripture, so that it is rightly in its initial features connected with him. Ephesians brings in the household, as you might say, fittingly, because the saints are viewed in their heavenly relations. This scripture follows a well-known statement that He "has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus". That is our final position, and necessarily lends richness to the idea of the household, which is a term that applies to us down here, for the house of God, as also the household, is connected with the earth -- it is really provisional.
There is, of course, the Father's house on high, but that is another thing; the household, and the house, refer to what we are here and involve what we shall be and shall have in the way of enjoyment. So that we get it in connection with Jacob as on a journey. The Father's house is the terminus of that journey; the house of God comes in as the believer is on the journey of faith, so that, after Jacob enters the house, as you will observe in chapter 35, he continues on his journey. It is, therefore, a great provision for us on the way now, but its greatness is enhanced by the fact that those who compose it are already seen to be heavenly, to belong to
{455}
heaven, to have a heavenly status in Christ; they are no longer strangers and foreigners, but are fit for the place, and fit for having part in the house. And Jacob serves to illustrate how the believer comes into it experimentally. First of all, it was a dreadful place to him, but still he had better thoughts than that. As the believer weighs things he comes back to sober thoughts and Jacob formally calls it the house of God afterwards, and is encouraged in it to make a vow. That is the initial instruction that we get from Jacob, for, whilst he called it a dreadful place, after all he had better thoughts than that; these thoughts came out in his naming the place Bethel, and then in setting up the pillar and anointing it, and making a vow. It is doubtful if any young believer will ever reach the house save on those lines.
Ques. Was Jacob's heart set in the right direction?
J.T. He was moving under orders, he was moving under the direction of his parents, and God honoured that.
Ques. A few verses were read in chapter 33. Jacob speaks in verse 5 of "The children that God has graciously given thy servant". Could that be linked up with the thought of the household of God?
J.T. As we come to that part we shall see how he disposes of his family, for as we arrive at chapter 32 what is in his mind is the brother -- an offended brother; his mind is full of the thought of the offended brother. One of the hindrances to our enjoyment of the house is the existence in meetings of offended or offending brothers, either one or the other. Chapters 32 and 33 are to show how that difficulty is overcome.
Ques. How is that removed?
J.T. Well, we shall see as we look at these chapters. Jacob is returning, and the angels of God meet him; that is, he is to be impressed with the unfailing *divine interest*; the God that had met him twenty years before
{456}
is now impressing him with His interest, two camps of angels are ready to serve him. These witnesses of heavenly interest and attention are calculated to lift us out of the realm of the flesh, what we may have in the flesh that we might rely upon; for we are apt in our spiritual progress to rely on certain fleshly acquirements, belongings or abilities, and God would give us to understand that we do not need to. Reliance on these things will only hinder us, and they are calculated to irritate others; they are also calculated to arouse similar thoughts and feelings in others. We thus provoke one another. Jacob therefore, instead of being affected by this remarkable testimony of heaven, and relying entirely on the power of God, sends a message to Esau conveying that he was *a man of earthly means*. He sends messengers to tell Esau, "Thy servant Jacob speaks thus -- With Laban have I sojourned and tarried until now; and I have oxen and asses, sheep, and bondmen and bondwomen; and I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find favour in thine eyes". He does not say a word about God. It is not likely that I shall appease an offended brother by telling him how many cattle I have; what a large house I have; or what a large car I possess. It is not likely I shall appease him or make him more brotherly than he was before, by telling him these things; nor is it any evidence that I am much of a brother. How very different would be the effect if you tell a brother, or send a message to him, that God spoke to you last night, that He came in in a wonderful way and impressed you with the fact that you are the object of His care; and then indicate to the brother that God would do the same for him.
Ques. Would that establish the thought of fellow-citizenship with the saints?
J.T. I think so. What is it that gives you status in the house of God? It is not the amount of cattle or sheep you have, it is not the size of your house or garden; God does not attach any importance to these
{457}
things. It is a question of what you are with God, that gives you status in His house.
The messengers say, in verse 6, "We came to thy brother, to Esau; and he also is coming to meet thee, and four hundred men with him" -- probably more than Jacob had, so that there is no headway at all being made on this line. And then he says, in verse 9, "God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, Jehovah, who saidst unto me: Return into thy country and to thy kindred, and I will do thee good -- I am too small for all the loving-kindness and all the faithfulness that thou hast shewn unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two troops. Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau; for I fear him ..." and so on. Then the passage says, "he lodged there that night"; that is, his lodging now is *where he has prayed*; it is a time of heart-searching in the presence of God.
E.J.McB. Do you mean he has left the sense of his material wealth?
J.T. That is what I thought: he is in the presence of God; and he lodged there that night.
E.J.McB. In a way, he got his own measure with God.
J.T. Quite so. Then, instead of sending to tell Esau what he had, he sends him a *large present*. That is good; he is *giving* now; he is like God. Thus he is likely to make some headway.
E.J.McB. The sense of the bounty of God to him comes out from him.
J.T. Yes, he had received it from God, and "freely ye have received, freely give". He is now to this extent like God.
E.J.McB. Would this line of the household be the line on which we come into the gain of the family of faith, which looks outside all seen things?
J.T. That is what I think. In turning to God you
{458}
are impressed with God; and staying there all night gives you an opportunity of receiving divine impressions where you have spoken to God. He gives now deliberately, as you will observe by the number of cattle he sends to Esau -- two hundred she-goats, twenty he-goats, two hundred ewes, twenty rams, thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, ten bulls, twenty she-asses, and ten young asses -- is rather liberal. It seems as if it is to testify to the effect of God's presence in the soul; that one is really now moving in relation to God and qualifying to have part in His house; you are like Him. And then, following upon that, God moves again, according to verse 24, "Jacob remained alone; and a man wrestled with him until the rising of the dawn". This "man" -- it is God of course, but it is a Man, One like himself in sympathy and feelings; He is giving way to Jacob, as if He would teach Jacob how to give way, because, after all, we must give way. If we are to gain an offended brother, there has to be some giving way, and I think God teaches us how to give way. The Man *allowed* Jacob to overcome.
E.J.McB. It is only the one who is right who can give way. Do you look on the wrestling as a further step to his being in the presence of God?
J.T. Yes, I think it is God approaching him now; he had drawn near to God in prayer. We are enjoined to draw near to God in all our circumstances, and He draws near to us, but He draws near to us in His own way. We are taught how to pray, and Jacob evidently had learnt how to pray; but God draws near to us in His own way; He had drawn near to Jacob in the two camps of angels, but now He draws near as a Man, which is very touching.
E.J.McB. And of course it leaves a permanent effect on Jacob.
J.T. Yes. If it is a question of the power of the flesh, he is limping, that is, he is weaker outwardly; but he is stronger inwardly.
{459}
Ques. Say a little more about this matter of giving way. In what sphere would this yieldingness be seen? Are you thinking of questions of judgment?
J.T. Well, you cannot give way, of course, if it be a question of right or wrong, but you can give way if it is a question of any right of your own, do you not think?
Ques. Do we sometimes deceive ourselves into thinking we are standing for the truth, when we are only really standing for ourselves?
J.T. That is it.
Rem. Self-judgment is behind giving way.
J.T. Exactly. I think it is God teaching Jacob, in a Man, how to give way. The Lord showed it in His manner down here; Mephibosheth indicated it too. Where it is a question of one's own rights or feelings, one can readily give way. It is the one who is right at bottom who can do that. The greater one is spiritually, the more ready he is to surrender where divine principles are not involved; and I believe that most of the difficulties amongst the brethren do not really arise from divine principles being transgressed, but rather because our own feelings have been affected.
Ques. Would Paul's epistle to Philemon be an example of how to encourage one to give way in order to promote the household atmosphere? When Onesimus went back to Philemon, this very thought of yieldingness would be called into play.
J.T. Yes, I think the epistle is full of this thought. I think Paul is teaching Philemon in his own spirit and manner, in the lowly attitude he takes up towards him, how Philemon should act towards Onesimus.
W.C.G. Would the fact that the sun shone upon Jacob as he halted on his thigh give him spiritual strength?
J.T. Just so. It is a remarkable testimony from heaven again; "as he passed over Peniel, the sun rose upon him". I think God gives you such a sense of His
{460}
interest that you feel you are valuable in His mind; you feel yourself almost alone as an object of God -- the sun rose upon *him*. It rose upon millions of others, but it rose upon *him*, at that particular point as he passed over Peniel, and "he limped upon his hip". The deeper the sense of God's love and interest in one, the more one can accept the weakness, the crippling; for, although the Man had given way to Jacob, he succeeded in all that he intended to do. He weakened Jacob, he strengthened him inwardly, but weakened him outwardly; that is, he is making him more and more fit for the house, and correspondingly more fit to meet his brother.
Rem. He was conscious he had seen God face to face.
J.T. He was. It was great inward gain, and then the sun shining upon him was heaven impressing him that he was the object of its interest.
Ques. Does Jacob here acquire firstly a sense of mercy; he says he is not worthy of the least of God's mercies, secondly, in this last incident, does he get a sense of dignity as having to do with God, and having his name changed?
J.T. Exactly. He is being ennobled, he is being made greater and greater. Then in chapter 33 you see the disposition he makes of the family, he reserves Joseph for the last, and Joseph moves *before his mother*. All this points to the increase of spiritual understanding and sensibilities that Jacob was acquiring. It will be observed that in verse 7 it says, "lastly Joseph drew near, and Rachel, and they bowed". Earlier it says, "The maidservants drew near, they and their children, and they bowed. And Leah also, with her children drew near, and they bowed. And lastly Joseph drew near, and Rachel, and they bowed". Rachel is after Joseph; another Man is coming into view now; there is the principle of displacement of what is according to nature. The disposition of the children in verse 2 is that
{461}
he puts the maidservants and their children foremost, and Leah and her children after, and Rachel and Joseph hindmost. They are all put into an order of nature first, they are all disposed of in that way, but as they actually approach Esau, there is liberty for Joseph to move forward; that is really what is meant, that spiritually under these circumstances Christ is becoming prominent -- for the thing that matters in all these things is that Christ is becoming prominent. It does not say Jacob was told to put Joseph forward -- he did it, this feature of Christ came into evidence.
Ques. Is it putting on "bowels of compassion, kindness, lowliness", @Colossians 3: 12?
J.T. That is the thing. If there is room for the Lord, you will say, We had a splendid time, for there was room for Christ. It is not a question of either Jacob or Esau, but Joseph; for that is the point, after all, in the house, that Christ *must* be supreme; He is Son over it. We can have no enjoyment of the house till Christ has His place.
Ques. In chapter 32 he divides the company into two troops. Is that the party idea, when there is no room for Christ at all?
Ques. When you come to chapter 37: 2, you have, "These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph ..." Is that the same thought as to Joseph?
J.T. That is the way the truth develops in Genesis. First in chapter 30, as Joseph is born, Jacob proposes to come back to Canaan; it is a very slight suggestion of Christ: but here Joseph *himself* moves forward, it does not say Jacob told him to, the point is there is liberty for him to go before his mother, and the generations in chapter 37 refer to Joseph only, as you say; and his brethren all come back to Joseph in chapters 45 and 46. In the generations of Jacob, Christ must have His place; for, after all, what are our gatherings and meetings unless Christ has His place -- unless there is room for Christ? And that is the point here.
{462}
W.C.G. Do you think the fulfilment of Peter's word, "be clothed with humility", is seen in them all bowing? Where there is complete humility there is room for Christ.
J.T. Just so -- binding on humility.
Ques. Would this be the working out of Ephesians in a practical way -- Jesus Christ the cornerstone?
J.T. That is it exactly. Do you not find that must be so in a practical way, for, after all, what are the meetings if He has not got His place?
Ques. Would this result in spiritual education for us, that we might be found intelligently in the house?
J.T. That is what is in mind. It may be in only a little way, but you see Christ is acquiring place in the meeting. He has liberty to move. It may be a brother who has not been accustomed to say much, at some meeting has liberty, and speaks beautifully -- that is the thought, there is liberty in the house, Christ is having His way.
E.J.McB. You mean that conditions have come to light that allow Christ to disclose Himself in that way?
J.T. That is right. You see the number of bowings here -- Jacob leading in bowing seven times. Esau is the offended brother; he is a man to be appeased, and he is appeased; he ran to meet Jacob, that is in the presence of all this grace and humility.
Ques. Is Jacob here adding the fifth part, so that there is increase?
J.T. Just so. Then we see after this another thing, that is, there must be tenderness, there must be consideration in the meetings. Esau would have Jacob go with him, but he says, in verse 13, "My lord knows that the children are tender, and the suckling sheep and kine are with me; and if they should overdrive them only one day, all the flock would die". That is a fine thought brought in; and Jacob has his way on those lines. So that Esau goes off to Seir. Jacob had said, "the children are tender, and the suckling sheep and
{463}
kine are *with me*" -- the true shepherd spirit comes out. There must not be overdriving in our meetings.
Ques. Would that link on with what the Lord says in @Luke 12, a faithful servant whom the Lord sets over his household?
J.T. Yes.
Then the next thing in the history is, "Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built himself a house, and for his cattle he made booths". Now he is overcome: he has secured his brother, but he is going to settle down; he built a house before he came to God's house. Our houses really should be patterned after God's house. In Exodus, God made houses for the Israelitish midwives in Egypt, that is, He gave a pattern, but then afterwards He gave instructions to build His own house. Jacob builds a house for himself and connects God with himself in his house, so that he misses Bethel; Bethel is deferred, and Jacob gets into terrible trouble in chapter 34. What is pointed out is the danger of settling down in our houses, and in providing for ourselves and our cattle, and failing to go on to the house of God.
E.J.McB. Really giving up the path of faith.
J.T. Well, exactly. It is a "house", it is not a tent. Earlier he was characterised as a plain man dwelling in tents, which means, I am moving on, but now he builds a house, which implies that he was settling down.
W.C.G. Is that why, in the night of wrestling, God would not reveal His name to Jacob? Was it because he was not yet equal to it?
J.T. Yes, I think he reserves it for His own house.
W.C.G. For in Abraham's case the new name given him was in conjunction with the name Almighty God -- they go together in Abraham's case.
J.T. Here Jacob asks for his name and God refuses to give it him; and I think it is because of what is in Jacob's mind. He had in mind to settle down, and you are not going to get any disclosures with a mind like that. You may succeed in reconciliation with the brother
{464}
and have matters settled; and both may settle down. God knows what is in our heart; He is the heart-knowing God, He knows what we are purposing to do, so that He reserves His own name, until Jacob reaches Bethel. It says in chapter 35: 9: "God appeared to Jacob again after he had come from Padan-Aram, and blessed him. And God said to him, Thy name is Jacob: thy name shall not henceforth be called Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name. And he called his name Israel. And God said to him, I am the Almighty God ..." I think that God disclosing His name in His own house is appropriate, it is where it should be disclosed. The Lord said, "I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it" -- it is in relation to His own side of things.
E.J.McB. Is not the appeal of the prophet Malachi on this line, that the people should put God and His house first?
J.T. Exactly; and there is the same appeal in Haggai.
Ques. Would the strange gods at the beginning of this chapter suggest the difficulty with Jacob?
J.T. That is another thing. There are many things involved; chapter 34 is a chapter of disaster, and now God comes in after that and says, "Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there, and make there an altar unto the God that appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother". And Jacob immediately responds now. What I think we ought to see is, that in making a house before we come to the house of God, the pattern is sure to be wrong; we ought to get the idea of a house from God's house. That thought is brought in in Exodus, that if God makes a person a house, then he ought to pay attention to what kind of a house it is; and then, if God makes Himself a house -- which He does in Exodus -- I ought to pay attention to what kind of a house it is. If I am to make a house for myself I must consider God's house.
{465}
Rem. That seems to come out in Solomon's case in that he was seven years building the house of Jehovah, and thirteen years building his own house.
J.T. It seems to me that in all these things we come out *from* God, whether it be into our houses, or into our businesses, everything must take colour from the fact that I belong to the household of God. It ought to govern me in all my relations and doings. We see how Jacob's building a house for himself, and booths for his cattle, before he reached Bethel, meant disaster. You may depend on it he built them according to the current local style; he probably went to some architect, as we speak -- what else would he do? The setting shows that there were links with the world immediately.
E.J.McB. The door was open to the flesh.
J.T. Quite so. The more my house is patterned after the world, the more I invite links with the world.
W.P. The situation is not hopeless. As soon as God speaks to Jacob, Jacob speaks to his household, and then they journey.
J.T. That is the great comfort today, the situation is not hopeless. There is a great deal that needs washing, but the situation is by no means hopeless, because faith underlies; God is with His people, and His constant exhortations lead to results; we see the results constantly, and it gives every encouragement to go on keeping the mind of God before the brethren.
Rem. God said to Jacob, "I will not leave thee until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of"
Ques. Does the name he gives his altar at Succoth shows his thoughts centred round himself? In chapter 35 he makes an altar to God in the house of God.
J.T. That can never be pointed out too often. That is, in building his own house, he connects God with himself, making himself a centre; whereas in chapter 35 he makes God a centre -- it is *God's* house. And then, it is very beautiful to see how after all this exercise and sorrow, the verses 9 to 15 give an epitome of the
{466}
whole matter, as if God were to say, After all this I have reached My point. It is a question of His patience -- it is a paragraph by itself. It is an epitome of the whole matter, that God has reached His point, and how encouraging that is, so that He discloses His name to Jacob, and then it says in verse 13, "God went up from him in the place where he had talked with him". That is the house; it is where God talks with His people, where there are communications. It is very beautiful, I think, and it must have afforded God great pleasure to record these few verses, that He had reached His point with Jacob.
E.J.McB. Do you mean He will do that with each one of us?
J.T. Yes. He glories over us as having reached His end in any matter.
E.J.McB. And it is very beautiful to see the way Jacob referred to it -- he "called the name of the place where God had talked with him, Bethel".
J.T. Showing how he had come round to God's thought; and God went up from him there. And now he sets up a pillar in the place where He had talked with him, "and poured on it a drink-offering, and poured oil on it". You will notice it is not simply a stone he set up now, it is "a pillar of stone", that is to say, it is a greater thought than merely setting up the stone he had used for his pillow; there is more dignity about it. He sets it up in the place where God talked with him, and poured a drink-offering on it, that is to say, he is sensible now that God has reached His end with him, and that God is pleased with him.
E.J.McB. Would it have any connection with the sense of the appreciation of the "chief corner stone" in his soul?
J.T. I think so. A stone pillar is not something for a moment only, it is to be permanent; and the drink-offering would mean that Jacob had the consciousness that God was pleased with him. God loves all
{467}
His people, but then He specially loves those who are lovable; it is a great thing in the house, to have the sense that I am lovable to God.
E.J.McB. When the Lord comes down Himself, as in John's gospel. He says, "Give me to drink"; and Jacob here is able to give the drink-offering.
J.T. Just so. And then a drink-offering is more than water. It is stimulating, according to the types, that is, spiritually it means that a christian who is after Christ in these circumstances stirs the affections of God, speaking reverently -- he stimulates the heart of God, as Christ did when He was here.
E.J.McB. "New wine which cheers God and man", @Judges 9: 13.
Ques. When you said the Father's house was a terminus, what did you mean?
J.T. That is what the Lord says in @John 14, "In my Father's house are many mansions"; it is the end in view; it is not something on the way; it is a future thing, the Lord comes and takes us there.
Ques. Were you contrasting it with the house of God and the household of God?
J.T. Yes.
Rem. Every family is there.
J.T. Quite so. There are "many mansions"; there is no such thought as many mansions in the house of God now.
{468}
THE ALTAR
@Genesis 8: 20, 21; @Genesis 12: 7; @Genesis 35: 7; @Exodus 20: 24 - 26
J.T. We should bear in mind the reference to the altar in Hebrews, "We have an altar", @Hebrews 13: 10. The altar we have must include the ideas appearing in the thought of altar from the beginning. We can see in Genesis that the thought arose in the hearts of men of faith. God leaving it with them, not asking for it nor prescribing what it was to be made of. When we come to Exodus, where we are on the ground of redemption and with God in the wilderness, then He tells us what material to use; and later on He gives the dimensions of it. Maybe if we looked at these features, the Lord would help us as to how to worship God, for that is what is in mind in the thought of an altar. The first thought that appears in the scriptures alluded to, including Hebrews, is that it carries an exclusive idea, and persons who are ministering in the current religions of the world have no part in it.
F.W.W. Has the eating at the altar any reference to the priestly portion of the sacrifices?
J.T. Yes, that is what is alluded to: it is only as we are priests that we live of the altar. Does it not say in @1 Corinthians 10: 18: "are not they which eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar?" The sacrifices of the Lord were their portion.
Ques. How does this work out today?
J.T. In Noah's altar you have the thought of unselfishness, which is, I think, a great principle in drawing near to God. He offered of "every clean animal, and of all clean fowl". Only a certain number of those were carried over, and, had he been governed by selfish thoughts, he would have perhaps spared some of them, lest there might be a shortage or they might become extinct. The book of Malachi shows that Israel was
{469}
offering the mean things to God -- they were selfish. I think one feature of Noah's altar is whole-heartedness in drawing near to God, for God looks at our hearts; and as we draw near, He reckons by what is in our hearts.
Ques. What is the distinction between the altar in Hebrews and this altar? In Hebrews it is, "We have an altar", but this is a question of building an altar.
J.T. A principle throughout Genesis is that God allowed the men of faith to worship Him as they apprehended Him. Modern people claim the right to worship God according to the dictates of their own conscience, but that will not do after God has prescribed what the altar is to be built of, and what its dimensions are to be. So that in the altar in Hebrews the allusion would be to the christian mode of worship, which is outlined in the epistles, the Acts, and the gospels. The use of the word "altar" in Hebrews is because the writer is dealing with Hebrew christians; we have to understand what is meant, how we draw near to God; "we are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh", @Philippians 3: 3.
O.G. The making of the altars referred to in Genesis follows upon communications from God and the reception of light; so in that way would you think they were in accord with what God had made known?
J.T. Well, God did not prescribe anything. What you say is true, I am sure, for in the next altar made we have the appearing to Abraham -- the altar is built to the God who appeared. Noah did not have an appearing; Abraham was the first to have an appearing by God, but Noah had communications from God, and specifications, too, in regard to the ark. God made no requirements as to an altar, or as to worship. It is a tribute to Noah's knowledge of God that he did make an altar and that he offered upon it in this unselfish way; and God honoured him in speaking in His heart as a
{470}
consequence. After He smelled a sweet savour of Noah's offering, we read, "Jehovah said in his heart ..."
O.G. It said that Cain and Abel brought an offering to the Lord, but there is no mention of an altar, and we do not get any record of God communicating with them. I wondered whether the altar represents what took definite shape in response to light.
J.T. Yes, I think Noah represents cumulative knowledge of God; his is the first altar mentioned.
F.G.W. Does, then, the altar indicate the state of the builder, and reflect the knowledge that the offerer has of God? Is there increase as you go on in that way?
J.T. That is what I thought. Noah indicates an increase in the knowledge of God. Abel gives the thought of offering, indicating that he had some knowledge of God; he had *faith* which always implies a knowledge of God, and he offered the kind of offering that was acceptable; but it does not say he built an altar.
F.G.W. Would you say a word as to what is the distinctive feature of these various offerings -- Noah's, Abraham's, Jacob's, etc.
J.T. I think Noah's is unselfishness: his approach to God was marked by a knowledge of God; that he built an altar indicates this. But the fact that he offered of *every* clean animal and of *all* clean fowl would show he was unselfish, he was not keeping back anything.
E.J.McB. So God seems to honour that by giving seed-time and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, etc.
J.T. Yes, "Jehovah smelled the sweet odour", which has allusion to Noah's name -- his name means 'Rest'. God, I think, honours him in that it says. He smelled a sweet odour, or "an odour of rest" (as it may be translated). That is, you are thinking of God, and God says, Well, I am thinking of you, of your name, you are pleasing to Me, "Henceforth, all the days of the earth, seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat,
{471}
and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease". That is, the creational position that we are in now is founded on sacrifice, it is a question of man -- Noah -- securing divine favour. The next chapter shows that God blessed him on that ground. God blessed Noah and his sons and made a covenant with him, so that the feature of Noah's altar is very extended and reminds us that, as we think for God wholeheartedly, He thinks for us and blesses us. Current religion is selfish. Jacob gives a clue to the current religion of our times: he built an altar at Shechem and called it El-Elohe-Israel, that is, he connected God with *himself*; that is like the Church of England, which is connected with this country, and like other churches which are national; but that denies the true idea of God. God must be universal; He is God; and Noah's offering lays the basis for God's universal relations. We should not be any narrower than that, we are enjoying its blessing today, "Henceforth, all the days of the earth, seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease". The fruitfulness of the land is all based on this altar of Noah's.
F.G.W. This altar would look forward to what is millennial and eternal. I wondered whether the other would be educational as leading up to it.
J.T. We get the great general thought of God saying things in His *heart*, which is a very remarkable thing. We are told what He was saying, but He said it in His heart, showing that He was thoroughly affected. Then He spoke of what is in man, the state of man was only evil from his youth; in spite of that, God blesses. It is very like christianity; God blesses in spite of man's opposition to Him. This fixed state of things arising out of it, seed-time and harvest, gives courage to go on in our toil, our labour is not in vain, because seed-time would be of no value if there were not harvest -- seed-time *and harvest*. That would mean that, in the right
{472}
apprehension of God, in worshipping Him unselfishly, He acts towards us, fixes an order of things that makes our labour not in vain, but fruitful -- there is a harvest. Then the things that follow that, the cold and heat, summer and winter, and day and night, are modifying things, they are necessary for experience with God.
Ques. Would it be right to infer that God can go on with man on these terms, consequent on the death of Christ?
J.T. That is right, that is how the matter stands now.
Ques. Would we provide the altar as Christ gains a place in our affections in this way?
J.T. Worshipping God is a question of what place God has in our hearts. These early altars are to bring out that side -- what are the movements of your heart? For without the Genesis side the Exodus side would be valueless. God tells us what kind of altar to build, but unless we wish to build it for worship, the prescription would be valueless; it must be based on our desire to draw near to God. Genesis is the *spontaneous* side, but, redemption accomplished and known, God has rights. He would say to you, I am ready for you to build Me an altar, but you must build it after My pattern. If we build, it must be on God's terms, for it is a question of *His* territory, of His house. The idea comes out in Jacob, for he began the idea of connecting God with himself, but that will not do. The opposite to that came out in Noah; so God prescribed *where* he was to build an altar, it was to be built in Bethel; that is the first time you get *directions* as to the altar, and that of course must enter into Exodus.
Ques. How did Noah know the clean beasts?
J.T. These unwritten things are to bring out the spiritual side, as we were saying yesterday. There are things that are not said to have been required, like Israel going out of Egypt in fives, and the ark moving without any direction beforehand: all these things are to bring
{473}
out the work of God in His people; He is working in men of faith. We are not told how Noah was to discern between the clean and the unclean, but in building the ark for those hundred and twenty years, the principle of discrimination would arise in his mind; the idea that God was about to purify the world had already been announced. There would be a difference between those entering the ark and those who did not. The building of the ark would test all, whether anybody wanted to be saved in purity. Thus they would be marked off from those who corrupted themselves. Peter says, "eight souls were saved through water" (@1 Peter 3: 20), through purification. Peter also speaks of those who had purified "their hearts by faith" (@Acts 15: 9) -- the clean animals represent those that purify their hearts. I think it is a credit to Noah that he knew the clean animals; he learnt it from God in some sense.
F.W.W. There was spiritual discernment with him.
J.T. Yes; it means that God had wrought and brought Noah into accord with Himself in this respect.
Rem. There is no recorded instruction as to sacrifice before the time, yet both Abel and Noah could offer sacrifices.
J.T. That is another illustration, things are done by *faith*. In Exodus, God does not leave it to Israel to determine the clean and unclean animals -- He tells them. When you come on to His territory. He asserts that He must determine things. He must be the arbiter of everything on His own territory.
Ques. Was this seen in the New Testament in the case of the centurion to whom Peter was sent? (@Acts 10.) There was a work of God although it was not on the current ecclesiastical line.
J.T. That is a good illustration of it, for what was in the sheet alluded to Cornelius, he was potentially cleansed; what he was doing, giving alms, etc., was the outcome of God's work, he was one of the clean ones -- "What God has cleansed".
{474}
Ques. Would these clean beasts refer to a definite appreciation of the death of Christ?
J.T. I think so. We must trace this thought to Noah's relation with God, the making of the ark particularly. The making of the ark made a difference -- what would people think of it? Only a few thought rightly of it; the mass, no doubt, ridiculed it; they were unclean and were destroyed in the flood. I think we have to understand how things came to light in Noah's relations with God; and the ark was a test. People would be shown in their true light in the way they spoke of it. So today, if you present the truth to people and there is no response, what can you think? They are unclean. Peter says, "Having purified your souls by obedience to the truth to unfeigned brotherly love". A purified soul will love the brethren, he will take sides with the clean people. If the truth is presented to you and you do not take sides with those who wash their robes, then you are in question.
Rem. So in principle it is the whole man that is offered, I was thinking of the clean beast here as representing the purified one, the one that has judged himself. When we make an offering to God, do we really offer ourselves?
J.T. That is the thought. Christ is your offering before God, and the Holy Spirit makes you correspond to Him. @Romans 8 shows how you are brought into accord with Christ. In @Romans 12 you present your body, holy and acceptable -- not in a substitutionary sense, of course, but as what God can use.
Rem. It seems the centurion was brought into accord with that, for he says, "we are all present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God".
J.T. Yes. Paul speaks of terrible things that had marked the Corinthians, "but", he says, "ye are washed". Saints are brought into accord with the offering on the altar, and if people do not wash in that way, if they disallow the washing, then they have no
{475}
right to enter by the gate: but if they do wash -- "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city". There is no doubt as to the right of such to the Lord's supper -- they wash.
The next altar helps us to see what God is. It is the first appearing to Abraham we get, as called out, "Jehovah appeared to Abram, and said, Unto thy seed will I give this land. And there he built an altar to Jehovah who had appeared to him", @Genesis 12: 7. God now is known in some way; an appearing means He is seen in a certain way; it is in relation to *giving*. Jehovah said, "Unto thy seed will I give this land". That is a distinct movement forward. The altar here is a public testimony to the man of faith being a worshipper, "to Jehovah who had appeared to him". No doubt there were offerings, but the altar is the public testimony. It is worship to the God who appeared to him, that is, to the known God. There is no idea of an altar to the *unknown* God, as the Greeks had, but it is to a *known* God, a giving God.
Rem. This altar is not, it appears, at Bethel, but has Bethel in view.
F.G.W. Is it the personal side; and, when you come to Bethel, does the collective side come into view? I need the personal knowledge of God as Abraham had it, before I can take up the thought of the house of God.
J.T. That is right. There may be a person who has believed the gospel but has not come to the collective side yet. But Abraham is ready for further light; he is near Bethel. The truth of the house came out in Jacob. If I worship God, normally I shall go on to the full thought; I shall worship Him among His people. The Lord says, "*they* who worship him", @John 4: 24.
F.G.W. Jacob does not arrive at that all at once, as you were remarking, he connects God with himself, like many believers who worship God in connection with the blessings they have received. He does not get
{476}
to El-Bethel, until he has passed El-Elohe-Israel. Do we not all have to more or less pass that road?
J.T. Yes. When you come to Jacob you have experience that most believers have to go through. Abraham brings in the principle of worshipping a *known* God, I am not a heathen, but I am worshipping a God who is living and who appears to me.
The next altar is Isaac's, which is at Beer-sheba, meaning that the God I am worshipping is *faithful*: He appeared to him, too, but He appeared to him in that relation. Beer-sheba is the well of the oath. The God of Abram is not unknown, but known, and He gives; but the God of Isaac is marked by faithfulness, as God says later, "I am God, the God of thy father" (@Genesis 46: 3), that is Isaac -- Christ risen from the dead, every promise made yea and amen -- that gives me assurance. But with Jacob it is more than that. God would say, I have others besides you. Although the thought of the house in Genesis is *abstract*, we must carry it forward for it involves the brethren. The saints are God's house; so that I have to see that, if I worship God, it is in relation to His people and with His people.
F.G.W. Would you connect Isaac's altar with that scripture in Corinthians, "God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son", @1 Corinthians 1: 9? Would that indicate a soul coming into the consciousness of what it has been brought into in the faithfulness of God?
J.T. Yes. The apostle mentions it three times in Corinthians. In that verse; then in chapter 10: 13, "God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape", which is a comforting thing; then, "God is faithful" in that the Son of God, Paul said, "who has been preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus), did not become yea and nay, but yea is in him. For whatever promises
{477}
of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen". Then, "he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts" (@2 Corinthians 1: 18 - 22); that is the God of Isaac.
F.G.W. Then would Jacob's history indicate soul experience in bringing us to the reality of these things, so that they become intensely real and practical?
J.T. That is what I thought: as represented in Jacob I am selfish -- it is just what I am. He would have the sheep and oxen and camels; he stayed in Padan-Aram to get his hire. Many defer coming into fellowship and worshipping God according to His thoughts, because of selfish considerations. Then finally, you connect God with you in your own settings, whereas God says to Jacob, "Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there, and make there an altar". That is what God would say today to all His people -- Go up to Bethel and build an altar there.
Ques. Do you mean the house of God should command us?
J.T. Yes, that is the chief interest of God on earth. That brings us to Exodus where it is no longer an abstract thing, but concrete. The building there typically is the saints, so that you get in Exodus, "where I record my name"; it comes in in the twentieth chapter, where He asserts His rights over us -- "where I record my name I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee".
F.G.W. Would the buying of the piece of ground as Jacob did, where he built a house and set up El-Elohe-Israel, and then the sin of Dinah, indicate the governmental consequences of the soul not going on -- which, alas, happens to many -- households are broken in upon, they are not going on with the divine thought.
J.T. That is right. As soon as God is connected with a person or a nation exclusively, then God is not there, and the door is open for the enemy, so that you
{478}
have all kinds of evil in the so-called denominations; there is no protection against the evil.
F.G.W. In going on to the divine thought you get the "opened door" into privilege instead of an open door for the enemy. That would be a preservative, not only for the soul, but for the household.
J.T. Just so. We must not ignore the covenant made with Noah, which is universal, but when we come to Jacob we have the thought of the house of God, God known in that setting, which is an exclusive thought -- "*we* have an altar". We do not deny that God has a right to every man, He is the preserver of all men, but He has a peculiar relation with certain people. We want to be in His house where He is revealed; the Father is made known there: "no one knows the Son but the Father, nor does any one know the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son may be pleased to reveal him", @Matthew 11: 27. That is where the altar is now.
Ques. So would it be right to say that the altar of earth suggests His holy humanity, and the altar of stone, His death and resurrection?
J.T. Yes. Applying that to our assembly gatherings, the first thing is, we have a footing with God on the ground of the Lord becoming Man; He took our state, sin apart, and made in the likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, He dealt with sin. We worship God on that ground as redeemed, forgiven, and having the Spirit of God; recognising it, He comes and blesses us wherever He records His name. That is a safeguard, it is not building an altar of earth anywhere, but *where He records His name*. Then He says, "*If* thou make me an altar of stone". The word "if" there, suggests, if you have spiritual power for it, you can get further than the altar of earth. We may not go that way, and God owns us even if we do not, but if we do, we are on the ground of *permanency*, it is Christ in resurrection; and there is nothing of man's work at all.
{479}
Rem. If you lift up a sharp tool on it you have profaned it; so our worship must be altogether apart from human device as God wishes it. With the altar of earth, there is no confidence in the flesh, and with the altar of stone, you are rejoicing in Christ Jesus, and in that light you worship God -- "We are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God".
J.T. Yes, we are on solid footing there. We do not often come on to that ground, but if you do, see to it that there is nothing added, nothing of man at all.
F.G.W. El-Elohe-Israel would be more like the concision.
J.T. It would; not going *all* the way.
Ques. May we have a little as to the steps?
J.T. That is the thought of exposing ourselves.
Ques. Going beyond our measure? The thought of the exaltation of man?
J.T. Just so. You may make it like the "great altar to see to" (@Joshua 22: 10) -- something that is big and showy which you have to reach by a device; going up by steps is not worshipping in the power of the Spirit of God. "We are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God ..." @Philippians 3: 3 -- that is not going up by steps; worshipping by the Spirit of God means the flesh is judged, there is no confidence in the flesh.
F.G.W. It is easier to give out a hymn than to say five words from your heart: the hymn might be steps; the five words, worshipping in the power of the Spirit of God.
J.T. Exactly. But you would of course say that the hymn does not denote steps if it is used in the power of the Spirit.
F.G.W. Yes, but it might be like Saul's armour.
J.T. The hymn-book may be that, so that the "if" is whether you can do it, whether you have power to do it. Human thought and device are shut out.
{480}
Ques. Would the altar of earth be more temporary, like the altar of earth in Naaman's day?
J.T. Naaman had evidently some thought of worshipping, but it would be a mixed matter. He would not give up the thought of lending himself to the king of Syria in his worship. It would ease his conscience that he had two mules burdens of earth, but it would be a mixed thing, taking what is of God into another realm: for all the so-called churches have taken *something* of God -- there are real christians in them -- but that does not go very far. I think the altar of earth here is inclusive of all christians: God accepts us even if we do not apprehend the divine side of things. God honours the first part of our meeting, but we may not enter into the heavenly side involving the altar of stone. Christ is "declared to be the Son of God with power, ... by the resurrection from the dead", so the sense of Christ risen involves sonship.
F.W.W. "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God", and "upon this rock I will build my church", @Matthew 16: 16, 18.
J.T. That is it. Then when we come to the brazen altar, we have God's requirements -- it must be so high and so broad, and made of brass. And it was anointed seven times. The full measure really is Christ, drawing near to God we come to the divine measure. Christ "has been crucified in weakness, yet he lives by God's power" (@2 Corinthians 13: 4) -- that is the brazen altar.
F.W.W. I was struck, in reading the directions for the brazen altar, by the fact that in the New Translation it says, "thou shalt make its pots to cleanse it of the fat". I wondered if it did not suggest that each time we approach God we are to come in a *new* way. You do not get that thought in the Authorised Version, where it says, "thou shalt make his pans to receive his ashes", @Exodus 27: 3.
{481}
J.T. That is very suggestive, for we are apt to bring forward previous meetings. All the fat was to be burnt at any given time: some was apt to be left on the altar, you mean?
F.W.W. Yes, and there were special vessels for dealing with that, so that God should be approached in a wholly fresh way each time.
{482}
BETTER THINGS
@Proverbs 21: 9, 19; @Proverbs 15: 16; @Zechariah 4: 1 - 14
It occurred to me as before the Lord, that these Scriptures would furnish suggestions suited to the present occasion. The book of Proverbs is intended to furnish instruction for us in our relations with one another, and our relations in the testimony of God -- indeed I may say, in regard to our place in the assembly. The book corresponds with @Colossians 1 in which it is said that we are to give thanks to the Father "who has delivered us from the authority of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love". These words convey much, and should touch our hearts both as to the delivering power of the Father from the authority of darkness, and as to the affections proper to the kingdom of His dear Son. Many of us, more perhaps than we are aware of, are under the authority of religious principles and doctrines because of their antiquity and their settings. There are denominational systems which also have authority over our souls. Millions are held under that authority. Their consciences are untroubled, because of the darkness which holds authority over their souls, and they remain where they are under the domination of that darkness, thus depriving the Lord, if they are christians, of His rights in them, and depriving the saints of their fellowship. The words in Colossians are very pungent with precious suggestions. "Giving thanks to the Father, ... who has delivered us from the authority of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love".
The book of Proverbs amplifies these words. He who speaks says he was a son unto his father (chapter 4: 3). These chapters one after another unfold the thoughts of Solomon, the son of David. *It is the Son*, and the Son clothes all His thoughts with affection. He is not arbitrary, but of course the One who is Son is Lord
{483}
also. He has sometimes to resort to strong measures, to use the rod to enforce His rights, but it is always in love. It is the Son who is Lord, but what is behind all is His love. We are in the kingdom, not here of the Lord, but of the Son of His Father's love -- a thought that should flood our souls, delivering us in our affections; as indeed the Lord Himself says, "If therefore the Son shall set you free, ye shall be really free". The affections of the Son are behind all these words in Proverbs. His thoughts are broken up for us into great detail, for, after all, our lives are made up of detail, and Proverbs takes account of that, and furnishes instruction that fits into the detail of our experiences. These verses I read contemplate the *comparative* degree. You will find much of that in this book -- the word "better" comes in frequently.
In the first verse I read you have a suggestion that "It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than with a contentious woman, and a house in common". "Wide house" is given in the margin as "house of society", it is a house in which you are forced into the society of one who is repugnant. You can see the application of this to certain religious settings, where certain doctrines and practices are adopted, and as in them we are forced to maintain social relations with persons who are objectionable to us because of our conscience and the work of God in us. The work of God in a man is certain to make him different from those in whom it is not; so that, if I am in the same house -- to use the illustration -- in the same religious association with persons who are not converted, or if converted, who are worldly, and I am different from them, I am yet forced to maintain relationship with them. Not that I hate them, but their unregenerate state renders them objectionable to those who are affected by the work of God. The "contentious woman" signifies that there is no peace between those in whom God has worked, whose consciences are active, who
{484}
love the Lord Jesus, and who seek to keep His commandments and those in whom there is no work of God. It may be, the latter are ignorant of the commandments or they are unaffected by them, but at any rate, peaceful conditions do not exist.
What is contemplated is a state of things where the work of God is rendered inactive by worldliness, and by rivalry and all that goes with it, and wisdom would make a way out for us. Not necessarily by the enforcement of direct Scripture, but by a wise word that points out a certain position as *better* than the one in which you are now found. Why not take it? The "corner of the house-top" is not very desirable, nor does it afford much comfort on a cold winter's night, nor is there much room for society, but you see wisdom presents the idea in the *extreme*. Not that you will be forced to come to that, but it is better to face it than to be in such trying company, day in and day out. A contentious woman portrays the system. A woman, referred to in this way, invariably signifies a system of things without any guiding principle, without headship. It is a system that is rampant, it does what it pleases; headship, as I said, is not there. The simple way, according to the wise man in Proverbs, who for us is no less than the Son of God, is to take the better course. That course will not violate any divine principle. The Son would not tell us to do anything that we should not do. He is simply putting the thing to you in the comparative degree, that the worst he portrays is better than the position in which you are now found. Hence the wise believer will act on this and move out, even if it be into loneliness -- the corner of a house-top. It is better to be in this place, than where your soul and your conscience will have no rest, where you are constantly troubled. Much might be said as to what you will come into. I am not speaking of that for the moment. It is the idea of the *better* course, and the relief that comes in when you take it.
{485}
In verse 19 the thought is pursued, but instead of a house-top, you have "a desert land". It is not a very inviting place. I recognise that, and one would be sympathetic. But still, it is better to dwell there than in a system where your soul has no peace; where there is nothing that is in keeping with the divinely formed instincts that you possess. It is better to dwell in a desert land. You might say you could not do that. Solomon is putting the idea in the extreme. He is showing you that, even at its worst, it is better to dwell there, than that you should be where there is no peace, and where God is necessarily shut out, His will being disregarded.
We know how Israel came into the wilderness. It was intended to be a wilderness. The wilderness of Sinai was not an accident, it had been formed by God centuries before He used it for the discipline of His people. That is true as to everything. The Red Sea also was there, centuries before God used it as a type of the death and resurrection of Christ. Other circumstances also, under the government of God, are ready for Him to use when the time comes. The wilderness of Sinai was a divine preparation, as was the land of Canaan. The land of Canaan was the main objective, but the wilderness was also a preparation of God. Israel went into it. It was better to go into it than to remain in Egypt where they had no peace. The Spirit of God depicts Egypt as to what it was. We have to go by what the Spirit of God says. I accept no estimate based on things said by the rebellious. To a man who is rebellious, to tell a lie is a small matter. When Israel talked about the flesh-pots of Egypt and all the fine dishes they ate, they were simply telling lies. The Spirit of God depicts for us the true state of things in Egypt. God knew their bondage and heard their bitter groanings. He came down to deliver them. They did not have to dwell alone in the wilderness; nor will any christian who steps out of the house of the brawling
{486}
woman, where God has not His place and where conscience is never at ease; such will find that God has a place for him, and He will be with you Himself as He was with Israel. He journeyed all the way with them. He was with them in the desert, and shared all their afflictions. "In all their affliction he was afflicted". He was with them. Is it not worth while taking the step to have *such* company? It will not be loneliness, you will have companionship, and that of none less than God Himself; besides, you will have others like yourself, who have moved on the same lines and reached the position you have reached -- those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart (@2 Timothy 2: 22).
Turning now to chapter 15 we have "the fear of the Lord", which having, one might have to come into smaller things which we naturally do not like. "Better is little with the fear of Jehovah than great store and disquietude therewith". That is, you have big buildings and much else that the eye can see, but there is trouble spiritually. There is no peace. One might say, See what I have to leave. There is much going on in these organisations, even dances in the church houses! The world is there. There is much, I quite admit, for the flesh, but then what is there for your soul? Your soul has divine requirements. What about the fear of the Lord? Is it not better to have a little where the fear of the Lord is? How restful the soul becomes as you are brought into a realm where the fear of the Lord is.
"Flee also youthful lusts, but follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, and with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart", @2 Timothy 2: 22. The atmosphere is delightful to the soul that is born of God, where people fear the Lord, and call upon Him out of pure hearts. How rare pure hearts are in this world! There is no "if" in that verse in Timothy. Such hearts exist, it is for you to find them; there are those following after righteousness, faith, charity, and peace, and calling on the Lord out of pure hearts. The fear of
{487}
the Lord is there. You come into this and all that it means. "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom". You find that where people are calling on Him out of a pure heart. It is most restful to sit down with them in a prayer meeting. How their hearts are burdened with the cares of the assembly of God, and yet what joyful songs are rising to God! -- for He is there. Heaven hears the earth through them. It is no myth. Most of us here know what I am speaking of. There is no question of being alone where the fear of the Lord is.
He goes on to say (verse 17), "Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith". A stalled ox is a big thought and denotes plenty, but then what is it without love? Suppose a man had everything without love. What is it? Nothing! "And now abideth faith, hope, love; ... and the greater of these is love". I am speaking of the comparative degree. It is not 'the greatest'. There is faith and hope on the same level, but love is the "greater" of these. There are just two degrees there, the one is great, but love is the greater. Love abides. Love is the life of heaven. God is love. Now can we afford to go in for the stalled ox, prepared in plenty, and not an atom of love therewith? We cannot, if we love God and love the brethren. We would say, I would rather have a dinner of herbs with love. If I am natural or fleshly I should prefer the stalled ox; but the dinner of herbs is much more to be desired, with love. You will be fairer and fatter, like Daniel and his companions, than all the wise men of Babylon if you feed on what God provides, refusing the world's fare. The point is love. I am being outwardly reduced all the time. There is nothing better for a christian than that he should be made smaller in this sense. The wise man is showing me how I should become reduced. I have the best thing in the universe. I can never afford to do without it. I want to show you, how all these things work out in the
{488}
position in which we find ourselves today. Many of us here, and thousands more, are, in measure, in the reality of them. We find ourselves greatly reduced. We are in a position that is despised in this world. It is under reproach. But as I have been pointing out, we have peace for our souls, we are free to serve and worship God according to His appointments. Thus while there is reduction outwardly there is this inward enlargement. We are *where love is*. "If a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be contemned", @Song of Songs 8: 7. If I have the tongue of angels, and have not love, I am nothing. "Though I give my body to be burned, and have not love, it profiteth me nothing". Love never fails; it is of God. "By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep His commandments", @1 John 5: 2. Love resists and overcomes all the vicissitudes of time. This great thing is available and enjoyed in outward littleness and reproach. Most of us here know something about it, and are concerned that you might join us, not in a mere religious community, but in what is here for God, it is a question of pursuing the wise man's instruction. He puts you on the way. There is much in this way that these verses do not indicate. But the way of life is upward to the wise, and he departs from hell beneath. It is life to love the Lord Jesus as knowing His love and to love one another. It is better to have a dinner of herbs with love, than the stalled ox with hatred.
This brings us to the littleness of which this Scripture in Zechariah speaks. It is a day of small things, dear brethren, but a day of great resources, as this chapter shows -- a day of great potentialities, and a day culminating in glory. Those who are in this state of things, this day of small things, are coming out victorious at the end! They are laying up for the future. It is remarkable how much Luke speaks of money, especially after chapter 15. There he brings in the prodigal and
{489}
the house, where he presents in the most beautiful way the gospel and its full results: there is music and dancing in the house. It is an appeal specially to young people. There is one man present who is out of sympathy with it all. He has not an atom of sympathy in his heart, not a thought in common with that whole scene -- a matter of disgust to him -- a terrible state of soul. He will not go in. The next chapter tells you about a steward who has got notice to leave his great position. He had been employed by a very wealthy man, and the steward being a wise man provides for the future. The word "future" on the stock exchanges of the world is a hackneyed term. It means that I buy commodities for delivery in the future, with the hope that they will be much more valuable then than they are today. But this steward looks ahead, so as to have an abode in the future. He is using the present for advantage later. We are in the day of small things, but what we have will be outwardly enormously enhanced in value. That is the position today -- what enters into this meeting would hardly be looked upon by the religious leaders of this world as of any importance, but it is going to increase in value until it is of great magnitude. Those who do not have it now, will not have it then, and they never will have it. The Lord will say, Depart from Me, ye workers of iniquity, I never knew you.
This chapter in Zechariah contemplates a day of small things. He and Haggai correspond pretty much to the two sons of oil. These two men were prophets; they told out the mind of God, and while they prophesied they built. They joined with Zerubbabel and the others who built the house. The man who has the mind of God today will *work*. The more I have the mind of God the more active I shall be. I shall use every ounce of strength so that the work of God may prosper. "I am doing a great work", Nehemiah said. As the apostle Paul is about to pass away to be with the Lord
{490}
he says to Timothy, "make full proof of thy ministry". There is so much to do, and it must not be neglected. The Lord has need of young men and young women in His service. If any saint be bedridden he can pray. There is nothing more necessary or more serviceable than prayer, that the work of God might be promoted. Sleepless hours of the night can be well spent thus. As I said, Zechariah and Haggai prophesied, and at the same time they were helping the builders. I have not a doubt that Zechariah would carry a stone up a ladder to a mason to put on the wall if needs be. The apostle Paul gathered sticks and put them on the fire -- he would do anything that was necessary. The Lord said, I am among you as He that serves. Such is the Lord Jesus in His humility.
Well, Zechariah is waked out of his sleep and he sees certain things; and he wants to know what they are. There is not enough questioning. *We* may not get our answers at the time, but the Lord will give us understanding in all things. Zechariah wants to know what the things were. "So I answered and spake to the angel that talked with me, saying, What are these, my lord?" See what respect the prophet had for the angel. He is a man who deserves special respect himself; but you will always find that a true learner in divine things is respectful. Indeed it is a matter of great importance that we have respect for one another. If we do not respect each other we shall not love each other, nor shall we have confidence in each other. We must have respect for our leaders, and for one another. The prophet says "my lord" to the angel. We are apt to be radical. It is most objectionable to the Lord. Michael is called an *archangel*, and no doubt there are others. Ordinary angels would have respect for these. The angel here is the messenger of God, and the prophet respects him. So it is that ability, experience, or anything in a brother or sister that is of God, that is of moral weight or worth, is to be respected. We are
{491}
maintained in humility of mind in this way. The person does not look for it, but *God* looks for it. Zechariah gets his answer (verses 6, 7). The latter half of the chapter confirms this. This servant of God is marked in the most beautiful way by this feature. You can understand how restful Zechariah would be after his interview with the angel. Babylonians, Persians, Greeks, and Romans may have their days, but everything, as spoken and as promised, is going through triumphantly in the Spirit's power -- not a future power but *present* power -- the power that works in us. It is that the saint might see what resource he has -- "these two olive trees upon the right side of the candlestick and upon the left side thereof" (verse 11).
The word comes to Zechariah that Zerubbabel is to lay the foundation stone. What religious activity there has been for eighteen hundred years in Europe and its outgoings! What structures have been built up! The book of Revelation shows that God deals with it all in judgment, but what is built according to the mind of God is going through. The foundation and top stone will exactly correspond. The top stone will be laid on by the same hands that laid the foundation. "And he shall bring forth the headstone with shoutings; Grace, grace unto it". How important that we should maintain that principle in our preachings, ministry, and intercourse one with another. A movement like this here in this town will be despised. Who despises it? God does not. Those who understand do not. The question in verse 10 is, "who hath despised the day of small things?" We are to be encouraged, and to have our eyes open, and see the support for it, that we may not resort to fleshly means, nor the leaven of the clamorous woman. We are to maintain the principles of this chapter. What was started in the foundation will be carried through. How great it is to have part in it!
In verse 14 we have "two sons of oil". The word "sons" is significant there. The suggestion as to the
{492}
matter considered in these figures is of adequate testimony and maturity. It is not a partial thing. It is seen fully in the Son of God. The Lord Jesus answers to every thought in God's purpose as to man. In Him everything is carried out and done perfectly.
What *underlies* the title "The Son" is the deity of the Lord Jesus. No one else could have this title. In Hebrews He inherits a more excellent name than angels, "For unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee?" @Hebrews 1: 5. Throughout that chapter it is the Son, it is a divine Person in that relationship which involves subjection. There are those who would seek to force back *that relationship* into absolute deity, thus making the Lord inferior to the other divine Persons in absolute deity. It is not the truth. The Lord Jesus is equal in deity. He never had a place of inferiority, relative or otherwise, in absolute deity. He was *in the form of God*. "Christ Jesus; who, subsisting in the form of God, did not esteem it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself, taking a bondman's form", @Philippians 2: 5 - 7. That is the scriptural truth as to the Person of the Son. Sonship is unique in Him, but Galatians shows how the saints are brought into it. As seen in Zechariah it suggests the idea of maturity, and that the testimony is rendered in spiritual power. It is alluded to in Revelation in the two witnesses, matured men representative of an adequate testimony for God among the Jews by and by. Meantime it is to be found among the saints today -- the testimony carried on in full maturity, not by human wisdom, nor by human resources, but by the power of God (@1 Corinthians 2: 5).
May the Lord encourage us on these lines, and grant that the brethren may pursue them. There will thus be blessing and enlargement.
{493}
RESUSCITATION
@1 Samuel 30: 11 - 15; @Genesis 45: 25 - 28; @2 Kings 4: 32 - 37; @Acts 20: 9 - 12
I have in mind to speak of revival, involving resuscitation. These four scriptures present the thought in as many aspects, and so may be regarded as presenting the thing completely. The first involves the epistle to the Romans; the second Corinthians; the third Colossians; and the fourth Ephesians. The young man who was found in the field is said to be an Egyptian, that is, he was a young man of the world. Some of such are really the Lord's. I had in mind to touch on the passage with that in view. He had been in the service of an Amalekite, which means the flesh in that aspect of it that affords the devil an opportunity to attack. The young men and young women who belong to the Lord, born it may be in christian households, yet looking out on the world, hankering after it, get drawn into it, it may be, by other influences -- perhaps by friendships. They become the occasion of attack, usually in relation to weak conditions amongst the saints. For such defects imply weakness in the households. In this chapter we have weak conditions -- David was in a false position. He had been harassed no doubt by the attitude of Saul, as is correspondingly often the case with christians. Responsible brothers may become harassed by competition and opposition, and drift into positions that are spiritually untenable. Weakness ensues in the meeting and gives occasion for attack. That is what happened here, so that a great disaster ensued, the burning of Ziklag, and the capture by the enemy of what was nearest and dearest to David and his men.
The young man when recovered explains to David what was in view, what the objectives were. The enemy was behind the activities of the Amalekite. The attack was, as we are told, against "the south of the Cherethites,
{494}
and upon the coast which belongeth to Judah, and upon the south of Caleb". These are all important suggestions as relating to the testimony, alluding to certain advantages that belong to the saints. The Cherethites had a place in the testimony with David; and what belonged to Judah involves much spiritually, for it represents the sovereign will of God and the disposition of His people. That disposition was according to infinite wisdom and accuracy, for our Lord sprang out of Judah. And Caleb, who also belonged to Judah, and greatly added to the tribe, was a man who was outstanding as *confirmatory* of the divine choice. It is a very important matter with God, that His choice should be confirmed by the conduct of His people who are the subjects of it, that one should justify the divine choice; this Caleb did. So the importance of this young man in the recovery. He revived, and is the key to the position here. However little we may make of defection amongst us, it may be that one involves a serious disaster, or if recovered, a great victory.
The procedure towards the recovery of this young man is what I wish to note specially. He is found "in the field". He gives an account of himself when revived, but he must be revived, if he is to be of any use: otherwise he would die. He is "a young man of Egypt, servant of an Amalekite", but there are great potentialities in him. What is stated is they "brought him to David", but that was not all. Bringing such a person to Christ in faith, and in prayer, is not all. They "gave him bread". That is, that the Christ we pray to, and to whom we bring him, is put before him; Christ is bread; and then they give him water. Young men and young women get into the world, and we pray for them. There is no hope from the standpoint of our responsibility, if we do not, but prayer is not enough. There must be skill in presenting the bread, for they are almost dead. There must be a skilful presentation of
{495}
Christ to the young, so that He is shown as bread to the hungry soul. Water is symbolical of the Spirit, presented to be appropriated for refreshment: bread and water is a well-known combination in the testimony. You will remember how Obadiah fed the prophets of God with bread and water. Then, after giving him the bread and the water, having brought him to Christ, there is the idea of what is collective; there is the idea of association, and what flows out of holy association.
These delinquencies are very largely due to associations, young people linking on with worldly friends. Therefore we have here recorded by the Spirit that they gave him besides the bread and water "a piece of a cake of figs, and two clusters of raisins". These are collective thoughts. The *cake* of figs involves that the figs are bound together, and so the "two clusters of raisins". It is not a question of the weight of the figs -- it is a cake, and the raisins are in clusters. These involve stimulation. I mention these things briefly because they are so urgent. The testimony is confronted with delinquencies, with deadness in the youth, presenting a means of attack by the enemy. The most precious things that we have are thus attacked, the devil attacking through them, and disaster at times ensuing. Hence the need of the brethren facing these things in regard to the generation that is coming, that we may know how to revive them, and to present that which will overcome the state of spiritual death, for that is what it is. He is found in the field, you will notice. Then there is the presenting, as I said, skilfully, of the bread and the water, what God provides, and the cake of figs and two clusters of raisins.
It is on such occasions as the present that young people become revived. It may be that many come together out of natural curiosity, or natural desires, but the Spirit of God is here in relation to the saints. He is in them, and stimulation is one great feature of spiritual meetings. It says of the young man here, that his spirit
{496}
came again to him. How often that happens in these meetings which we rightly call special occasions, in which the Holy Spirit has a peculiar advantage in operating through the affections of the brethren; young people who have been delinquent, it may be, are revived, and recalled to earlier days, and to what they once enjoyed. So that, instead of being servants of the Amalekite, instead of bearing the character of young men and women of Egypt, or the world, they become the keystone to the position. They become, in the hand of the Lord, the means of the recovery of all. How great is the change, as one has often noticed in young people thus restored! They are becoming active, intelligent servants of Christ, learning to undo what they once had part in doing, for that would be the object in the mind of every recovered person. How great is the victory when I can undo that which I had part in doing! The Lord Jesus came "to undo the works of the devil". So to be brought into line in undoing the works of the devil, is what is in the mind of any delinquent restored and brought to light, by the bread and the water and the figs and the raisins, brought into line with Christ, brought under His will for the undoing of the works of the devil. How much there is of this amongst us, alas! One has often thought of late that the most spiritual of us may unconsciously be an agent of the enemy in a misjudgment of persons, or of conditions, or of difficulties. He is so ready to use us. How much there is to be undone as the effect of this attack of the Amalekites on the Cherethites and on the coast that belonged to Judah and on the south of Caleb! Then what a glorious triumph! David recovered all. This young man was the key. With him there was complete victory. There was nothing lost.
Now the second scripture, I apprehend, involves the epistle to the Corinthians. Romans is that everything is recovered. The young man is recovered, and becomes in the hand of David a vessel for the undoing of that
{497}
which he had part in doing. In the main Romans is food, bread and water, i.e., Christ and the Spirit. Corinthians contemplates that Jesus is away, that He is absent from this world. We are not to reign as kings while He is absent. We will reign as kings when He returns. Now Jacob is representative of a believer in this setting, as *baffled by the state of the brethren*. Many are like that. Joseph stood in a peculiarly tender relationship with Jacob, but the brethren are wrong from the beginning in regard to Jacob and Joseph; and Jacob, although always right in his affections, was wrong in his calculations, deceived by his sons, and harassed by the thought that the thoughts of God about him would fail. In a word we see him, at times, losing heart. God had spoken wonderful things about him, and to him, but now it seems that the thoughts of God are failing. There are many like that amongst us, baffled by the state of the brethren. The experience of Jacob, depicted in these chapters, is almost entirely the outcome of the state of his sons, and their conduct. So that it is a question in these circumstances, of seeing beyond the brethren; of seeing that the purpose of God cannot fail, that what is spoken about you hold, that every promise is yea and amen in Christ, that God is faithful who has called you into the fellowship of His Son. The heart is thus stayed, as the waves roll, and the winds blow. Not so with Jacob, harassed day and night as the outcome of the state of his family and their conduct. He might well blame them for everything, as people generally do, but faith will not do that. Faith would say in the heart of Jacob, God is God, the God that spoke to me at Bethel remains. There is no change with God. Indeed, you get in Scripture the word the "Same" applied to Christ personally, involving that He is the same to us, that there is no change.
There are many amongst us baffled by the brethren, by their conduct. Occurrence after occurrence arouses suspicions in the heart of Jacob as to his sons; and so
{498}
when they come to him here, with the greatest possible tidings, he would not believe them. His heart fainted. Can you wonder? If his heart was stayed on God, he would not faint at good tidings. How humbling it is that, on account of our conduct and deception, our word is untrustworthy, even when it is true! Can we wonder that these ten sons of Jacob were scarcely worth believing? Yet they *were*. They now had tidings that faith should accept, for the light already vouchsafed as to Joseph required that he *was* alive, but their past conduct rendered them untrustworthy in the patriarch's mind, and he suffered accordingly. Joseph had this in mind, that their tidings may be accepted, that they may not seem to be clouded or uncertain. He says to them before they left Egypt, "let not your eye regret your stuff". Also, "Do not quarrel on the way". He is urging them to come down to where he is. The point for us is to get to where Christ is. The Lord's supper has that in mind -- that we should in spirit reach Christ where He is. Joseph was not in Canaan. He is not coming up to Canaan now. He is elsewhere. He is concerned that his brethren should carry a definite message to his father, and he says, Do not think of your stuff. There is much of that -- we do not want to leave this scene. We have a little more than others. How that ministers to pride! Our "stuff" is not worth thinking of. "The good of all the land of Egypt shall be yours". I am not speaking of Egypt as the world now. It is the *sphere of Joseph*. He is lord of it. It is another thing altogether. We have to understand Scripture contextually. I am now speaking of Egypt as the sphere of blessing; it is under the rule of Joseph. Christ makes the difference, whether He is in Israel's land or out of it. He *is* out of it. He has been put out of it, cruelly put to death. It is not *His* place now. He is coming back to it. The apostle says that when the time of reigning comes, we will all reign with Him, but not now. The point now, is to go out of it. The Lord's
{499}
supper is the appointed symbol of exit from this world.
I want to show you how this old man, Jacob -- for that is what he was -- got a sense of the divine thoughts. He was a depository of the promises. He fainted -- but seeing what Joseph had sent, he realised that though Joseph was in Egypt there was something here that denoted what he is, and what he has. It denotes his love, his truth. Persons like Jacob in their baffled condition of mind forget to take notice of what is here on the part of Christ. The enemy blinds their eyes to the presence of the Comforter -- the means he has sent to take us where He is, the power of the Spirit of God. One has, at times, gone over the epistles to the Corinthians from the standpoint of the Spirit. It is a fine study -- the place the Spirit of God has in that setting! When Jacob saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived. "And *Israel* said". "Israel" here is worthy of special notice. If, as a learner you go through the two epistles to the Corinthians, you will become an Israel, so to speak, you will become *spiritual*. The apostle stresses that. He could not speak to them as spiritual whilst writing the first letter. The Holy Spirit is brought in in the epistle, so that they might understand what it is to be spiritual, that they might be *men* in the true sense. Here it is *Israel*, the spiritual man, who determines to go. "And Israel said, It is enough; Joseph my son is yet alive: I will go and see him before I die". That is the word, beloved, especially to any baffled ones, clouded through the conduct of the brethren. In spite of their conduct, *God is faithful*. God has been thinking of you in all this cloudiness. He has not had His eye off you. He is faithful who has called you unto the fellowship of His Son, and He will not allow you to be tempted above that you are able. Every promise of God in Christ is yea and amen! So Israel took his journey and came to Beer-sheba, and offered sacrifices to the God of Isaac -- Christ risen. Every
{500}
promise is true in Him, whatever the brethren may do.
The next part of my subject is the boy born to the Shunammite. It is a well-known chapter. The truth is typically presented very constructively in it, from Romans to Colossians. The young man represents young men, not such as the young man of Egypt, but young men who have *grown*. This boy whose age is not given is said to have grown, and as having grown he got trouble in his *head*. He went out to his father where they were reaping and said, "My head, my head!" It was a head matter. His father had no power with him. The turning aside from Paul is not in evidence in Colossians. It is the work of the Spirit in the saints in Colossians, the work of the Spirit in persons whom Paul never saw. They had never met him. They had not had his impress. He however saw the danger which beset them. It was a head matter. Young men grow rightly and they read rightly, but the head is out of proportion with the other members of the body. The father sends him back to his mother, which was also a right move, but useless here. Even the saints -- the assembly -- cannot do anything with a man like that; the mother suggests the assembly. It is deeper than what the assembly can meet. He died at *noon*. There was no power even at that time of day to keep him alive. I believe that the suggestion is that as we grow in the knowledge of God, and in the knowledge of Christ, and in the truth, we should put things into practice, work them out, and thus maintain a balance in our members. The Shunammite woman had wisdom. The father did not send him to the prophet, and he did not put him on the prophet's bed. She took him and laid him on the bed of the man of God. That is the thing to do. The cause is deep. The child died. He had neither voice nor hearing. He had lost all power and consciousness. Speak about Christ -- he does not hear you, nor does he say anything.
Who is to look after this? The man of God. You
{501}
will notice, if you read the chapter, the great stress laid on the idea of the man of God. He is one entirely on God's behalf. This is the man who will help. It involves the Spirit, and those who are thinking for God. The Holy Spirit leads to that. It is a long matter, and a difficult one and Elisha is a long way off. What is to be done? Our 'care meetings' are very important as to what is to be done as to such cases. Not that it is a question of talking about a thing and returning home. There is a *journey* to be taken. The mother is urgent about it. She saddled the ass and said to the servant, "Drive and go forward". She reached the man of God at Carmel. Every case requires its own handling, and this is a new thing -- so that the staff of the man of God does not do -- mere *experience* is insufficient. There is neither voice nor hearing in spite of that. An old brother may say, I have been seventy years in fellowship. That in *itself* does not help. These seventy years have gone. It is the *present* living energy of the Spirit that is needed. The staff will not do. The Shunammite insists on the man of God coming. The child is on his bed. It is all *his* matter now. It is not what your staff represents, what you *have done* these many years, but what you *are now*. He must go up to the room, pray to Jehovah, stretch himself on the boy, put his mouth on his mouth, eyes on his eyes, hands on his hands, and the child becomes warm. That is a great point -- the direct touch of life. That is the point in Colossians, where we are raised on the principle of *faith*. That is the *position*; but life is by *quickening*. Quickened together with Christ. That is by contact, by nearness. It is *with Christ*. We are alive with Him. Not simply made alive, but made alive with Him. The more you love Christ, the more you will have it that way. This child is made alive in that way. He gets warm. Victory is coming, but there must be the second touch. The man of God walked about, involving keen exercise, no doubt, for it is very searching. He returns and
{502}
bends over the child, who sneezes seven times. It is not to be a head matter now; it is to be a lung matter. The child breathes the breath of life once more.
Hezekiah says, "The living, the living, he shall praise thee!" It is in life we praise God, and witness to Him. There will be no testimony apart from love; intelligence, of course, but there must be love. The apostle prayed for the Colossians, for they were in danger of philosophy and vain deceit, which is the very thing that attacks the head. The thought was that they might be knit together in love to the full assurance and the understanding of the mystery of God. It is a question of love, understanding coming in that way. That is the thought.
Finally, in @Acts 20 there is another young man, Eutychus. He is called a "youth", and finally referred to as a "boy". He represents our young people who are taking up positions to which they are not equal. This young man is listening, we may say, to the most spiritual ministry of Christ ever spoken; there are many lights in the upper room. Bring such to the most spiritual meeting. Take him there to be sure -- but is he equal to it? Is he well founded? Has he interest enough? Will he go to sleep? Will it become so wearisome to him that he will loathe it? These are important considerations. He could not have been in a more luminous place; there was the unfolding of wonderful things, although we are not told what Paul said -- no doubt it was about Christ and the assembly in relation to the Lord's supper. You can scarcely conceive of a better situation for ministry, for one to get on in his soul, or to get light. Is the young man equal to it? Is he grounded enough? I do not say he should not be there. Far otherwise! Are we seeing to his being rooted and grounded? That is Colossians. Well, what happened? Paul spoke at length. The father and mother of the boy might say that the address was too long, too much for young people. But he is the only one
{503}
that suffered. Should he be considered alone in the meeting? See all these dear men who were present at that time. See what men they are! Are we to consider him only? Surely not! A meeting for ministry must aim at the highest capacity present. The young must be ministered to, but the spiritual must be ministered to also. Timothy was there. Did not he need to get a little instruction? There were a remarkable set of brethren present. Did they all not need instruction? They did. Valuable ministry you may be sure! But this young man was not equal to the position. I do not say that the fault was on the part of his father or mother, or the brethren. The fact was, he was not equal to the position. The fault was *his own*. He was overpowered with sleep. Think of the anomaly of a christian being overpowered with sleep in the presence of such ministry. Such light! The fact is that he was overpowered in *those* circumstances. He succumbed to the *natural*. He fell down from the third story, for it is a morally elevated position. It is an Ephesian chapter; the chapter is full of Ephesian truth. He fell down, and seemingly he was dead. Then Paul *descended*. That is to say, it is the activity of love. The word "descended" takes us to the cross, to the descending of Christ in love -- love of supreme character. Paul enfolded him in his arms, and says, "his life is in him". They were not to be troubled about him. We have to take Paul's word for the moment. That is the way it is put.
The Spirit would insist on our listening to Paul. Paul represents the discerning of potentialities -- what there *is in* the youth. You have to wait for it, but it is there. He is not like the young man given back to his mother. We have just to listen to what Paul says. His life was in him, known only to the apostle for the moment. There is potentiality. He enfolded him in his arms. He was near enough to feel that the heart was beating. Others could not then know that. It is a
{504}
question of the affections, and getting *near* to the young; the secret is there. It is a question of potentiality. There is not another word said about Eutychus until we are told that the apostle went up and broke the bread, as if the Spirit would say, that is just one thing: "his life is in him"; the next thing is the breaking of the bread.
It is "the first day of the week". It is a link with the eternal state of things. We are in the presence of great things in this passage and not a word is said about the young man until we are told that the apostle went up. He did not stay down where the young man was, nor does it say Eutychus was carried up. The apostle did not give up the position through the fall of the youth. We must not admit of giving up the position. We must not *lower* the position to him. We must hold to the elevation God has given us -- the spiritual elevation. Paul did, he went *up*, and spoke a long time. There was plenty of energy. He did not stop speaking because the young man had fallen. He broke the bread and went on speaking, and then he departed. Then it says, they took away the boy. Not now with his life in him, simply, but they took him away *alive*. Potentiality was there! And now the life is developed. He is alive and they brought him away. That is not the end of that boy. We have to understand what is unwritten. That boy represents great potentialities. So it is with the youth among us. We get near to them, and feel the pulse, the beatings of their heart. We know their life is in them. We go on with the testimony, with the breaking of bread. Let us not stop because there is disaster, or apparent disaster. Go on with the ministry, maintain the level, the elevation that God has brought us to. That young man will come in, in time. They had brought him away alive.
May God grant us help, dear brethren, on these lines!
{505}
CONDITIONS FACILITATING THE WORK OF GOD
@2 Timothy 2: 20 - 22; @Ezra 1: 7 - 11; @Ezra 7: 6 - 10; @Ezra 8: 32 - 36
Thinking of this great city, the work of God came into my mind. In view of this, the divine hands should not be hampered in their operations, and if this is to be so, certain conditions must obtain, and these require vessels or instruments of service. So I have read these passages, containing, as they do, the idea of vessels. They are symbols of believers; for believers in Christ, as having the Holy Spirit and formed accordingly after Christ, are the vessels now employed by God, in His service. He of old directed Jeremiah the prophet to go down to the house of the potter, where He would speak to him. He could have spoken to him where he was; but it is one of God's ways, to place us in the circumstances concerning which He would speak to us; this is to the end that we may understand His mind more clearly. The potter made the vessel and it became marred in his hands. He made another vessel as it pleased him to make; referring obviously to God; He being the Potter, and the house the sphere of His operations. From the outset God had in mind that He should have a vessel such as pleased Him, such as He could use according to His mind.
The vessel was the order of man set out in Christ. Christ is said to have been "made of a woman" (born of a woman), which means that in that way, He became incarnate. The idea of making does not otherwise refer to Christ, for He is a divine Person, having equal part in the Deity with the Father, and with the Spirit; but as Adam was a figure of Him that was to come, so God maintained that thought, and although Adam became marred in His hands. He immediately made another vessel, that is, He began in Abel; Abel setting
{506}
out the great principle of righteousness. He had the testimony that he was righteous, which is the great fundamental thought in all vessels of service in God's hands. Aside from righteousness, God cannot use us according to His mind; although He has used unconverted persons and even the lower creatures, but He has in mind to have vessels according to His own heart, and that is what is conveyed in the voice from heaven at our Lord's baptism. As Jesus, being about thirty years of age, was baptised, and came up out of the water, heaven was opened upon Him and the voice came, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight". That is the divine order of man, and He began that order of man in Abel. It is a long formation, extending right down to Christ as the great Model of what is according to the mind of the Potter, and what pleases Him. Abel represents the first great idea -- *righteousness*; and then Enoch -- a man who *walked with God*; and then Noah, who was perfect *in his generations*. Abel had no generations. Enoch had generations, but he is not said to have been righteous *in them*. Noah also walked with God. And so throughout @Hebrews 11 we have different features of Christ worked out in those mentioned who are said to have had faith.
It is a long history, but God works patiently, especially when it is a matter so near to His heart, as the order of man which is to dwell with Him for ever. Into man's condition, sin apart, He came in Jesus; who being in the form of God thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but emptied Himself, taking on a bondman's form. So that you can understand how near to God's heart was the work of the forming of a vessel for His service. The idea was in His mind from the outset, and in the incarnation it became manifest, and all believers are to be according to the perfect Pattern seen in Christ. In Him there is One entirely according to God's mind and heart. One who will do,
{507}
as He said, all His pleasure. In no way were the divine hands hampered in that One. We have thus the divine idea. But what I am speaking of now is that believers are to be formed after Him, so that God's operations may go on unhinderedly. The Lord said, "My Father worketh hitherto", and that work is to go on. But there must be conditions and instruments for it.
In taking Israel out of Egypt, God intended to operate according to His mind, but He proposed conditions, and these work according to measure and weight and personality; for personality has a great deal to do with what I am speaking of. Personality came out particularly in Aaron, for personality must enter into the service of God. The divine thought thus being expressed, I need only refer to the history of the wilderness to show the result. The people turned aside quickly, and hence God had to work in spite of adverse conditions; and at the end the testimony was, "What hath God wrought?" And in subsequent history -- I need only refer to the history in Kings and Chronicles to show how God had to work generally in spite of adverse conditions, in spite of wicked kings, such as Ahab; but He worked, and so right through to the end of the old dispensation.
In the present dispensation the Lord Jesus took up certain men, numbering twelve, wrought with them personally, making them the greatest of men, the greatest of servants. The Holy Spirit came down, and the work proceeded, and proceeded with marvellous power and intelligence and results. The book of Acts is a remarkable credit to the apostles, the Holy Spirit taking account of what *they* did, making little or no reference to what they were told to do. Of course they were in principle divinely directed as to what they did, but one point in the book is to bring out what *men* they were, and how God's work was facilitated in them. We do well to dwell on the Acts from that point of view. But the drop from the high standard they set, beginning
{508}
with the immediate period that followed, is lamentable. Nevertheless, the work of God has continued right down to the present time. God's work has gone on; but see how unsympathetic the general conditions have been! God has wrought in the most adverse circumstances. The conversion and deliverance of us all and myriads more is a touching testimony to this and to His wonderful patience.
The scriptures that I have read show how He has come in and released His vessels. Not all of them, alas! although He continues His work of deliverance every day, and will continue. He has opened the door for these vessels, as it were, to return from Babylon. He has need of them. He said of the colt in the gospels, "The Lord has need of it". If one had the ear of every christian, one would like to say to him, The Lord has need of *thee*, as a vessel. The word implies not only a containing vessel, but an instrument, that is, such as God can use. The Lord has need of thee. The history of Israel will show you how God was forced -- how loth He was -- to allow His people to be carried away captive. Because of their conduct, He is obliged to let His people come under a foreign yoke; but as soon as the captivity occurs He has in mind that it should be reversed, for He delights not in judgment. He has no pleasure in His people being at a distance from Him. His thought of them is, "a people near unto him", @Psalm 148: 14.
That was His thought about Israel, and not only did He indicate that there should be recovery, but also that there should be a man -- Cyrus -- prepared for this purpose; and the book of Ezra shows how Cyrus answered to the mind of God. These verses in chapter 1 tell us that the vessels which Nebuchadnezzar took from Jerusalem were handed back by Cyrus. There are those even now, it may be, that are still in Babylon. Well, the mind of God as indicated in Cyrus is that you should *not* be there. Cyrus is more than a mere
{509}
earthly monarch here. He is definitely charged by God to build Him a house at Jerusalem, involving the release of God's vessels; and if there is one here who is still in Babylon, the mind of God is that you should not be there. He says in verse 2, "Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The Lord God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth; and he hath charged me to build him an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah". That is a word for the moment. Why should any christian be in Babylon? He is one of the divine vessels. Think of the degradation of the vessels as in Babylon. Think of that banquet hall of Belshazzar, when the vessels of Jehovah were desecrated. There are many like it. Many of our brethren have been in the banquet halls of this world; how painful to the heart of God! But here we have a Cyrus, not Belshazzar. We have a man prophesied about, that God would raise up to open the door to His people, that they might not remain in Babylon, but return to Jerusalem. He says, "Whosoever there is among you of all his people, his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem". And then, confirmatory of their being the persons, comes in the idea of the vessels. There were 5,400 vessels of gold and of silver. The Spirit of God gives us the number. Cyrus "brought forth the vessels of the house of the Lord, which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of Jerusalem, and had put them in the house of his gods; Even those did Cyrus king of Persia bring forth by the hands of Mithredath the treasurer, and numbered them unto Sheshbazzar, the prince of Judah", @Ezra 1: 7, 8.
Now I want to show you that certain instruction enters into the mention of "the prince of Judah" here; the release of God's people from Babylon implies that they are put into *God's hands*. It is not leaving one system of religion to go into another. Many change about, and make their preferences of religious systems, but that is not the idea at all. The vessels are handed
{510}
over to the prince of Judah; in no other hands are they safe. Need I suggest who the Prince of Judah is? It is a reference to Christ. He is more than the Prince of Judah. He is the Lion of the tribe of Judah. He is Shiloh to whom the gathering of the people is to be (@Genesis 49: 10). Let us not gather to any other; let us not place ourselves in any other hands than His. And another thing to note is, it is Sheshbazzar here, not Zerubbabel; the same person, but the Spirit of God would separate him from all Babylonish relations. "Zerubbabel" implies his connection with Babylon, but "Sheshbazzar" would signify his link with Persia, the country of Cyrus. This is obviously important, Cyrus being a type of Christ. Here it is the prince of Judah with *this* name. Some think it means the 'joy of tribulation', and surely tribulation awaits us if we have to forsake the renowned religions of this world; but our Sheshbazzar, the Prince of Judah, will protect us. It is said indeed that the idea "protection" enters into the name. We need protection, as going forth unto Him without the camp. We should be ridiculed, we should suffer reproach; but as David said to Abiathar, "with me thou art in safe keeping".
We are in safe keeping in the hands of the Prince of Judah. The vessels are counted as given into his hands. So that, as the Lord Jesus says, "I know ... my sheep", "neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand". He knows everyone. We are under His hand. We are in sure and safe keeping and nowhere else can we regard ourselves as safe. There is no protection elsewhere. The most renowned religious organisation does not afford protection to the saints. We must be under the hand, so to speak, of Sheshbazzar, the Prince of Judah. As soon as one is outside, as he leaves that wherein the rights of the Lord Jesus are not respected, the Lord finds him. He is watching you. You will all remember the man in @John 9. He was cast out, but why was he cast out? -- because of faithfulness to
{511}
the truth. And when the Lord heard he was cast out He found him and said, "dost thou believe on the Son of God?" -- He is more than the Prince of Judah. He is the Son of God. And the man said, "Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him?" And He said, "Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee", and he said, "Lord, I believe", and worshipped Him. True worship is seen outside the camp.
To amplify this a little, I want to show you subsequent movements, answering to the testimony through Cyrus. In chapter 7 it is said, "This Ezra went up from Babylon". The second movement is a *priestly* one. Ezra, the priest, is the leader of it. We have his genealogy given back to Aaron. It is a great priestly movement. Christ is the "great priest over the house of God" (@Hebrews 10 :21), and Ezra is typically a priest of that order. His genealogy is traced right back to the great head of the priesthood. That is a great matter, and hence we must pay attention to it. There is no priesthood recognised in heaven that cannot be traced to Aaron, that is, to Christ. All others are spurious. Ezra represents priesthood in the true sense. Verse 6 says, "This Ezra went up from Babylon; and he was a ready scribe in the law of Moses, which the Lord God of Israel had given: and the king granted him all his request, according to the hand of the Lord his God upon him". That is to say, with this priestly movement, we have the law. As the Lord says, "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me". Every true priest will insist on that -- what the Lord Jesus has said, I must be governed by that. The most renowned creeds, although they contain much of the *letter* of the truth, are not what the Lord has said. If anyone, Paul says, is spiritual among you, let him recognise this, that what I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord. Every true priest of God would recognise that the things that Paul wrote to the Corinthians and in his other epistles are the commandments
{512}
of the Lord. Another point I just wish to touch on -- verse 9 says, "upon the first day of the first month began he to go up from Babylon". The word "began" there, in the margin reads "was the foundation". That is the foundation of the going up. It is a great thing to make a good start. There was determination with Ezra and his company. In the better translation it is the determination to go up on a certain day. In such holy movements the difficulty is that some are irresolute; they admit the commandments of the Lord, but are irresolute as to them, and move tardily or do not move at all; but here is a definite determination on a certain day to go up out of Babylon, and they went up, and they reached Jerusalem.
Yet another thought is the *arrival*. It is spoken of in chapter 7, but it is again referred to in chapter 8. Verse 32 says, "And we came to Jerusalem, and abode there three days". Not *they* came, but *we* came. One loves to hear something like this experience. How many of us can say, *We* came to Jerusalem? It is a spiritual thought. We have to arrive at Jerusalem. It is the great central position spiritually. As soon as you arrive here you are determined to stay. They were determined to go up, and they came up, and it says, "*we* arrived"; and they spent three days before they did anything. A very important matter -- that we should be careful in what we are doing, to take God into account in everything. Ezra with his company comes laden with precious vessels, carried through with the hand of God upon them, to Jerusalem, and they abode there three days, "Now on the fourth day was the silver and the gold and the vessels weighed in the house of our God, by the hand of Meremoth the son of Uriah the priest; and with him was Eleazar, the son of Phinehas; and with them was Jozabad, the son of Jeshua, and Noadiah, the son of Binnui, Levites. By number and by weight of every one, and all the weight was written at that time". Some may say that certain brethren are too
{513}
particular, but the Spirit of God records all these things, not because these priests were *too* particular, but because they *were particular*. We *must* be particular, if we are to have to do with the things of God, if we are to be priests in the house of God. And the question of vessels arises every day: when persons seek to walk with us we must see that they are weighed, as it were, for the wealth of a company of believers consists not only in its number, but in the weight spiritually of those who form it. Now these are very practical things. There are those, as I say, who complain and talk about exclusivism and so forth, but what do they mean? Looseness is behind what they say. It means that persons are considered before God's principles. His rights; and the result is that we have His hands hampered. There are not conditions suitable to His operations. That He operates is true, but it is in spite of conditions, as I said earlier, instead of the conditions being favourable.
Well, that brings me to the first Scripture I read. It is the New Testament parallel to what we find in Ezra, and is as I might say the mandate for the people of God today, just as the decree of Cyrus was the mandate for the people of God in that day. It is a question of whether we have taken it up. In a great house there are vessels of such and such material, some to honour and some to dishonour. The allusion is very sorrowful, beloved friends, that the Spirit of God has to use the idea of a great house, for what had been called earlier the house *of God*. It is not called the great house of God; it is just great in the sense of bigness, in the sense which men would think of greatness in a religious way, but nevertheless, there are vessels to honour. For we cannot get out of the great house except by apostasy. We have to accept it, and in it there are vessels to honour. Then the point of the passage is, if a man shall separate himself from these (that is vessels to *dishonour*) he shall be a vessel to honour, sanctified and meet for the Master's use, and prepared unto every
{514}
good work. Now that is the position. In a few verses, we have the parallel to Ezra. There are vessels to honour, that is to say those who separate from vessels to dishonour. Earlier, it was said, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity". Iniquity is found in persons, but here it is what is more *systematic*. We withdraw from *that*, if we keep the commandments of the Lord; but vessels are individuals -- persons marked off as dishonourable persons, it may be who deny the deity of Christ, persons who deny the inspiration of Scripture, and many other such things. They are proving themselves to be vessels to dishonour, and if we are to be vessels unto honour, we have to separate ourselves from them. And thus, dear brethren, you have the conditions, for divine operations, that is, you have vessels to honour, sanctified and meet for the Master's use, and prepared unto every good work. There are those who take on certain work, or certain parts of the work, but a true vessel is ready for *every* good work.
These vessels or persons thus qualified, together follow righteousness, faith, love, and peace. They do this, as calling upon the Lord out of a pure heart. And that brings me to assembly formation, for the assembly today is what the temple was in Ezra's day. You will see in the book how great stress is laid on the building of the temple; and the Spirit of God is endeavouring constantly to bring the idea of the assembly home to the mind and the heart of every christian. There is no greater thought, besides that of divine Persons, than that of the assembly; and the Holy Spirit is stressing it constantly with a view to getting the saints to lay hold of it. It is a heart matter. It is those who call on the Lord out of a *pure* heart, and so in localities, like this great city and others, where the saints are, the Holy Spirit is operating to bring about assembly conditions. It is not simply that I am outwardly in fellowship; I may be outwardly in the fellowship, but inwardly not.
{515}
I may belong to a certain party, for instance, I may be preferential in regard of the saints, maintaining an alliance with certain ones. All such things are simply hampering God's hands in His operations. The appeal is for those that call on the Lord, not simply out of their hearts, but out of *pure* hearts. The word pure is rarely applicable, one has to admit, but it is the word given here. It would mean that all special preferences, to say nothing of outward worldliness, are repudiated in the heart. We are to get at each others hearts. It may seem difficult, but the Lord helps in this as in all else. As frank with our brethren as we meet them, we shall find out the state of our hearts, the Lord, as I said, helping. In this epistle it is said that He gives understanding in all things (@2 Timothy 2: 7).
That is what I had in mind both for myself and for all; that the work of God should proceed, and that there should be conditions suitable for it. He should not be obliged to be working in spite of conditions, but with favourable conditions, so that the original features of the assembly should mark the closing days, as regards the work of God, and so we will go on always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that our labour is not in vain in the Lord.
{516}
DIVINE COMMENDATION
@2 Corinthians 10: 18; @Acts 9: 10 - 17; @Numbers 12: 5 - 9; @Genesis 20: 7
I am thinking, dear brethren, of *divine commendation*, a subject that might not be familiar as set out in the form of an address, but familiar enough otherwise to us, for we shall all bear in mind the remarkable statement in @Romans 5: "God commends his love to us". The fact that He deigns to commend His love to us encourages us to look for other commendations or subjects of commendation by God. For His love, as expressed, should need no commendation; it is its own commendation. Every movement of it carries commendation with it, and when I say every movement of God's love, I have to begin with @Genesis 3, and even before, for it was His love that prompted Him to create. It moved "In the beginning", it took a very touching form in @Genesis 3, when God began to provide for sinful persons. The light began to shine, not yet in Jesus incarnate, but reflectively it was that same light: "In him was life, and the life was the light of men", @John 1: 4. That was shown anticipatively in the divine service of making clothes: every stitch, as it were, every bit of work put into those clothes denoting the love of God.
We can see this now, and so the Lord Jesus as here, says, "My Father worketh hitherto" (@John 5: 17), meaning that He worked from the time that sin came in; and "I work", not that the Father had ceased to work, but that the Son as here was working before men's eyes. All that was love, but then love has to be learnt, not in half or partial measures, but in whole measure, so that John says, "Hereby we have *known love*, because he has laid down his life for us", @1 John 3: 16. That is the full testimony of love which the Holy Spirit makes good in our hearts. At times He has to write of love
{517}
abstractly, as in @1 Corinthians 13, but He puts it into our hearts. That is where it is intended to be. Our hearts are intended to contain the love of God; the Holy Spirit puts it there, and as His love is in our hearts, then there is love for Him. So @Romans 5 is the love of God shed abroad in our hearts, and @Romans 8 is that we love God. "All things work together for good to them that love God", @Romans 8: 28. There are such. God never contemplates a time when He has not His lovers in this world, and those who are not lovers of God are to be pitied. "All things work together for good to them that love God" -- they can never be defeated. It might seem at times that their aspirations are not fulfilled, but in result, those who love God are never defeated, nor is any legitimate desire of theirs in result unfulfilled. Those who love Him keep His commandments characteristically, and "no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly", @Psalm 84: 11.
I am purposing to speak about commendation, and the verse in @2 Corinthians 10 is a solemn one, reminding us that self-commendation spells defeat. No one is ever approved of God who commends himself. "For not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends" -- a very solemn and yet needed warning, dear brethren, for we do not want to be at the terrible disadvantage of being disapproved! The approved are those whom the Lord commendeth, and I would show in the course of my remarks how He does this, and in what connections He does it. I cannot, of course, go over the whole ground, because it is a somewhat extensive subject, but I have selected three examples.
First, divine commendation of a young believer, a young convert; there are those here under that head, no doubt: not perhaps so very young as to days, months, and years, but young in growth, or in whom growth
{518}
has been somewhat slow -- and for any such the brethren are rightly concerned.
Heaven will always make the most of us, even though this be the case; it will not fail to call attention to what little growth there may be. Although the Father is keen and intent, as the Lord says, to take away the things that are hindering growth, yet He never fails to notice the growth, however little. He is the husbandman, as the Lord says, and is keen on any little growth there may be, but He also would remove what hinders growth. So anyone who is in any way stunted, needs every bit of encouragement possible, and no encouragement is greater than divine encouragement. God will not fail to make the most of what there is; but if He does, it is not to induce or encourage laziness, but rather to give leverage by encouragement so that the laziness may give place to energy, and there may be more rapid progress.
I have selected this instance in @Acts 9 because it speaks of one just converted -- Saul. We have all had this experience if we are believers. He may have outrun all of us, but he is at least one who has had a day's experience as a young convert, and he would never fail in after years to get down alongside of any other such, and give him to understand that *he* had been there. In fact he is so simple about things that he speaks about certain ones "who were also in Christ before me", @Romans 16: 7. They were not apostles, but they had *that* advantage over him, and he could never outgrow it. There were many in Christ before Paul, though not before Peter, for I suppose he was one of the first to take up his relation with Christ, only Andrew and another disciple being before him. Not that he could have been "in Christ" until Christ died and rose again, but I mean in the principle of it. The whole hundred and twenty, and more no doubt, came into the position of "in Christ" when the Holy Spirit came down. There was a sort of unifying principle there, they all came
{519}
into it together at Pentecost, but, on the other hand, there were those who had priority because they had been disciples from the outset. Luke speaks of persons who from the outset were "eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word". Luke did not assume that place, but he obtained his information from such. At Pentecost they were all together in one place, and the Holy Spirit came in and they were all baptised on that same day by the Holy Spirit.
Now Saul in @Acts 9 is a young convert, and the Lord is giving him every possible advantage that there is among the brethren. If there is any young person wishing to place himself among the brethren, the Lord is waiting to give you every possible advantage. If you were to go up to heaven with Him today, He would make the most of you, but it may be the brethren *here* are not ready to make the most of you, perhaps they are making the least of you. Brethren are apt to think more of the debits than of the credits in a young believer; but there must be a balance. God is infinitely fair in taking account of His children, and He would give us all due credit. If anyone think little of himself, it is wholesome, but on the other hand some of us are hindered by thinking too little of ourselves. If you are a converted person, a believer in Jesus, you are a great personage, not as in the flesh surely, but according to divine reckoning -- you have already made an impression in heaven! Your first movement towards Christ in repentance was the cause of joy in heaven, and has given you a status in heaven, and all that has followed in the way of faith has increased that impression in heaven. You began by causing joy in the presence of the angels of God, and every movement since in faith has increased that impression. So it is well to be balanced, and to understand that the work of God makes you something which is pleasing to God, and which is going to abide for ever. You say with the apostle Paul, you do not over-estimate or under-estimate, for
{520}
you have your measure -- "by the grace of God I am what I am", @1 Corinthians 15: 10. So it is well to be balanced, and to bear in mind that the brethren have not the same means of knowing what is going on in your heart as the Lord has. On the other hand, the brethren are apt to think less of you than they should from the evidence they have, and that is how matters stood here.
Ananias was a brother, it would appear, not specially distinguished, but as we say a leading brother, in Damascus, and it would appear that the Lord regarded him in that way, and was determined that Ananias should not belie the confidence He was about to place in him. In local companies of brethren there is the idea of representation of Christ: we are of no moral value otherwise. We must be representative of Christ when called upon to act for Him, especially in regard of the "little ones", because the brother who helps you -- through whom light comes to you -- will probably be the ideal of your mind at the outset, and hence the importance for the brother who seeks to help another to be truly in the spirit of Christ, and devoid of mere officialism. As representative of Christ, he must have "the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ". The Lord has all this in mind here, for this convert is to be properly cared for. If Saul had been taken up to heaven at that moment, how wonderfully he would have been treated! The Lord says "It is hard for thee" -- He had sympathy with him. Angels would attend on him up there -- he would get a wonderful reception -- and that should be reflected here. It makes the position of service to those who are coming in amongst us a very solemn matter as to how we act towards them, how they are treated, because their first impression will be derived from the persons who are serving them.
The Lord says Saul has seen a vision, he had become blind, he was led by the hand into Damascus but he was not blind inwardly -- he was capable of a vision. In it he sees a man coming to him by the name of Ananias.
{521}
The vision presented Ananias as he should be. To this end the Lord has to bring Ananias into accord with Himself. He must come up to the measure of the vision, otherwise the young convert who is to be served will be disappointed. Now what kind of man is Ananias? Is he going into the whole sinful course of Saul? Will he tell him he is a persecutor of Christ and of the saints? Saul knew better than Ananias that he was a persecutor. He had judged it, no doubt, more profoundly than Ananias. So the Lord, having sent the vision to Saul, sees to it that Ananias is in keeping with the vision; He appears to Ananias. He has His own way of moving inwardly. He speaks to him in a vision, saying "Ananias". He calls him by name. How great was that honour! And it is the honour conferred on us now as acting for the Lord and in caring for souls. He knows the names of the brothers here, and all the meetings represented and who are acting for Him. The enemy will attack them if they are acting for Christ. Let *us* not speak against them! I am speaking about them as being in the spirit of Christ so as to act rightly.
Ananias is put right and the Lord commends the convert, and says to Ananias, "Arise, and go into the street which is called Straight, and enquire in the house of Judas for one called Saul, of Tarsus, for, behold, he prayeth", @Acts 9: 11. No doubt, if Ananias as he met Saul were to ask him whether he prayed. Saul would say he did; and this is a good question to ask young people. I was having to do with a soul a short time ago who got light from the Lord after the preaching, and I asked her, "Do you pray?" "Yes", she said, "I do", and yet she was dark in her soul at the time and did not know her sins forgiven. "What do you say?" "Our Father which art in heaven", etc. "Your Father? Where did you get the thought of God being your Father?" I inquired. She had just borrowed it from religious custom; and that is how matters stand with thousands of souls. She had no idea of the Father in
{522}
her soul; but she got fight through the gospel a few minutes afterwards, I think she would now say, "Abba Father" -- at least every intelligent christian says "Abba Father". That is how Jesus spoke to the Father. I do not know how Saul had addressed God when he prayed. He certainly was not accustomed to use the precious terms of relationship that belong to christians. But the Lord says he is praying, and if the Lord says "behold he prayeth", he *was* praying, and it is thus the Lord commends the convert.
It is very encouraging for young people when the Lord commends them; and He has His own way of telling the brethren that you enter into your closet and speak to Him. Every word that goes out from your heart is presented to God by Him. He is our Great Priest at the golden altar, every true prayer is made efficacious by Him there. Thus the Lord takes the matter in hand, and the Holy Spirit too, indeed it is *through* the Holy Spirit, of whom the Lord says He is another Comforter -- meaning One that is by your side, who takes charge of every item of your case, whether in regard to the brethren or in regard of God, and sees to it that the brethren know about you -- because it has to do with them, too.
Now Ananias makes his speech, and the Lord says, "Go", for the Lord has *authority*. That is another thing we must keep in mind, that if the brethren do not just understand it, the Lord has to say to them, too. He has authority over them, so that if they are hesitating as to us we can afford to *wait*. It is better to do that than to push ourselves. You will remember the Lord *compelled* His disciples to go on board ship, and He can compel the brethren to think rightly of any of us. He says to Ananias, "Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me", @Acts 9: 15. What a commendation! An elect vessel! And He says moreover, "to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel: For I will shew him how
{523}
great things he must suffer for my name's sake". How beautiful is the status the Lord gives him amongst the brethren! -- and I believe He operates in that way with every one of us. We do not need to force ourselves; the Lord takes matters in hand and He works with the brethren, but He works with you too; and if He works with you and with them, you will come in and have a place no one else can fill.
Now the next thing I want to show you comes out in connection with Abraham. I do not suppose persons ordinarily in company with Abraham would have called him a prophet. He was called out of Mesopotamia and God appeared to him, wonderfully honoured him, stood by and cared for him, communicated His mind to him in regard to Sodom, saying, "Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do?" (@Genesis 18: 17), but there is not a word about Abraham being a *prophet* before chapter 20: 7. That is the next thing, to learn how *God* takes account of us. You may say, 'I have no gift, I never get an opportunity of preaching, I have no place among the brethren -- no distinction whatever'. Scripture does not say a word about Abraham being a prophet, nor a word about him praying in the regular sense, until we come to this chapter, but he is both prophet and priest in the mind of God here. God had said this about Abraham.
This is the first mention of the word "prophet" in Scripture and the mention is to a heathen king in a vision -- a very remarkable fact, showing how far afield God goes to bring about His thoughts, and how it should induce us to put ourselves in His hands. What the brethren are not taking notice of, God knows, and in due time it comes to light. You may have said some little thing to someone that was the mind of God to him or to her; you may have thought very little of it, but He bears it in mind. It may be you are in the habit of praying for some person, and you have attached but little importance to your service; but God attaches great
{524}
importance to the prayers of His people. As a matter of fact your prayers are greater than Aaron's. A little one in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than John the baptist! I speak thus that we may learn to value such service as we render, so as to be encouraged to continue in it. A bedridden person can be greater than Aaron, carrying on his heart the needs of the saints, before God day and night, as he has opportunity. It is one of the greatest services. Abraham apparently had been accustomed to it; God knew that he could pray, and He says, "He shall pray for thee" -- for this king of the Philistines. God does not say, "He may", but he "shall" do it, as if to say, He is that kind of man -- @Psalm 105 refers to this incident, "he reproved kings for their sakes". You think yourself of no account, but God does not think of you thus. If you are able to pray, or to say a word to a soul about God, you are of great account in heaven. God would ennoble His people, and would show us what He thinks of us. So He says to Abimelech, "he is a prophet, and will pray for thee"; according to the psalmist, "Touch not mine anointed ones, and do my prophets no harm", @Psalm 105: 15. When was Abraham anointed? God says he was anointed. He was anointed; in other words, was representative of God. That is the idea, that God had committed Himself to him in His own way, and if anyone touches him, he touches the apple of His eye. Thus God commends Abraham. He shows why He values him, in that he is a prophet, and he is a priest -- he prays. And that is what everyone of us is according to God; all who have the Spirit are priests. Why not take up these great privileges? It belongs to sisters as well as brothers. It is no question of official place, but of an effective service, and so if you were speaking of such a one you would say, he or she is a priest, she prays. These are the most practical things that anyone can speak about; what has been said brings us all into the service, and answering to it would make our meetings
{525}
living; they cease in our minds to be mere congregations with a few brothers looking after them.
Then there is another feature of our subject in @Numbers 12. There are those who are specially addicted to the service of God, and they are the peculiar objects of the enemy's attack, especially through envy. As soon as a man has any distinction in the way of divine ability given him by the anointing, he will be envied. The enemy's way will be to produce envy in some heart against him, and "who is able to stand before envy?" It is a terrible thing! Moses had to experience it in a keen way here. It is Miriam and Aaron who speak against him; it began with the sister. Persons near to us in the flesh are as likely as any to speak against us. Miriam was Moses sister, and Miriam and Aaron spoke against him, because he had married an Ethiopian woman, but in truth it was more because of envy, that God had so honoured him, so distinguished him, that he was far beyond them. They themselves were great, for Miriam was a prophetess: we are told that she was, and Aaron was truly a priest. They were both most distinguished servants; but alas! in spite of this, they gave place to envy in their hearts against their brother, and thus the devil got in. But God never lets such things take their full course; He takes them in hand: as soon as we begin to feel things He intervenes. Thus we must always bring God in. There is no suggestion that Moses quarrelled or complained about their rivalry. The Holy Spirit puts in a beautiful word about him, "But the man Moses was very meek, above all men that were upon the face of the earth". You could scarcely get a better commendation. If the Holy Spirit had said that he was the greatest gift of his day, it could not be so beautiful as this that he was the meekest man in all the earth. Anticipatively, he took on the character of the Man, Christ Jesus -- the Man upon whom God had opened the heavens, saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight", @Matthew 3: 17
{526}
and @Matthew 17: 5. Moses had taken on something of His character. Jesus comes in on that line and says, "I am meek and lowly in heart", @Matthew 11: 29. But the Holy Spirit here puts it in parenthetically about Moses. It says Jehovah spake suddenly, as you will observe in verse 4. "The Lord spake suddenly unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto Miriam, Come out ye three unto the tabernacle of the congregation". Those who are envied are to be prayed for. Envy is a terrible thing -- who can stand before it? But then God comes into this matter: He never fails, especially where the one envied is quiet, and leaves all in His hands. "Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my messenger that I sent?" It is a matter for God. If I am envied, that is discipline for me, but it is a matter for God to take in hand, and He never fails to do it.
I want to show how beautifully He commends His servant here. First of all He says to the three, "Come out"; and the Lord came down in the pillar of cloud and stood in the door of the tabernacle and called Aaron and Miriam, and they both came forth; Moses is left behind. He is not the subject of judgment, but of commendation. This is a particularly fine passage in that respect. These two, sister and brother, are taken away from Moses. God acts very carefully, very formally, and very solemnly, and in doing so He speaks most beautifully about His servant. He says, "Hear now my words", and we shall do well to listen to such words as having to deal with these matters in the assembly, and to see how God does things, "Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house". Can you get a greater commendation than that in the Old Testament? I do not know of one. For forty years he bore with Israel's manners on God's behalf in the desert, and did it marvellously, and God knew it, and did not fail to make
{527}
it known. And moreover He says that if there are prophets, they are not like him; he is distinguished above them. "With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?"
Well, that is all, but I commend to you this particular part of the subject, that in service if we are envied, the course is plain: not to vindicate ourselves, nor push ourselves, but to let God come in for us. He does it in His own time. I need not dwell on what follows. Jehovah departed, and the cloud departed. What a solemn thing! Israel for the time is left in the desert without a cloud, without a *God*, through this. How solemn therefore to sin in this way! Miriam becomes leprous, and all Israel has to stop marching; movement is stopped until the leprosy is healed, so serious is this matter. But I am speaking not of that, but rather of the commendation of Moses -- the beautiful, forceful commendation that Jehovah gives His servant. There is no one like him, "wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?" -- not simply Moses, but *My* servant Moses.
May God bless these thoughts to each of us!
