{1}
*Pages 1 - 345 -- "Life and Spirituality". South Africa, 1936 (Volume 134)*
ESTABLISHMENT IN THE SPIRITUAL FAMILY
@Hebrews 10: 9; @Mark 3: 31 - 35; @Job 1: 18, 19; @Job 42: 7 - 17
I have in mind, dear brethren, to speak about establishment, the state of being divinely fixed or established in the things of God. What is said as to this to the saints at Corinth may be mentioned at the outset, indicating what is in mind. "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ", says the apostle, "and has anointed us, is God". "In Christ" is fixity, and it is there that we are to be established, not in this world. What I have in mind as to this is specific -- that is, establishment in *the divine family*. I read in Hebrews as giving the great principle, "He taketh away the first, that he may establish the second", and I wish to apply it to the family. There is the first family and the second, but He takes away the first, as we have read in the book of Job, in order to establish the second; for any thought that God has introduced is never to be abolished, it is to go through, and one of the great conceptions in the divine mind is the family. "And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father)" -- an only one with a father particularly brought out a father's affections. The truth is presented in that way so as to impress us with the peculiar affection that flows out from the Father, and which belongs to the family.
Isaac is a type of Jesus in this respect. The word in regard of him was, "Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest". Abraham and Isaac, seen in @Genesis 22, foreshadowed the passage I quoted from @John 1. It is the setting out of the family thought;
{2}
so we are told later in John that the Father loveth the Son, and we are also told that the Lord Himself said that He loved the Father. Moreover it is stated in the same great family gospel, "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". We have the idea of the family greatly stressed, and God would have us to understand it. It was a primary thought with Him, and every primary thought continues into eternity. The thought of the family is supremely such, for we are told in @1 Corinthians 15 that in eternity "the Son also himself shall be placed in subjection to him" (who is God and Father) "that God may be all in all". *All in all* -- that is, every created intelligence will be filled with God, but He will be Father as well; He is God *and* Father. The Son will be there, there will be the perfect radiation of affection between divine Persons, and the Spirit pervading all to make this good in every heart. That is not the first family, but the second. We are told "that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and afterward that which is spiritual", and this applies to the family.
Mark records for us an incident which brings out this great thought of the family and how it is experienced now -- the moral element that enters into it. When I use the word moral in this sense, I refer to what has to do with time. It is the same family in mind, only viewed as constituted capable of overcoming evil and practising righteousness. There will be no need of these features in eternity, for there will be no evil there, and no need of the moral element in the sense in which it is spoken of in this passage. Evil will be relegated to its own place, the lake of fire, never more to lift up its head. The divine family is marked off, as the Lord says, by doing the will of God, and I want to show how the first family comes into evidence in this passage in Mark, so that you may see how this idea of the first family may even apply to a believer's house. I hope also to show from Job how God works in such a house, so that the first family may
{3}
disappear in the second. The discipline of God is to lead us to abandon what attaches to the first, so that we may be established in the second.
In this remarkable passage in @Mark 3, we have the Lord's mother, Mary, the most honoured of women; and yet here she is on the line of the first family -- that is, on the line of nature. In this she erred more than once. For instance, at the marriage in Cana she said to the Lord, "They have no wine", as much as to say, You are my Son, and I have liberty to call Your attention to this matter. He said to her, "Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come". He repudiated the introduction of nature in this way. Mary is adjusted at once, and sets an excellent example for fathers and mothers who would pursue the natural; she says to the servants, "Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it". But here in @Mark 3 she is on natural lines; the multitude tell Him that His mother and His brethren are standing outside; He is inside and they are calling Him. Think of who He was! Mary should have known -- no one on earth should have known better who this Person was, but she is standing outside, and the *brethren* are inside. The disciples are sitting around Him, for He looked round in a circuit. If we are not in the divine family, if we are on the line of nature, we are really outside the circle of those who are sitting around the Lord Jesus, those who love Him. The relatives call Him to come out to them; they were His brothers and sisters according to nature, and they call Him as if they had a claim on Him. That is what enters into this; they were calling Him. Why did they not come into the circle, and sit down and listen to what He was saying? No; they did not, and the Lord scathingly rebukes them. Parents may expect such rebukes when they are on the line of nature and not on the line of the second family.
In the book of Acts. Luke refers to "all things which Jesus began both to do and to teach". The Lord here in @Mark 3 exemplifies what He is about to say, in that He
{4}
looks round upon those who were sitting around Him; He was doing that as if to say, My heart is set on those who are sitting round Me, they are delightful to Me, and I must not be called outside. It will not do at all to give up the second family for the first. No doubt Mary and His brethren were thankful in after years for this rebuke, as, for instance, when they were found in the upper room later on. If you were to ask Mary, What did you think when Jesus said that to you? -- she would say, 'Oh, how foolish I was, and how faithful He was! I feel this, as recalling that He was inside with His brethren and I was outside'. She was a true believer and a highly honoured one, but she was on the line of the first, the natural family, and she was rebuked. The Lord looked round on those who sat about Him, and saw them listening, not merely as curious and interested persons, but listening. The heavenly family is a circle of affection, for John says as we love the brethren we know we have passed from death unto life. The Lord looked round and said, "Behold my mother and my brethren! For whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother". Young people, come into the second family! You do not want to be taken away by the government of God. It says that He "taketh away the first". Many have been taken away by death, others through worldliness, so that they are morally dead. The point to understand is what the first represents -- the flesh in the believer is to be taken away. How? Through the efficacy of Christ's death -- by self-judgment, by self-renunciation and the avoidance of all that goes with the flesh, by the washing of water by the word. If I put my son to the university I want a name for him; I want him to be distinguished in this world; that is the first family. The jailer, believing in God, was at once baptized with his family; that means that he was at once going in for the second. So with Lydia also, at Philippi. They were remarkable cases, they started with the idea of the second family.
{5}
Now I go on to Job to illustrate what I am saying, for the Old Testament always helps in this way; it gives us details. In chapter 1 you will find that Job's sons and daughters are specifically mentioned four separate times, and in every instance -- except the first -- they are mentioned as meeting in each others¬ houses. That is, they are viewed from the very outset as constituted to carry on as brothers and sisters *without* their father. Young people very often like to get relieved of the father's authority and influence. It does not exactly say that here, but it does say that they met alternately in their brothers¬ houses. Very nice, you say. Yes, from their point of view. On the last occasion they are drinking wine in their eldest brother's house; not a word about Job and his wife. On every occasion Job sent and sanctified them, and he rose up early in the morning and offered sacrifices for every one of them. But why send? Why not go? Why should he be exempted from these occasions? There is not a word about Job being present at those family gatherings. This was not written by accident, but with purpose to teach us. Although the father was unique as far as he went, he did not take part in what his children were going on with. Was his life rather tame then? No, Job was a man of great affairs, but there was never any word of his children *having part* in his affairs.
If you read chapter 29 you will be impressed with what a man he was in his district. He says, "When I went out to the gate through the city, ... the aged arose, and stood up. The princes refrained talking ... The nobles held their peace". He was the leading man in his district, perhaps a wide one, but there is no mention of his children. I have no doubt that Job was known far and wide. He lived in the land of Uz, and was one of the most distinguished men of his time. His was not a tame life, but a life of affairs; "I ... dwelt as a king in the army", he says as to his public life. But I am speaking now about his children. He sent and did things for them, but that was all. No doubt it suited them that he did not come;
{6}
there is not the slightest hint that they missed their father, or were at any loss owing to his absence from these feasts in their houses. In the last instance the feast was in the *eldest* brother's house; they were on the line of *nature*, and they moved in that way; but a wind came from the wilderness and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon the young men and they died, and the messenger says, "I only am escaped alone to tell thee". Is not that a solemn lesson to children who disregard parents and are content to go along by themselves, who want to go on the line of the first family! A solemn warning, too, for parents who allow their children to do these things! It came from the devil -- God gave him leave; but there is no word of him after chapter 2. It was the Lord who allowed these things -- it was a question of the governmental dealings of the Lord. Job was a converted man, but godliness may be only up to a point, not going far enough. How terrible is the thought that He taketh away the first! All that is on the line of nature fails. He gave it abundance of time to prove itself, but now it is exposed. He taketh away the first, and what for? that He may establish the second.
So I come to the last chapter, in order that you may see how the discipline of God brought Job to the second family. Forty wonderful chapters intervene, chapters of education, bitter experiences for Job, but well worth the while, as we see when we read this forty-second chapter. You will notice what is said in verse 7: "And it came to pass after Jehovah had spoken these words to Job, that Jehovah said to Eliphaz the Temanite, Mine anger is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends; for ye have not spoken rightly of me, like my servant Job. And now, take for yourselves seven bullocks and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for yourselves a burnt offering; and my servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept". God had spoken to Job. I am here tonight that God may speak, and all meetings of this kind are intended to give God opportunity
{7}
to speak. The point is what God says. Jehovah said to Eliphaz the Temanite, "Mine anger is kindled against thee".
Now what is to be observed is, that the root of the matter was in Job, and that the second family as worked out today is not merely a second family of persons but a second family in *principle*. Children, of course, are born on the line of nature, but the second family is the idea. The first family is there -- that which is natural is first, afterwards that which is spiritual. Circumcision came in on the eighth day, indicating the second family, that is, the spiritual. So it is with baptism; household baptism came in under Paul and is a great thought in christianity. At Philippi, the two leading believers have their households baptized, and the baptism of the household implies the thought of the second family. Why should I bring in death if the first family is not to be removed? There is no point in anyone having his household baptized unless he has the second family in mind. The idea in the mind of the believing parents is that the child is dead and buried, and is to be brought up in the light of the second family -- in the light of Christ risen from the dead. So you find the principle in Moses; he is laid in the water. Indeed, you find the principle as early as Seth. When his son was born, by the name he gave him he said, He is a poor dying creature; he called his name Enosh, which conveys this thought. The babe, however delightful, is born to die, and the parents say that he must die, and baptism means that. It is taking away the first so that the second may be established. So the eunuch says, "See, here is water; what doth hinder me to be baptized?" So with Paul; Ananias says, "Why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins", @Acts 22: 16. The "first" has sins attached to it, and these must go, the person and his sins all go in baptism. It is a question of baptism to Christ -- "as many as have been baptized unto Christ Jesus, have been baptized unto his death ... so we also should walk in newness of life". Room is
{8}
made for the second. The point in the early verses is to bring in Job as the head; he is regarded as a priest also. The second family here illustrates any family brought up on the line of baptism to Christ as Head, risen from the dead. The Lord indicated to Eliphaz and the two others that Job would intercede for them. "My servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept". He is a priest. The new order of things is to have such a man as this leading. How we can apply this to our Lord Jesus! How God has accepted Him! Job is a type, though perhaps a dim one. The Lord Jesus is the only Man acceptable to God in His own Person. He is Priest to God for all His people. These three friends of Job are brought in and saved because of this man.
We are told the Lord accepted Job, and thus he was set up again with twice as much as he had before, except that his sons and daughters were not increased in number. There is the passing over to the second, for in truth the second is reached in the same individuals. Romans takes up a man responsible to God, and the "second" is worked out in him by the removal of the first. Job has twice as much as he had had in cattle, but only the same number of sons and daughters. See what a man Job is! How different from his friends and neighbours and brethren! He is set up, not only in acceptability to God, but to everyone. God has been doing this ever since Job's day, working out His thoughts with us in severest discipline, so as to put away the first and establish the second. Job's friends bring him money and earrings, and set him up as if he were the centre of affection. He had seven sons and three daughters, and in all the land there were no women so fair as the daughters of Job. It is not the natural now, not a question of physical features, the beauty of these women is typically spiritual. The second family is marked by this. It would be well to consider these women and others who are mentioned, holy women of old, women of faith. The women of the New Testament form one of the most interesting studies as
{9}
one works out in each the transfer from the first to the second. What a group you find standing by the cross of Jesus, the *Marys*, which imply that they knew suffering! Where are there women to be compared with those delineated by the pen of the holy writers in the New Testament! There are not any so fair, as is said of the daughters of Job. In the first chapter no names were given, for names indicate character, and their characters were evidently not worth naming. No doubt they were "*society people*", distinguished among men, but God took them away with a terrible stroke, to make room for the second. Now the second family comes into view; their names are given, and the daughters are specially mentioned; but there is not a word about feasts in their brothers¬ houses in this last chapter. It says Job gave them an inheritance amongst their brethren; they are in subjection in their own right positions. That is where all true christian sisters should be -- amongst their brethren in the assembly, in the family of God; and that is what the Lord had in mind when He looked round upon that circle that were sitting around Him. What a holy place for young sisters! Instead of the dance hall and all that kind of thing -- to enjoy an inheritance amongst the brethren, an inheritance handed down from their parents and given by God Himself, for Job is here representative of God. God is the Father of all the spiritual families; they are all named of Him, and to each He has given a rich inheritance amongst the brethren.
So the Lord looking around in @Mark 3 indicates that those round Him were *morally* right, they were doing the will of God, not their own will. The place in the divine family is based on this, not doing one's own will. I suppose each of these feasts in the brothers¬ houses was a matter of the will of the brother. Their father is not there, he has other matters, and they are quite content to be without him, and Job is seemingly satisfied to let it be that way. For this reason they are taken away. In Mark the second family is composed of "whosoever shall
{10}
do the will of God"; in Luke of "these which hear the word of God, and do it"; and John gives, from the Lord's own lips, the glorious position accorded to us, saying, "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". That is the heavenly family, the family that God is to have before Him, and we shall be in it throughout eternity. May we be established by God in this great family!
{11}
THE SUPERIORITY OF CHRISTIANITY
@Hebrews 8: 6 - 13; @Hebrews 7: 26; @Hebrews 3: 3 - 6
I have before me to speak about christianity in its initial features, and if the Lord help, as I hope He will, to show its superiority as compared with human religions -- indeed with all that is merely human. I have in view to help the young, for as young we are prone to be discouraged by the outward smallness of what we are identified with, allowing our natural sensibilities to control us, and thus disqualifying us from viewing things morally, from the judging of values, and disqualifying us for the appraisement of heavenly things. The Lord introduced the idea of values in His parables, speaking of the treasure that the man found as if he were not looking for it, and then of something that one was seeking as a merchant-man ready to pay for what he sought, his taste being of the highest order. He found one pearl of great price and sold all to obtain it. He thus stresses the idea of value and the ability to esteem it proportionately. One observes and knows, from one's own experience, that what marks the young, and perhaps all, is the constant tendency to gravitate to a lower level; and the lower we get, the larger things become on that level. So we become discontented with what is of real and abiding value, and hence turn back to what is visible and to what is appraised among men as of value, and yet is of no real value.
Now these were the circumstances which drew forth this remarkable epistle -- the epistle to the Hebrews. It was undoubtedly written by one who had great appreciation of the heavenly. It has been styled, and rightly so, the book of the opened heavens. Stephen was the first to look into heaven, as far as we can see, after Christ was received up. Those who saw the Lord go up are addressed by two men in white who say, "Men of Galilee, why do ye stand looking into heaven? This
{12}
Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven" (@Acts 1: 11); and they returned to Jerusalem from mount Olivet and entered into the upper room. It was from Olivet, but before they left Olivet the cloud had received Jesus out of their sight. It was not that they were not to see Him in another sense, but the era of sight had ceased -- they were now to walk by faith and not by sight. It is a question of faith in this epistle, so it says "we see Jesus" -- He is still to be seen, not on the principle of natural visibility, but on the principle of faith. "We see Jesus, who was made some little inferior to angels on account of the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour; so that by the grace of God he should taste death for every thing". So we see Him crowned with glory and honour, and Stephen could say, "I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God". He saw the glory. It was no longer in Jerusalem, no longer on Olivet, no longer hovering over the threshold of the house, but in heaven, and seen there on the principle of faith. All true values are in heaven. The manifest intent is to draw us away from earth and the most accredited things on earth, to what is in heaven. If these things are represented here they have not lost their value, and I want to show that they *are* represented here, and I would enlist the interest of every young person as to them. Christianity is a heavenly thing on earth, but by this it has not lost its heavenly quality. Gold is gold wherever it is, whatever the circumstances; so true christianity is heavenly, whatever the surroundings, and has the ability to keep itself. The power to keep itself is inherent through the divine provisions, which I hope to speak of. I wish to enlist the interest of the young, especially that they may see how this works out that there is inherent power in it to keep itself in this world.
The first thing is the covenant. There are many golden threads running through the epistle, all on
{13}
parallel lines, but the words I wish you to dwell upon are "better" and "new". In the passage read we have both. Some years ago there was a calling together of a so-called parliament of religions, in which all were compared. But christianity in the true sense is incomparable. For christians to accept such a proposal was an absolute surrendering of the whole position. There is no comparison with christianity at all, it is unique. The word "new" signifies that the covenant is entirely *different* -- new in *that* sense. There has been and is nothing like it. It stands by itself, and we want to see that we have part in it. It is "better" too. This word involves comparison, but it is with what God had ordained, and which does not exist now. Christianity supersedes it. Jewish christians were going back to what had grown old. That is what is in view in this epistle. They should have been teachers. How quickly the early brethren declined! -- for this epistle was written a comparatively short time after Pentecost; but we are reminded in it of the readiness in ourselves to decline. Hence the need for care in discerning and judging the elements of decline. These tendencies will show up in our reverting to something old and rebuilding the things we have destroyed. We revert not merely to what we have left, but to what *God* has left. We are then on the down line, whereas God is always on the up line.
The twelve apostles continued on the old level in grace according to the Lord's leading in @Luke 24; they were in the temple daily, in order that the elect Israel might be saved, and a testimony rendered to everyone in Israel. But the upper room was in view. There is no steeple, no choir, no organ, nothing to appeal to the flesh where christians meet, and the flesh does not like that. We are told they went to the upper room, so it is a question of valuing what is in that upper room. Analyse the persons who were abiding in that upper room and see whether, by careful spiritual weighing, you can find anything to compare with them. You cannot; it is the
{14}
most excellent material there is. The apostles are there, they are continuing in prayer, and we have their names given -- each name signifying what is most excellent. There were certain women there; the mother of Jesus was there and His brethren. Christianity is there concretely, the excellency of the workmanship of Christ is set out in the persons staying in that upper room. Let the youngest here sit down when they have opportunity, and carefully consider those persons. Do you prefer other society? Could you find any woman in all the world like Mary the mother of Jesus? Or a man like Peter, or James, or John, or Bartholomew, or Matthew? The whole list is given and they have no equals. They have all gone, but their testimony remains, and the Spirit that actuated them when He came from heaven remains. All is substantially here, all is carried down to us. Think of who is here! The Comforter is here, the Paraclete. He is here not only to help those who minister, but to look after, to superintend, the divine interests. He is the great custodian of the things of God from Pentecost until now: sensitive and tender as the dove, still patiently waiting on the people of God; but also in the character of fire, for He will not tolerate the flesh. Whatever religious titles people may have, He will make no compromise with any; unless Christ is honoured, He will retire, for He can be grieved and quenched. He has a footing somewhere and He maintains the principles of christianity, and He maintains values. In these last days He has come in wonderfully to emphasise the heavenly side of things with Christ as our Head in heaven.
Let us think of that magnificent truth -- we have a Man in heaven who is our Head, who knows us well; and we have the Comforter, the Paraclete, a correlative Person down here who takes care of the affairs of the assembly day and night; and now in the last days there is such a mighty impulse of the Spirit that Christ is brought in as Head of the assembly, His body; and moreover, that assembly is God's temple, the house of
{15}
God. So we have *christianity*. I use that word as being, for what is before us, as comprehensive a word as I know. Think of having part in christianity! It ought to appeal to us and cause joy unspeakable and full of glory in our hearts, stimulating them. Think of it! -- that we are "holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling" -- that applies to every true christian.
So in the new covenant; God has entered into covenant with His people. He says in effect, I love you, and I want you never to be distant from Me. I want you to be a people near to Me. I brought you to Myself at infinite cost, and I want you to be nearer to Me, and nearer to Me in perfect restfulness. So I enter into covenant with you, and the terms are calculated to make you perfectly at home with Me, to cast out every bit of fear from your hearts. The Spirit of God goes on to say "he is mediator of a better covenant" (verse 6), and in verse 8 refers to the "new covenant". God found fault with the old one. He said virtually, It is not good enough, it did not effect what it was intended to effect. That is what the great religious bodies, from Rome to the weakest church, Anglican, Wesleyan, or any others have gone back to -- to this principle, the principle of demand; whereas God says it has not served its purpose. God finds fault with it. He says it is proved valueless and has grown old; it is aged and vanishing. It has been revived and is the principle, in one way or another, of every accredited religion in christendom, every one of them. I do not say this in order to attack those bodies, but to help the saints here so that we might not drift back into these things, for they have long since vanished from the eye of faith. Faith has taken on God's way -- the effective one, the new one, the one that abides -- God's covenant. You say, I would like to understand it. It appears every time we break bread. The Lord Jesus said to His disciples -- referring to the cup -- "Drink ye all of it", and "they all drank out of it". Then He says, That is the new covenant. It begins here in @Hebrews 8 and ends in
{16}
chapter 10. I would urge every young person here to read these chapters and see whether they fit into them, into the warmth and liberating power of the covenant; whether they are at home in the assembly, in the conscious worship of God. If so, you will say, Nothing can allure me from this, I have turned my face to God who is presented to me, there is the outshining of love in the face of Jesus.
The glory of God is in the face of Jesus, the outshining of God's love in the face of Jesus, and it has been shed abroad in our hearts. The Spirit of God goes on to point out that it is not now a question of demand -- not that the christian does not have to be responsible -- but you are set down in the presence of God without any sense of demand being made upon you. So God says, I will teach you Myself, no man shall say, "Know the Lord", He will see to it that everyone will know the Lord. The epistle to the Hebrews is an epistle to christians to save them from going back into religions of this world; they are to stay in a realm of love where God provides everything. So the writer goes on to say in the succeeding verses, "Because this is the covenant that I will covenant to the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord: Giving my laws into their mind, I will write them also upon their hearts; and I will be to them for God, and *they* shall be to me for people. And they shall not teach each his fellow-citizen, and each his brother, saying, Know the Lord; because all shall know me in themselves, from the little one among them unto the great among them. Because I will be merciful to their unrighteousnesses, and their sins and their lawlessnesses I will never remember any more". Does not that appeal to your conscience? It has often appealed to mine. "I will be merciful to their unrighteousnesses". Does anyone claim to have none? The more honest we are, the more we have to admit that we have. Moreover He says, "their sins and their lawlessnesses I will never remember any more". That sets us down in restfulness of
{17}
conscience. "By one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified" -- by the one offering. There is the sense of forgiveness, that God does not remember our sins; not only are they forgiven, but remembered no more. It is intended to govern the rest of our course, to give restfulness of conscience, that we may have restfulness in the presence of God so as to serve Him. "And the Holy Spirit also bears us witness of it", @Hebrews 10: 15. It is by the Spirit that it is brought home to our souls in power. "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us".
The second thing I would call attention to is in @Hebrews 7; we have priesthood as belonging to us. I need not remind you of the hierarchies there are in christendom, all based on the idea that priesthood attaches to man in the flesh; that men of religious culture and training, unregenerate men, can take the place of priesthood to God, and not only so, but the place of a high priest is taken. This epistle brings out the magnificence, the greatness of our High Priest. It is not so much here the priesthood of christians; all christians are priests, but what this epistle stresses is the greatness of the Person who is our Priest. Hence the statement in chapter 7, verse 26. This brings out the greatness of the persons who are represented by that Priest. "Such a high priest became us". There are those who claim a certain person in Rome as their high priest, but he dies; one after another goes. Look at *our* Priest. It is a question of faith, apprehending Jesus in heaven and who He is. I believe it would be of assistance to many young believers to be enquiring as to *who Jesus is*, as did Zacchaeus. Zacchaeus sought to see Jesus who He was. The one great feature of this epistle is the greatness of Christ, who is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec, without father or mother, without beginning of days or end of life, but abiding a Priest continually. Then after many such statements about Him, we come to this statement, "such a high priest
{18}
became us". Who are the "us"? I am one of them, thank God, and so is nearly everybody in this room; but do we sit down and let the greatness of it settle into our minds and hearts? That word "became" means that the persons of whom He is Priest are so great and glorious in divine counsels, that their calling requires such a High Priest. You say that is taking very high ground. It is: for the ground is high. God is impressing upon us here the greatness of divine counsels and purposes. The writer of the epistle says, "holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling". "Such a high priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens". It signifies an uncreated state of things, it is beyond creature thought. The heavens mark the acme of creation, the highest realm, however many. Paul went to the third heaven; Jesus went higher than the heavens, beyond them all -- what creature heart can understand it? And yet in that very connection you have the statement "such a high priest became us", and so as to preserve us in the meantime it says, "he ever liveth to make intercession for them". It is the character of the Priest. Is that all He has to do? We know He has other things on hand, but day and night He is living to make intercession for us, as if it were the prime object of His position as Priest. He ever lives to make intercession for us, and to save to the uttermost all who come to God by Him. All are so precious, all so valuable, all provided for; so that while you eat, while you sleep, while you work, think of it -- He ever liveth to make intercession for you.
The third thing is the house. These things are over against current religious combinations; every item is over against what is generally accepted in this world religiously, to which many have gravitated and have built again the things that they destroyed. You will observe that I began with chapter 8, and then went back to chapter 7, and then to chapter 3. The nearer you get to chapter 2 of the epistle, the higher you get. In chapter 3 the saints
{19}
are addressed as "holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling". In verse 3 the point made is that the Lord Jesus is the Builder. God is the Builder, "he that built all things is God" (verse 4), but Christ is God. That is a way of asserting the deity of Christ, He is no less than God. As compared with Moses, who was a servant in the house, Christ is the Builder of God's house, and has thus more honour than the house. Now the next thing is, what is the house? It is composed of persons. The general idea is that it is composed of stones and mortar. That is a fallacy, and yet there are those who cling to it and defend it, and some have left and gone back to it. So in order to bring this out in greater clearness, the Lord at the end of His ministry, as He was about to suffer death, looked up and saw the rich casting their gifts into the treasury of God. He was interested in that, in fact Mark says, He was seeing *how* they did it. He took notice of it because from His point of view it was a question of love, and there is nothing more prominent in Scripture than God's way of love. "Yet shew I unto you a way of more surpassing excellence", @1 Corinthians 12: 31, and giving is under that head. So the Lord was interested to see *how* they did it.
Luke does not make so much of that, only enough to show it came under His eye, but there is this woman. The widow is usually a figure of the remnant -- bereft of shelter, of what she should have had, but this widow had something -- two mites. You say, That was not much. But you always have something to attest your loyalty, that is the principle. You may not have money, but you have a body, and it is more to the Lord than money. Romans says the believer has an arm or an eye; according to chapter 6 he can present every member to God, holding his members as instruments of righteousness to God. I always have the means in my body of attesting my loyalty and love to God. This woman's body was not needed, it was of no use in the temple. Looking-glasses were donated in the early days. They
{20}
were given up. There are a good many of them today; they represent that on which I feed my pride. In surrendering this, women are heartily in the tabernacle; but the body of this woman that I allude to would have been no use then; it was of use in the upper room. There were in the upper room in @Acts 1 Mary and other women, but they had no place in the temple. The widow's mites were enough to attest her loyalty; her devotedness to that temple. To her it was God's place, and the Lord Jesus immediately says in effect, This building is not great enough for such giving. He said every stone would have to be thrown down. It was as if when the disciples said, Look at these stones, He said, All this grandeur is not great enough for this widow. Of course other great things were also in His mind. But she is attesting her love to God, and the Lord is saying that she needs a greater building than this. She needs to be among the brethren, in the upper room. Not only her mites, but herself will be of use there. All those buildings which are but a revival of the temple will be thrown down, and men are building them today with increasing pomp and magnificence. They are not great enough, however, for the saints today who are devoted to Christ. The writer of Hebrews speaks of the saints when he says, "whose house are we". The Lord says to Philadelphia, "thou hast ... kept my word, and hast not denied my name"; and again, "thou hast kept the word of my patience"; and further He says He will make those who say they are Jews and are not to come and "worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee". That widow would find a resting place there, she would be a loved sister there. It was what the Lord valued, hence He says, "more than they all". Peter is stronger in a way in saying, "To whom coming, a living stone, ... yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ", @1 Peter 2: 4, 5.
{21}
That is the position, and I press it so that the young might be saved from despising what is small outwardly, and might learn what is of essential value because of its moral worth, and what heaven thinks of it. If you love Christ and love the brethren, you say, This is my home and this is my rest, this is the house of God. He rests here, and I rest here, and it is going through. What is despised now will come out presently as the heavenly city, and how glorious it will be! We shall shine in it. The Lord says if we deny Him, He will deny us, but if we are unfaithful, He abides faithful. He says, I never proved unfaithful. Let us value what is brought in -- value each other, indeed, because of what we are in divine counsels, as subjects of the work of God.
{22}
DOING AND TEACHING
@John 1: 38 - 42; @John 4: 28 - 30; @John 6: 66 - 69; @John 12: 3; @John 20: 16 - 18
My subject is teaching, and how it works out in the doings and sayings of those taught. For the principle is *doing* and teaching in the teacher, and learning and doing in the taught. In his second letter to Theophilus, Luke refers to "all things which Jesus began both to do and to teach". Christianity therefore is exemplified, and then taught. It is a substantial thing, not merely a system of ethics and doctrines, but concrete things worked out livingly first in Christ, and afterwards in His apostles, who as having learnt from Him, were marked by doing and teaching. What I have in mind is to work these things out in John's gospel, and what is to be observed is that the Lord draws from the Old Testament as to this matter. He says, "they shall be all taught of God"; that is the result of all teaching -- whether by the Lord, by His apostles, or by gifted men since the apostles¬ time; for one of the gifts given by Christ was that of teaching -- pastors and teachers are one gift. In this sense, the teacher not only takes care of the minds of the saints, but of the saints themselves. All is included in God's teaching, for after all God does everything, whether it be in this wonderful dispensation, in the one that is to follow, or in the one that is past. The great testimony is, What hath God wrought! The more we advance in the knowledge of God, the more we attribute everything to God. So the passage in @John 6 is significant, "they shall be all taught of God". What a joy if it can be said of us that we are characteristically taught of God! -- not priding ourselves in the schools and colleges we may have graduated from, but that we have been taught of God; for the teaching of God is the only teaching that goes into eternity.
The first example I wish to use is in chapter 1, verse 37, "And the two disciples heard him speak, and
{23}
they followed Jesus"; they are examples for all christians at the present time, especially those who are divided up into sects. The ministry of John is to detach us from all such sects and direct our minds to Jesus, to make Him our Leader, and Him alone. This is a great matter, and it refers to our own time even more than to the time in which it occurred, for the real people of God are, alas! divided into numerous religious associations, and the testimony that John would present has in mind to detach us from all such denominations and to attach us to Christ, so that He becomes our sole Leader. Paul says, "Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ", -- not in any other sense; for all true leadership is Christ's leadership. So these two disciples -- we assume they are young believers -- left John and followed Jesus, and the first title they give Him is Teacher, Rabbi; and the Spirit of God immediately tells us the meaning of this word "Rabbi" (verse 38). They had the idea of learning from Him in close quarters, in family relationship; so they say to Him, "Where abidest thou?" Would that every young one here would ask that question! Whatever your associations, the Lord would give you a definite answer and invite you to the place, for He has a place now where He teaches, as He had then; and spiritually He has a place here on earth where He abides, and where He is loved. He would invite you there, and indicate that you can learn better there than anywhere else, for environment has much to do with education. They go to where He dwelt and abode with Him that day. The idea is a period of testimony suggestive of enough time for a given matter. I have no doubt that the part of a day is a day in Jewish thinking, not necessarily twenty-four hours, but a part which represents that you have had enough time to learn something; to learn above all that Jesus is the true Teacher; and thus, as resorting thither, we are delivered and saved from human organisations.
The next thing about one of these disciples is that he shows what he has learnt; he has learnt to think of his
{24}
brother. The result therefore of the teaching is that he first finds his own brother Simon. It is not now a question of thinking of John the baptist, for John continued in his ministry. He had a mission of his own -- he was the forerunner of Christ. But these two disciples were not concerned about what they had left, for they had definitely left it; and that is what is being effected today in thousands of souls who have definitely left former associations through impressions received from Christ, and who think now of their brother. Whatever his denomination may be, we must begin to think of our brother. Andrew first finds his own brother Simon, not because of his religious affiliations, but simply because he is his brother. "The Lord knows those that are his". If we are thinking of our brother we shall be effective in finding him, and not only that, we shall lead him to Jesus, who will care for those who are brought to Him. Peter is given a name and is made a great apostle. It is not a case of building up human organisations, but of leading your brother to Jesus. Education shows itself in its result. Jesus will look after the brother, you may be sure He will look after those who are brought to Him. He gives Peter a name -- "thou shalt be called Cephas", which means a stone, that is, a stone in the divine structure. He is to be taken out of human organisations which will perish in course of time; there is not a human organisation existent which will not be dissolved. The Lord Jesus had permanency in His mind -- a stone is permanent. What importance there is, therefore, in bringing the brother to Jesus!
The next illustration of what is in my mind is the well-known woman of Samaria. John gives great prominence to women as examples of the truth. He furnishes us with women as well as with men as exemplifications of great principles. This woman had a disreputable history, and you may marvel that the Lord should take up such a person, but it is only to enhance the grace of God. It is a question of the Father. John makes much more of the
{25}
Father than any of the other apostles do; that is, God revealed in grace in a character to which judgment does not attach -- it is entirely stripped of the thought of judgment. It is a question of pure and unmitigated grace, "the Father judgeth no man". What I am concerned with now is how this woman profited by the teaching. She had a conversation with Jesus. He was alone, and He sat on the well. He was weary, and made no effort to disguise the character of His humanity -- a humanity capable of being wearied. He asked a drink of the woman -- it was no feigned request -- and this asking brought out what was in her mind and what was in His. It opened up the great subject of worship. You cannot connect the worship of God with a merely human organisation, the thing is incongruous. The worship of God is of the Spirit, and they who worship Him, worship Him in spirit and in truth, not by the paraphernalia of current religion in christendom.
What did the woman do? After the conversation it says she "left her water-pot". She had received an impression from Christ, she became a *taught* person. In these meetings what impression do you get? -- and what do you retain in your soul of the teaching? Do you become taught of God? This woman shows that she had gathered something that referred to her own person, and what her own body was to be used for. Though having little religious education, she had her body. Perhaps I have no money, no religious education, but I have a body and God says I can use that to minister for Him. Jesus tells her that in her body would be a fountain springing up into everlasting life. If you can get one real thought from God and take it home and assimilate it, you have obtained something. This woman received that something, for it says she "left her water-pot" (verse 28). Many of you may have read that, and you may say leaving the water-pot is a mere incident, but it has great significance. That woman had travelled along the road to the well with her water-pot to fill it. The journey would have
{26}
been futile without it, but now she leaves it without filling it. She received the impression that her body is now the water-pot, and she is not now afraid to go to the men and say, "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did" (verse 29). Did she come under their influence? No; she was superior to them, and her body would be used henceforth for ministry; she left her water-pot. Were she to consider what is natural, she would say, I shall fill it in any case. But no, the Spirit of God wishes to convey to us that she learned what God thought of her body, and that it was to be a vessel. God could purify it and use it for testimony. How important our bodies are! We should be careful to keep them pure. This woman used her mouth in an effective way and the men went out to Jesus. What she had learned worked out in effect in bringing them to Jesus. There is not a person in my hearing who may not become a servant of Christ, even the youngest may. It is not only what you say, but what you are; the body is at the service of God. You may speak to your school-mates as to what Christ has done for you, but remember that actions count as well. The woman has living water in principle, she is now another kind of woman.
The next illustration which I have in mind is in chapter 6. This chapter has a great bearing, and alludes to the spiritual teaching of Jesus. It was so spiritual that the hearers said, "This is an hard saying; who can hear it?" (verse 60). The path is too narrow, the teaching too exacting, too heavenly, and many left him and went away back. They put a distance between Jesus and themselves. There are many christians who are doing this and it is a challenge to us. "Will ye also go away?" Others are going -- He does not disguise this fact. Why are there so few, when this teaching is so wonderful? God is teaching, yet people want to go away. This is one of the most wonderful chapters in the Bible, it is full of matter. It is a very long chapter. The teaching is divine and spiritual, yet people are turning their backs
{27}
on it. What a challenge to every heart! Others are going, are you going too? Peter represents the spiritual instruction of the chapter. He says, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal" (verse 68). One would love to have heard Him say that! John certainly says a great deal about eternal life. I do not believe that the disciples understood it at this time. Peter could not have given you a discourse on it, none understood it, but the instinct to perceive it was there; and the words of it, the details of it, the opening up of it was in the Lord's teaching, and Peter says, I discern this, and where shall I go? What is all the teaching of the world? what are the universities? All come to nothing. Even the great classics, what will become of them? They have no place in heaven. And Peter says, What is the good if there is no eternal life? -- Why, there is nothing; tomorrow we die. Life here, at best, is only a few years. Peter would say You have the words of eternal life, and that is what man needs. In @Genesis 3 the great thought is life, as death is on man. "In Adam all die". "Death reigned by one", as the word says. So today cemeteries and undertakers and coffins are just as numerous as ever they were -- men are disappearing into utter darkness without God. Peter goes on to say, "we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God". Not only that He had heard the words of eternal life, but that He was the Minister, the true Aaron to set up the service of God and to maintain it. The epistle to the Hebrews opens up Peter's remark, what he had believed and known, showing Christ to be the Minister of the sanctuary and of the true tabernacle. Peter says, "the holy one of God", the true Aaron in the tabernacle, pitched not by man but by God. As far as the testimony and the service of God are concerned, he sees it all in Jesus. How delightful this must have been to the Lord's heart!
I pass on to chapter 20. It is a woman again here, Mary Magdalene, out of whom the Lord had cast seven
{28}
demons. She was thus a woman who had been under the terrible power of Satan. One passage says they went out of her; their position was rendered untenable in her. The position of the devil in man is rendered untenable as the result of the work of God in him. The other side is that the Lord Jesus cast out these demons, and she would never forget it. This is the Lord's first great service to her. Now she is concerned about Him. She is early at the tomb, looking for Jesus. Much as she loved Him, she is dark in her soul, but now this chapter shows that she has been taught, for she says, "Rabboni" (verse 16); showing that the teaching had been effective in her, and was a realised thing. She had found her Teacher, and you could not have persuaded her to listen to the greatest teachers in the world now. She says, "My teacher", and He says, "Mary". How delightful it must have been to hear her name used by Jesus, risen from among the dead. There can be no doubt that the meaning of that name implies suffering and the Lord cherished it; she says in effect, You taught me! The Lord loved that! Young christians are apt to think too much of the brothers who taught them, they tend to become followers of them; but how much greater it is to have Jesus as your Teacher! A brother may make a party, and include you in it, so be on your guard!
The Lord says, "Touch me not" (verse 17); in effect, Do not connect Me with earth. The point is that we must not connect Jesus, as risen from among the dead, with an earthly position. I am not saying that He does not help you in your circumstances, but He belongs to heaven. The old corn is Jesus as indigenous to heaven. It is inscrutable; this great Person belongs to heaven. "The Son of man which is in heaven". We must not link Him who is in heaven with an earthly setting. We have to understand something of the inscrutability of this. He refers over and over again to the fact that He "came down from heaven". "What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?" He is
{29}
ascending as a risen Man to His Father. What a great Person He is! To ascend is His own action, and Mary is to understand that she is not to touch Him, for He has not yet ascended (verse 17). Mary therefore shows that she has learned, and she goes to the disciples. The Lord gave her the message (verse 17), and she takes it, not as a teacher, for a woman does not teach men, and public teaching by women is not acceptable to God. We have this definitely set out in @1 Corinthians 14: 34, and @1 Timothy 2: 12. She is learning from Jesus how to act in a comely way, and she goes to the disciples saying that she "had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her". The Lord would instruct all sisters to be like her, comely in the assembly and in relation to saints generally.
The final word is about Mary of Bethany (chapter 12). The name of Mary has a spiritual significance. I believe it has to do with suffering, with bitterness. No one of us is of any value without having passed through bitter waters in our soul's history. The Lord Jesus is the true wood cast into the waters, making them sweet for her, and she is now a true worshipper of Jesus. She began to learn early. When Martha is criticising her, she is at school, learning as she sits at Jesus¬ feet. And now we have the grand result, for we never hear of her afterwards. She will shine in heaven, but here she shows how educated she is; she is the finished product. She knows what it is to be criticised, and criticism is one of the hardest things to bear. She experienced it from her sister, and now from the wicked Judas. Jesus says, She knows what she is doing, she has kept this for the day of My burial. She has the pound of ointment, which is very costly; spiritually it has cost her bitter experience. She is educated spiritually and has reached the thought of worship. She anoints Him with the ointment, and the house is filled with the odour. She wiped His feet with her hair -- she gives Jesus all the glory. She was ready
{30}
for the opportunity and seized it as it came, and now she disappears, only to appear in the future in glory.
May the Lord help us in all these things! It is a question of being taught, and proving it by what you do and say.
{31}
WORSHIP
@Philippians 3: 3; @Exodus 4: 27 - 31; @Exodus 12: 21 - 27; @1 Chronicles 29: 20
My subject is worship. Although a very great one, and extensive in its bearing, one can only hope to present it under these four scriptures briefly, but I hope, by the Lord's help, concisely. The epistle to the Philippians is an appropriate one to begin with, although there is very much more detail in the epistle to the Hebrews as to this great matter. The state of the assembly at Philippi furnished an excellent setting for such a verse as I read in chapter 3. The apostle writes that letter with great feeling. It is peculiarly a love letter, and in his allusion to the worship of God, we can understand how his heart entered into it. We may safely say that in the heart of no one on earth at that time had God such a place, and so he would be full of holy feeling in speaking of himself and others as the circumcision who worshipped God by the Spirit; alluding by way of contrast to those who worshipped nominally, but by earthly means and methods and not by the Spirit of God. The word used here for "worship", is one which relates rather to the public service of God; what God had in mind when He said, "Let my son go, that he may serve me". God had in mind that He should be served by persons in the liberty of sons, not in slavish fear or in a mere fleshly way by human means and devices, but from the heart, as indeed the Lord Jesus, who is the great Leader in all this, the Minister of the sanctuary, said, "God is a spirit; and they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth"; "the Father", He says, "seeks such as his worshippers". Mark you, it is the *persons* that He seeks -- the worship of course, but the *persons* are before Him. The apostle Paul has this in mind, that he was amongst those persons; and all true christians characteristically belong to those persons who are the true circumcision,
{32}
that is, those who accept the death of Christ "in the putting off of the body of the flesh", @Colossians 2: 11, the totality of whatever character it may wear. It is put off judicially and drastically in the death of Christ, viewed as circumcision, so that the soul is clear of flesh, especially religious flesh, for the apostle here is dealing with persons called the concision, persons who attempted something in the way of circumcision, but who failed to go the whole way -- that is, persons who are marked by coming short so as to lose everything from this point of view. As indeed is said in Romans, "come short of the glory", for God will not lower His standard at all. What has happened in the history of God's people is the lowering of standards, especially in regard to worship, and in lowering the standard they legalise it by professed teaching, so that men's consciences regard it as according to God. But it is rejected by Him, it is not according to God.
Now that is what the apostle has in mind, and I have before me to bring out the thought of how worship is induced and maintained here on earth until the coming of the Lord, because the word in Philippians implies that it is the public thing, what is due to God -- the real service, of course, but still what can be seen by others. God intends this to go on, with however few or however many, and the thing is, can I include myself in this "we"? "*We* are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God", those who have turned their backs on man-made religion, however antiquated or honoured according to man, and turned their faces to God as His sons, who have accepted the death of His beloved Son as bringing to an end the flesh even in its religious character. They worship according to the prescribed way and the Spirit of God is the sole power for that worship. There is of course outward order. Luke in his gospel and treatise in Acts has in mind what is seemly, what is according to God in public service. So he tells us, for instance, that the Lord Jesus *placed* Himself at table. You may say that
{33}
is a small matter, but it is not mentioned by chance. The word "placed" indicates order. One can cite many instances of this kind. God is not a God of disorder. He has nothing to do with all this that is current abroad in christendom, man-made forms in the supposed worship of God. He is not the God of that. He is said to be the God of many things, and amongst them He is said to be a God of order, and the God of peace in all the assemblies. That word "all" does not include the myriad religious bodies in christendom today. The Holy Spirit of God is here in relation to divine order, so that the worship of God should continue. The Supper is the public expression of it in its initial character. It is not done in a corner -- it is a public thing, it is a testimony to the death of the Lord Jesus until He come. That is, as we eat of the bread and drink of the cup it is a testimony to His death until He come; but that is not all, it is initiatory to this matter of which I am speaking -- the public service of God. It is calculated to move us towards Christ, the Mediator of the covenant, and towards God, the Author of it. As thus moved, we serve God in spirit and in truth. We begin by saying, by the Spirit, "Lord Jesus", that is service towards the Lord Jesus. It is not the mere use of the words or the appellation "Lord Jesus", but it is by the Spirit, meaning that the Spirit actuates our minds in addressing the Lord Jesus in that way. Then He has another character, that is the Spirit of adoption, the Spirit of God's Son. He is in the christian, that is the remarkable thing, giving us the consciousness of being God's sons, so that we can cry "Abba, Father". That likewise is the service of God. The apostle has this in mind, that that service which has been inaugurated by the Lord Jesus and maintained by Him, is to go on to the end of the dispensation, so that the true tabernacle which God pitched and not man is able to go on. It will be taken up in another way in the future. The book of Ezekiel shows with remarkable detail how there will be a house and a service maintained through priesthood, "the
{34}
sons of Zadok", as it is said. So that God's service will be continued on earth, and it will be taken up by Israel and carried on through the millennial day, and, in some sense, go on through eternity. The more we know and love the Lord, the more we want to have part in it, and desire that others should have part in it.
Everything that hath breath is to praise Jehovah. The last book of Psalms has this great subject in view. It is the great hallel book, ending up with the great hallelujah psalms. The consideration of this ought to stimulate our hearts, for in truth we are on the very verge of the ending of this dispensation, and the beginning of our service in God's presence, and the introduction of God's ancient people on earth.
This service is induced particularly by ministry, and the first thing I would dwell upon is practical unity amongst the ministers. The two passages in Exodus refer to the ministry, what we call ministry; such as I am attempting tonight, and such as others attempt and are helped in throughout the world. What the first passage includes, amongst other things, is practical brotherly love amongst the ministers, and hence practical unity -- what one says the others say. There is no contradictory thought or spirit between Moses and Aaron, they represent the ministry. The book of Genesis is patriarchal -- the other four books of the Pentateuch are ministerial. They are books which ministers should study, and one thing stands out peculiarly and meets us at the outset -- love amongst the ministers. Aaron is particularly called by the Lord Himself, "the Levite", not 'a Levite', but "the Levite"; that is, he represents the great levitical thought. We do not hear of him earlier. He is eighty-three years old when this occurs; he is an old man, not a novice. The introduction of him by the Lord shows that he must have had experience with the Lord. Jehovah says, "I know him". It is a great thing to be known of God. All are, in one sense, but the word says, "if any man love God, the
{35}
same is known of him", @1 Corinthians 8: 3.. It is a distinction that belongs only to a few, but it is a distinction that Aaron had, and it is fully exemplified in him. Jehovah knew Aaron's heart; He said to Moses, "when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart", @Exodus 4: 14. Among other things, what qualifies a man to be a minister is that he loves his brethren. And then He says, "he can speak well". It is not only the thoughts we have, but the ability to convey them. Let us remember that. Then He sends him to meet Moses. The Lord had had a very long and profound conversation with Moses and Moses with Him, and this is the issue of it. God gives him a companion in service -- no less than this great Levite -- the Levite with such love in his soul. What companions they were, both having such relations with God, and particularly Aaron, who had love in his heart! Not that Moses did not have love in his heart, but it is said particularly of Aaron, "when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart" not merely in ordinary civility, but in his heart. They were going to be public ministers in Israel for forty years, and in the main they were held in this holy bond of brotherly love, hence the perfection, so far as it went, of the ministry.
Now it says, Aaron "met him in the mount of God". That is important, too -- not any place, but in the mount of Jehovah, where the resources of God were provided. God sets His ministers up in entire independence of human support. The bane of current Christianity is that it is supported by the world. Men are earning salaries to serve the Lord, some going out into the streets with musical instruments to get money -- it is all disgraceful and discreditable. Divine resources are the resources to sustain the ministry. Peter said, "Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have". They had spiritual resources.
Moses was kissed. It would seem that love predominated in Aaron. He was the elder by a few years and may have given a lead in this way. It is a very fine
{36}
picture, one of the finest things among the many wonderful things that happened at that time. It was in the mount of Jehovah -- the place of divine resources and counsel -- and genuine mutual affection adorns it. So they both came and gathered the elders together, and Moses told Aaron -- a ready recipient -- of all the communications that Jehovah had made to him. They came from a heart and a mouth anointed. Then Aaron spoke these words and did signs, there was real power in his ministry. What a beautiful spectacle in presence of the elders, the communication of God's mind! and what happened was the people bowed their heads and worshipped. That is sure to be the result of such ministry -- ministry impregnated with love and intelligence and with words suitable. The mind of God conveyed to them was that He would deliver them, and they bowed their heads and worshipped. Not heads bowed like bulrushes -- that is, just their heads bowed, no heart matter -- but here their hearts are moved, too. Worship implies a reaching forward to the object of the affections, a prostrating of one's self in reverential affection. It is a real heart matter here.
In chapter 12 Aaron is not in view. It is now Moses. It is more directly the *authority* of the Lord that is in mind in this particular ministry in chapter 12, and it is to be noted that while the communications of Jehovah to Moses about the passover include twenty verses of the chapter, Moses in delivering the message to the people only gives us the seven verses I have read. Now I think we ought to pay attention to this, especially in regard to ministry, that we do not need to say everything we know. The idea is that intelligence and instinct would lead the minister to present what is needed at the moment. Saints are not able to take in very much at one time, and the skill of the minister is necessary to discern what is the need and what the capacity, and to make the thing as concise and yet as spiritual as possible, so that saints can assimilate it. The apostle pursued this method of
{37}
ministry to the saints. At times, as in @Ephesians 1, his heart was so full of the great things of God that he spoke on without a full stop; but because of their small capacity he says to the Corinthians, "I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified". One marvels at his restraint. They were only babes in Christ, with a very small capacity. Hence he says, "I have fed you with milk, and not with meat". He kept at it, whatever they thought, because he knew what was needed. "I determined not to know anything among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified". That was his skill. The Israelites in like manner could not take in very much, they were still in bondage. Look at the long discourses in Deuteronomy. It contemplates the Spirit and the state He forms, but here they are still in Egypt, and the great minister discerns what they can take in, and presents this great matter to them in seven verses. He uses about a third of the space that Jehovah used to tell him, and moreover he introduces thoughts that Jehovah did not mention according to the record. He mentions the bunch of hyssop. He is a minister who is *applying* the truth. They were like the hyssop that grew out of the wall -- small -- not like the cedar as possessed of the Spirit and growing up. And, moreover, he used the word "bason" twice here. The blood is to be preserved; it is in a vessel, it is to make the thing practical to these Israelites, and he says it is a household matter. Where the truth of the passover is needed most is in our houses, or our households will not be saved. Moses speaks about the deliverance, and instructs them to tell their children by and by that Jehovah delivered their houses. When he finished, as he does with that great thought, it says "the people bowed the head and worshipped". Moses reached their hearts. Every levite ought to be able to do that, to reach the heart of the people as speaking through the Spirit.
What is in view in this chapter in Chronicles, and indeed, in all the chapters from the end of chapter 21
{38}
of this book, is headship -- not simply lordship. Although David was the king, the Lord in type, headship is in mind. David here is an old man. If we compare this with the first chapter of 1 Kings, we shall see a great contrast, and yet it is the same person. In 1 Kings he is a weak, old man having lost all his vigour and warmth and about to die in weakness, but there is no suggestion of that here. It is David viewed as the subject of the work of God, standing on his feet, no need of support or of being carried on a platform. I do not think much of an address given otherwise. He stands on his feet and speaks most pungently and beautifully to his captains and princes, and then to Solomon, his tender son, speaking in beautiful terms reverting back to the sovereignty of God. How good to refer in your later years to the sovereign operations of God. That is David in this book. He tells Solomon one thing after another. He tells him he had the pattern of the temple by the Spirit. We are in the presence of the greatest things here. And so he goes on and tells him that riches had been provided, meeting every need in the temple, and as it proceeds it says, "And the people rejoiced because they offered willingly". David tells us how much he gave of his own personal property in his affection for the house of Jehovah, and the people all gave and began to rejoice because of the giving. Every man giving was rejoicing, he did not feel as if he had parted with something -- he was rejoicing in the giving. And David rejoiced; the old man, as we see him in 1 Kings, was here jubilant in presence of such an evidence of the work of God in himself and the people, and he blessed the Lord.
Beginning at verse 10, we have David's outpouring of praise to Jehovah. He is the great leader in this matter of public service to God, he is typical of Christ in this, "Wherefore David blessed the Lord before all the congregation: and David said, Blessed be thou, Lord God of Israel our father, for ever and ever". So he comes on down to the verse I read (verse 20), "Now bless
{39}
the Lord your God". That is what I apprehend is the idea of Christ as Minister of the sanctuary. David does it first before the congregation, and then he says to the people, "Now bless the Lord your God. And all the congregation blessed the Lord God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and worshipped the Lord, and the king". This is the last feature I had in mind of what induces and maintains worship. It is a command, not in the sense of lordship, but of headship. It is an appeal; he says as it were, I have shown you or given you a lead in the service of God. He addresses Jehovah as Head. He calls upon the people to bless God, and is the Lord not calling upon us now, dear brethren, in the same sense? He says to the people, "Now bless the Lord your God. And all the congregation blessed the Lord God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and worshipped the Lord, and the king". Worshipping the king here is intelligible, it is a question of what Christ is as having part in the Deity. But the great point here is "Bless now Jehovah". For us it is to worship the Father, for "the Father seeks such as his worshippers", and our David would say to us, "Bless now Jehovah". It is praise to the Father. You know how Christ did it Himself. When the time was darkest it says, He "rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes", that is, our day. He is worshipping, as it were. He is praising, and Luke says that He told His disciples, so to speak, not to rejoice in the support they had in their ministry (for they had been telling Him that the demons had been subject to them), but rather to rejoice that their names were written in heaven; and then He rejoices in spirit and praises the Father; and He turns to His disciples and says, "Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see". Did it ever occur to you that *your* eyes are blessed as seeing the holy things relating to the Father and the Son which are opened up to us?
{40}
I think, dear brethren, you will see how the things of which I have spoken induce worship, especially the great thought of headship in Christ, involving His office as the Minister of the true sanctuary which the Lord pitched and not man.
{41}
LIFE AS SEEN IN THE MINISTRIES OF ELIJAH AND ELISHA (1)
@1 Kings 17: 17 - 24; @2 Kings 4: 17 - 37
J.T. What is in mind is the need of life -- life in the young -- not life and death, but death and life. On the principle of faith we have to come to death in order to live. These passages are much the same and yet dissimilar. The first has reference to the confirmation of the Lord's testimony in those who render it, and in the second the effect is inward. We have the mother -- the saints viewed in that light collectively. The child is brought back to life and delivered to the mother. She is the objective in the miracle. She would be a different woman in the house from what she had been. She had been great spiritually, but now she would be greater. She "went out" with her son brought back to life. It is a question of what she is. It was a new experience for her, and hence a wholly new feature in her formation. The need of life is what we learn from these passages. Men of God keep God before us. We see how they are confirmed in their testimony, and on the other hand, how the saints are confirmed and brought back into the realm of life.
Ques. Would baptism be suggested here in regard to death?
J.T. Baptism is a figure of death and burial. "If we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection", @Romans 6: 5.
Ques. What is the difference in your mind between Elijah and Elisha?
J.T. Elijah is *in* the house. Whilst it is a household matter in both cases. Elisha had *left* the house, but Elijah had not. It is the mistress of the house who is before us in Elijah's case, she had no husband. She was in a critical position, and Elijah comes in with the light of
{42}
God in regard to the meal and the oil. There is the continuance of what was already there -- the barrel of meal and a cruse of oil. Then the son falls sick; the sickness was observable, but it was not diagnosed, although it should have been. Those responsible are to observe what happens, and to see what causes this sickness in the young. Here there was a gradual ebbing out of life in the child, in spite of the barrel of meal and the cruse of oil. In spite of much light and testimony, so to speak, the sickness is not arrested. There seems to be a want of understanding as to how the thing is to be met in both cases. Ministers are apt to overlook this side of the truth -- they are occupied with externals, and the bringing to life is sometimes foreign to them. Elijah was very concerned -- for the ministers are to take the matter to heart. There was no breath left in the child, and evidently no power to arrest the sickness, which was a very solemn thing both for Elijah and the mistress of the house; see verse 18. Elijah was in a very awkward position in the eyes of those to whom he ministered. When trouble arises, very often the servant's position is not clear and he has to accept reproach.
Ques. Who is the mistress of the house?
J.T. If we think of the assembly from a maternal point of view, the young go in and out among us, and we discern them and feel that we are responsible as to them. The mother is the nearest to the young. The paternal side is not in evidence. The thought seems to be that these things happen and all the saints are brought into it. The full thought of the mother is "Jerusalem above" -- Sarah is the great type of this. She was concerned about her son, about influences and weaning. She is more in line than Abraham. So it should be the great concern for all of us as much as for the ministers, but they, too are responsible. Elijah is great, and yet he does not arrest the sickness, or take the initiative. It is the mother.
Ques. Why does she speak of iniquity?
J.T. In verse 18 she says, "What have I to do with
{43}
thee, O thou man of God? art thou come to me to call mine iniquity to remembrance, and to slay my son?" Something unjudged comes to light in these circumstances. She must have been calling her own iniquity to remembrance. If there are some of the saints dying morally, there must be something wrong among us. To get the maternal idea we must go back to Sarah -- she is a type of the assembly morally *elevated*. The young are frequently allowed to move along on the level of the world, and there is no effort to check it. The barrel of meal was there and the cruse of oil, and yet there was this severe sickness. Spiritually we know what it is -- life ebbing out, not sudden death, but no power to arrest it. It is left with us to discern. Whatever scripture is read, it bears on those who read it or who hear it. So this chapter bears on us here this afternoon. There is a searching character about it. The ministry had not had a deep and spiritual effect on the woman. Her mind is clouded and she talks of her iniquity. There must have been some there; and she blames the man of God. It was all contrary to the spirit of the man in her house, for she had already said that he was a man of God.
In @Romans 7 I am learning to analyse what I am internally, but here it is a young person, and nothing of his character is recorded. The sickness is not diagnosed, but it should be diagnosed in our meeting here this afternoon. We should know what is current amongst us, and how it continues and causes death in a moral sense. Young people lose response to God in His things and die. We all need to be exercised about this. Are we taking notice of these things? We are apt to blame the wrong person, not taking it home to ourselves. We are apt to say it is the boy's fault, and the thing is allowed to drift without any effort to check it. The mother appeals to the prophet here, who is placed in a very serious light in her eyes; he represents the ministry at the moment. It is the maternal side in both these cases that is prominent. There is no father here -- there
{44}
is in @2 Kings 4, but no appearance of spirituality with him. Eventually Elijah knows what to do to meet the case. He says, "Give me thy son". He takes him entirely out of her bosom. We may take part in the meeting, but our young may be brought up entirely on natural lines. Elijah proceeds to meet the situation on right lines. He takes the child over -- there is a change of position. He removes him from her bosom, he takes him out of his natural setting. It means that the minister brings the sick young christian into the realm of divine love. Love never fails. There is no edification but by love -- love edifies. Viewed from a spiritual standpoint, there must have been the allowance of worldliness in the household. Children are brought up on natural lines and we tolerate it, and fail to see that they are slowly dying. This boy was brought up on the mother's natural bosom -- she would probably bear much from him and would make great allowances and excuses for him, whereas God has a right to him. Elijah takes him up into an *elevated* position. It is a question of where *he* abides. John's gospel brings this out -- they say, "Rabbi ... where abidest thou?" and they abide with Him that day. This is a principle. We need to be *taught in the right place*. Dorcas was put in the upper chamber as dead, and brought back to life there. That *position* was necessary, but there were weeping widows there whom Peter put out. It is a moral elevation corresponding with @Acts 1 -- the upper room. When the child was restored, Elijah brought him from his upper chamber to "the house", as if his chamber were not part of the house -- it was elevated. And then he can present her son to the mother living. He is now to live on another principle. The woman is now satisfied that Elijah is a man of God. "Now by this I know", she says, "that thou art a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in thy mouth is truth". The testimony becomes discredited unless there is life. The apostle says "they shall proceed no further", @2 Timothy 3: 9. Imitators can go no further as life is
{45}
active. The woman is satisfied that the word of Elijah is truth. It can now be seen. What a different house it is! At Pentecost everyone heard in his own tongue the wonderful works of God -- the moral connection is the upper chamber (@Acts 1). The Spirit of God was present and His power was there in a living way.
A low moral state in our homes would bring about the situation described here. Our homes affect the assembly in this way and bring the testimony into discredit, and the ministers also. The cruse of oil and the barrel of meal were there for a whole year, but they did not prevent death in this lad. What is before us may help us as to worldliness in our houses. If it is so, we shall proceed on the lines that Elijah did. The first thing is to detach the young from the natural. Sarah *weaned* her son, and Samuel was a *weaned* child as brought to the house of God. Elijah took the child from the mother's bosom to where he himself abode. It suggests that the children are to be in a new environment entirely. Then Elijah cried to Jehovah and in his prayer in verse 20 he does not seem to be clear why Jehovah had done this, but he stretches himself on the child and prays again. He identifies himself completely with the child, and this he does three times. It is a figure of the Spirit of Christ, identifying Himself with us in death. "One died for all, then all have died", @2 Corinthians 5: 14. He then says, "Let this child's soul come into him again". He does not admit that soul and body are definitely separated. He prays as if the soul were very near at hand, but it is life out of death. Jehovah does exactly what the prophet asks Him to do. That is very encouraging to those who minister -- your prayer exactly covers the case. The great feature of Elijah's ministry was prayer -- his prayers were very definite. He was a man who knew how to express himself rightly in regard to a matter. In the account of his prayer that it should not rain, as given in the New Testament, we are merely told that he prayed and it did not rain, and he prayed again and God sent rain, but in
{46}
the book of the Kings we get his deep exercise. He puts his face between his knees on mount Carmel. What a profound exercise! He represents the need of taking things thoroughly to heart and making them our own.
Ques. Would it seem that Elijah acquainted himself with the conditions before he prayed?
J.T. He was deeply concerned. He grasped the bearing of it on his own ministry. What strikes one is the procedure -- how accurate it was! It showed how right his exercise was that Jehovah answered him exactly as he prayed. It is an encouragement to those who minister that they should pray in intelligent detail. Very likely it was because Elijah did not pray for the child before that the sickness came upon him! He appeared to take no notice of the child before. We are wholly cast upon God for our children. The children of *all* the saints should be on our hearts. There are great possibilities for our children if they are detached from the natural. It is a household matter, but also a ministerial matter. Want of moral elevation was the trouble here. No doubt it made a great impression on that child to come to life on *the prophet's bed*. He might say to his mother, Why was I not restored on *your* bed? To bring life out of death we need to be more before God in prayer. The father in @Mark 9 brings his child to the Lord. The disciples were as little able to help as those around. We are cast upon God for our children. It is a household matter, but also collective and ministerial -- perhaps the ministry has been faulty.
Ques. Is the mother able to help the son now?
J.T. The effect on the mother is mentioned here. She says, "Now by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth". It is a question of *God*, His word and the truth. There is a great deal of attention paid to the bodies and minds of the children, but the point is their *souls*.
In @2 Kings 4 the child of the Shunammite was given miraculously, so that he is already viewed as from God.
{47}
He is born in due time. There was growth -- there was something of God there, but the trouble was his *head*. It represents what children *learn*. Where excessive education is allowed in relation to the children of those in fellowship, it damages them. The boy knows where the trouble lies. He went out to his father and said, "My head, my head!" The father was not able to help him, but fathers ought to be exercised about their sons as to their education, for the schools are full of poison. The question is, are you giving them a high education so that they shall make a mark in this world, or only just sufficient to meet ordinary needs, to make a living? As soon as you seek to put them on a high level of education, they are specially exposed to poison. In this same chapter we find there is death in the pot. With 'higher' education the point is largely flattery. Here it is a Colossian case that is in mind. In the previous passage, (verses 1 - 7), it is more Romans. Here the boy went to his father, which was right, but his father was not able to help him. The Shunammite, like many a godly mother, had concern for her son, but if there is one eye on the world and another on the assembly, the mixture is deadening. The mother nurses him as a mother would. He sat on her knees till *noon*, and at noon, when his strength ought to have been at its greatest, he dies; there was no power to retard the hand of death. It comes in largely in connection with mental powers. Perhaps the boy does not know, but the father ought to have known. So the mother goes to the man of God, and even he does not know about it. He says, "the Lord hath hid it from me". He immediately sends Gehazi with his staff, as if experience could help in the matter, but it is not *experience* that is needed, it is the power of *life*, and Elisha is remiss here. She caught him by the feet, which indicates her deep exercise, it was so urgent, but Gehazi did not understand. Elisha thought his staff would do, but he had to go back with her. She had the right thought in laying the child on his bed, but she had lacked
{48}
in some sense. She is mentioned as a great woman, but evidently she was remiss in the care of her child. Gehazi said, "The child is not awaked"; so Elisha goes in and closes the door. He had the idea of the exclusion of everything that would be a hindrance -- everything unspiritual. Elisha went further than Elijah in identifying himself with the faculties of the person. Eyes on his eyes, mouth upon his mouth -- it is the thought of correspondence with Christ. He walked to and fro in the house. That means the whole house is to be affected, whether the believer's house or the assembly is involved. It is the effect of the movement of the representative of God. The damage done in this case takes the form of educational influence. It is the head. In the first incident, the case at Zarephath, the inference is that the mother made allowances for her son's natural proclivities. He was not detached from her. There the prophet stretched himself upon the child, but here Elisha puts his mouth on the child's mouth, his eyes on his eyes, and his hands on his hands, identifying himself with these faculties so that he might be brought back to be like the prophet -- in type, like Christ. I am concerned to convey the idea that the child is no longer to be under the influence of the natural. @Romans 7 deals with what we are internally, leading to the clarification of the function of the mind. "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law". There is correspondence to Christ in that way -- you take account of everything as He would. There is that faculty which normally comes under the renewing power of the Spirit. This enables us to enter on Colossians, which teaches us headship -- Christ is Head of the assembly by right of His own Person, it is not given to Him in that sense. In Ephesians He is given to be Head over all things to the assembly.
{49}
LIFE AS SEEN IN THE MINISTRIES OF ELIJAH AND ELISHA (2)
@2 Kings 4: 38 - 44; @2 Kings 6: 1 - 7
J.T. We have had the early part of chapter 4 before us, and the object of this reading is to pursue the thought of life, as seen in this book.
It will be known to most of us, that the Jordan has a prominent place in it. It is symbolical of death, and the miracles recorded denote the power of God exercised in resurrection, shown first by Elijah and then by Elisha. Elisha represents the presence of the Spirit here enabling us to enter into the effect of Christ's resurrection, and indeed to join Him in it by faith. The raising of the Shunammite's son is symbolical of this life, which we have in Christ by the power of God; and the place the sons of the prophets have in the book is another feature to be noticed. We see in these two passages how they come into the thought of life, in the meal put into the pot and then in the iron swimming in the Jordan -- life in the midst of death.
These verses in chapter 4 set before us the sons of the prophets, alluding to the young men who would serve amongst the people of God. As they are moving in a general way with Elisha, they are tested. In such meetings as we have, or in readings such as this, we have what answers to the great pot set on by the direction of the prophet, marked by certain wild contributions. The great pot suggests some occasion when contributions may be made by anyone present, but the contributions bring out that to which we are exposed. In what we call Bible readings, or in ministry meetings, as they are called, we are directed that everything is to be under control, what is said is to be tested, or we may get something that poisons.
Ques. Might such a contribution be something that does not tend to feed, but rather to poison what is there?
{50}
J.T. That is what is before us. It is manifest in what we read. Elisha ordered the pot to be set on, and prescribed what was to be done. "Set on the great pot, and seethe pottage for the sons of the prophets. And one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds his lap full, and came and shred them into the pot of pottage: for they knew them not" (verses 38, 39).
F.J.F. Would the wild vine suggest that they are not under culture, and not controlled?
J.T. "Wild" is the key-word. It gives the clue to what is meant. We are apt to be governed by our own thoughts and to fail to test them by the divine standard. The wild contribution implies what he has; the allusion is to the state of his soul. What he contributes is according to that. The dearth in verse 38 signifies God's government. It is usually the outcome of some low state of soul among the brethren, so that the Spirit of God is not free, is grieved or quenched, and there is no food.
Rem. It says, "one went out into the field".
J.T. Yes. The words would indicate that he is acting independently. Elisha himself is not taking any part, except to direct what was to be there -- pottage. This contribution was not that. It was not as he directed. The wild vine is not pottage, it is something different. The man did not intend to poison his brethren. He did not know what it was himself, but in doing the thing, he is acting on his own initiative. We may not mean it, but we may act very dangerously, so as to poison our brethren. We must be in subjection, not independent. The mind of God must be sought. It ought to take on the character of the temple, where the mind of God is.
Rem. The man who brought the wild gourds was not using the unction by which we know all things.
J.T. You are alluding to John's epistle. This man should have known that it was poison. It is quite manifest that the Lord set up in the assembly the means of keeping all under control. The principle of control
{51}
runs throughout the Acts. Although a large number were added, they persevered in the apostles¬ doctrine. The Spirit continues that and occupies us, therefore, with the need of being in subjection to Christ and to one another.
Rem. It is independency of action that has brought in all the trouble.
J.T. Men have broken away from control, and hence the poisonous things have come in. Rome has introduced control of its own kind. It is most vicious and displaces Christ and the Spirit. Here it is Elisha -- what he directed.
Ques. What would Elisha represent in this connection?
J.T. He represents the spirit of the dispensation. It is the ministry of the Spirit, but there is the authority of the Lord in it. There is that which is operative in us, by the Spirit's power. It is not simply that the Lord is in heaven, and that we go by the letter of the Bible, but that the Spirit is here in power. The spirit of life runs through Elisha's ministry.
Ques. Whom would his servant represent (verse 38)?
J.T. All of us, as moving under control; that is the principle here. A servant is to be subject, not acting independently. We are to be acting in subjection.
Rem. The man appeared to have a great deal. His lap was full.
J.T. We ought to test everything. If a brother gives out a great deal in a meeting, that is, has a lap full, we ought to test it as to whether there is a want of care or elevation in it. A "lap full" is loose. There was plenty of it, and he shred the gourds into the pot, without anyone questioning him apparently. This was worse still. Things are allowed to go on without being detected. Independence is not right.
Rem. We should have an intelligent understanding and see that what we are administering is good food which will nourish.
{52}
J.T. That is right. We have tested it. You may not get things directly from the Lord. The full ears of corn come directly from Baal-shalishah, which alludes to the place where the Lord is, where there is authority. Things are not done there independently, so that the general thought is that the contributions are already proved. The Bereans searched the Scriptures daily. We are to prove all things, and hold fast all the things that are good. We are to cut in a straight line the word of truth, knowing how to apply parables and the like, understanding dispensational truth, and knowing how to distinguish it..
Rem. He did not know what he had brought; we should prove what we bring.
J.T. We must not minister what we do not know ourselves experimentally. We should always be subject to correction. The principle of ministry, especially collective ministry, is the temple. "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?" The natural mind does not understand the mind of God. "But", he says, "we have the mind of Christ", that is what we must understand. The Spirit discerns all things. If we make room for the Spirit, we get the truth. The Corinthians were like this man. They were bringing in terrible things. Some were saying that there was no resurrection from the dead.
Rem. This man was not told to go out and gather these gourds.
J.T. No; and not only so, they were not what the prophet directed. The food was there as directed by the prophet.
Rem. Verse 38 says, "seethe pottage". There is that which is ready to hand.
J.T. Yes. The suggestion is that it was there.
Ques. Would this indicate lack of spiritual sight? They should have seen what was being put in.
J.T. It shows us what young brothers may do. Although they are there and sitting before the prophet,
{53}
one of them is doing this sort of thing. Chapter 6 shows that they may have the best desires and thoughts, yet things are not just right. They attempt to work with a borrowed axe, with what is borrowed from others. We are to get things from the Lord, testing them out for ourselves. They are to belong to us; they are our own, as our brother pointed out in John's epistle, chapter 2: 20, where it says, "But ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things". There is another word to be observed: the Lord says, "Will ye also go away?" Peter says, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God", @John 6: 67 - 69. Peter had proved that the ministry is to be in holiness.
Ques. Would you say that this is largely taking place in christendom?
J.T. Yes, christendom is full of poisonous things, things not detected as poison. They are standardised, and labelled good food, and people are dying morally from them. This passage is directed towards us, for the prophet is there, and things are generally right. The sons of the prophets are there, they follow on a generation of those who were right. Other men have preceded us; we have followed on, and these scriptures are to show us that we must test what is presented to us as food; we must prove all things and hold fast what is good.
Rem. An argumentative spirit, and also a worldly spirit, in the meeting would produce wild gourds. The contribution must be definite, not things left in the air, so to speak.
J.T. Yes. Things must be proved sound, because even though brethren may not be carried by what is said, wrong doctrine must be exposed, for some young person may take it in. A person who contributes is responsible.
Ques. Did he not go in the wrong direction to get the food? He went into the field.
J.T. Yes. The point was to get the pottage, and it
{54}
was to the servant that the order was given. We need the principle of the servant, of subjection, and this will preserve us from wildness. The prophet did not direct them in a general way. He says to his servant, "Set on the great pot, and seethe pottage for the sons of the prophets. And one went out into the field ..." It does not say the servant did it. It was someone who had not been directed to do anything.
Ques. Why was it not detected when it was poured out?
J.T. "So they poured out for the men to eat. And it came to pass, as they were eating of the pottage, that they cried out, and said, O thou man of God, there is death in the pot". That is, it is the eating of the thing that showed it to be poison. It is good that they discerned it and did not swallow and assimilate it. The palate in the mouth is to discern the food. It is a safeguard. Taste is an important sense.
Rem. They all seemed to detect it. It was not the thought of one only.
J.T. It shows there is a healthy state of things generally.
Rem. It is a happy state when the whole meeting detects and refuses evil.
Rem. I suppose these poisonous things are swallowed by those whose taste is worldly.
J.T. There you have the principle of the swine. It swallows things down without tasting them. Young people, even young children, acquire the habit of proving things. The earlier children come to the meeting, the better for acquiring the way of testing.
Ques. What would the meal set forth?
J.T. That is another thing which the prophet directs. They cried out, "O thou man of God, there is death in the pot". They made haste to make it known, and they put the information where it belonged. Then he says, "bring meal". The prophet has a remedy. There is no thought of christianity being driven to the wall in any
{55}
circumstance. There is no suggestion that there is no meal. It is not, 'Bring if there is any'. It was there. That is, the saints are of the order of Christ's humanity, the idea is of the meat offering. The general state among the saints is right, therefore there is a means present of meeting this condition.
Ques. Why are there two pourings out?
J.T. Elisha said, "Then bring meal. And he cast it into the pot". That is, he did not leave it to anyone else. He took control himself. The matter is urgent. This element of control has to be noticed, the element of the spirit of control as in the Acts. So here it is Elisha who pours out the second time or gives direction. He says, "Pour out for the people, that they may eat. And there was no harm in the pot". Where Elisha is in control you are safe, things are wholesome; but without it (for us the "unction") you are not. You are exposed to danger.
Rem. We must not make wild statements when ministering to the Lord's people.
J.T. You do not trust your own mouth. Even Paul's preaching was tested. Like him, we must be concerned to speak "words of truth and soberness".
Ques. Does Paul bring in the "meal" in his corrective epistles?
J.T. Always. It is the bringing in of Christ. It says, "other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ". That is typically what is meant by the meal -- the state of things among them -- for they discerned the poison. There is salvation in that. There are those who do not hold their tongues when things are not right. Here they cried out about it to the right person, that is to Elisha. Many things are allowed to pass for the sake of peace or through carelessness; young people may get damaged if you hold your peace and do not let it be known. You find that if in a meeting a thing is said which is not right, if it is called attention to in dependence on the Lord, the truth becomes clearer than ever.
{56}
Ques. Do you think it takes a man of God to deal with a difficulty like that?
J.T. Well, it is that element. When the general state is wrong, the man of God comes into prominence. Timotheus is the only one called the "man of God" in the New Testament. The man of God stands at all costs. The term fits when things generally are going wrong.
Ques. Why is it poured out for the people when the meal is put in?
J.T. You have in verse 40, "they poured out for the men". It brings out the care there is, and the interest of Elisha in the people. Ministry is for the edifying of the body of Christ; one is thinking of the saints all the time. The Lord draws attention to the faithful and wise steward who gives the portion of meat in due season.
Ques. Do the sons of the prophets represent young believers particularly?
J.T. In the sense of belonging to a generation of accredited persons. We have come after a generation of faithful men, and have come into a generation of the sons of the prophets. Our position is very much akin.
Rem. They seem to know a good deal according to chapter 2.
J.T. They know a good deal, but are not affected by it. They can tell Elisha that Elijah is about to be taken from him. He says, "Yea, I know it". There are brethren today who go in specially for prophecy. They write books on it, but they do not know anything about the assembly. Anyone who knows Christ and the assembly could say to such, I know more than you do, for the coming of the Lord refers to the assembly. The assembly knows intuitively what is coming; it is not governed by what is happening in Europe. These sons of the prophets knew Elijah would be taken away and they said so, yet when it happened they did not believe it, and they went to seek for him. They darkened even Elisha's mind. One must watch those people who introduce books on prophecy and who do not know the assembly. Such
{57}
books on prophecy cannot be trusted. Only those who apprehend Christ as the Head of the assembly can be trusted in the truth. It does not mean that all the sons of the prophets were wrong. Elisha used one later to anoint Jehu king over Israel. They are generally right in chapter 6 too.
Ques. The contents of the pot were poured out for the men first, and later for the people (verses 40, 41). Would it suggest that contributions are subjected to a maturer element before being presented to the people?
J.T. Verse 40 is just a fact that they poured out for the men to eat, and in the next verse we have "Pour out for the people, that they may eat". The sons of the prophets represent one thought, men another, and the people still another thought.
Ques. Is there adjustment in verse 42?
J.T. Yes, it says "there was no harm in the pot" at the end of verse 41 -- we have this matter adjusted, and now we can go on to a higher level. We are told that a man came "from Baal-shalishah, and brought the man of God bread of the first-fruits, twenty loaves of barley, and fresh ears of corn in his sack". We have authority here, for the name of the place indicates authority. The Spirit of God gives us these terms so that our minds might take in the meaning. We have a definite number, twenty loaves, and the corn is fresh. It is kept from harm in his sack. It does not say simply "a sack", but "his" -- the man's sack; that is, like Mary of Bethany, he preserved what he had. No doubt Mary is the woman of @Mark 14 who had the ointment. She *kept* the pound of ointment in an alabaster box, meaning that it was kept from contamination. You can see the difference between this instance and the previous one, the pot. The contribution in the previous one was loose; this from Baal-shalishah is compact.
Ques. Does this incident bring in lordship?
J.T. It is the authority of Christ in another sphere. Baal-shalishah indicates that it is under control. The
{58}
Lord has supreme sway there; that is, it is a state of spirituality, and probably alludes to heaven. The first-fruits would show that it is typically Christ risen from the dead.
Rem. The man with substance waits for the moment when it should be given out, that is, the *right* moment.
J.T. Yes; it is kept till the right moment and given to the right man, the man of God -- put into good hands. It came from the right source and is kept intact and delivered over to the right person; all is marked by care. Care is important. As already remarked, Mary of Bethany in Matthew and Mark is a good example of this. She has the alabaster box, showing that she was careful as to the ointment. In John the alabaster box is not mentioned, suggesting that she was it herself. The point there is that she kept it, and kept it for a purpose, and applied it at the right time as opportunity offered. Here the good food is put into the right hands, having been carried intact, and there was a possibility of increase. If you get ministry from the right source and it is kept under control, there is a great possibility of increase. So there is more than is needed, one hundred men are fed. The servant may wonder how he could feed so many, but the word of Jehovah (verse 44), through Elisha spoke of enlargement, as by Christ in the gospels. In @John 6 things were in the hands of a little boy. It is in that chapter you have the feeding of the multitude and the increase.
Rem. The little boy in @John 6 kept the food intelligently.
J.T. He *had* it. He was a little boy in the minds of those who spoke of him, Andrew and Philip, but they knew he had something. It seemed diminutive to other minds, but the Lord used it, and there was plenty.
Ques. The ministry increases and enlarges. Is the meat offering suggested in the meal, then Christ in resurrection, and Christ in glory in the food from Baal-shalishah?
{59}
J.T. Yes. The barley refers to Christ in resurrection. He is the first-fruits. According to Exodus, it is the earliest crop. The fresh ears of corn allude to the energy of life by the Spirit. We can only have freshness down here by the Spirit.
Ques. Does this man suggest Paul coming to Ephesus through higher regions?
J.T. Yes, it is the heavenly side of things, where Christ is supreme. Paul's ministry comes expressly from heaven. He received it from the Lord, and passed it on. He says, I have received of the Lord, and what I received I give to you. He passed it on, unadulterated. If we get things from the Lord, we should see that they are kept, and not damaged in transit.
Ques. What would twenty loaves set forth? There are five loaves in John, but here twenty.
J.T. The number would indicate a good supply for one man to bring. We must not always complain of 'one-man ministry'. Sometimes it is better than more! The thing is to have things under control. This man is a trustworthy brother to whom something is committed. So with Mary Magdalene, who went and told the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and He had said these things to her. She did not add to the message. She brought it intact. It is very important to get things intact and hold them by the Spirit. There are a hundred men -- out of proportion to the supply. It is a matter of great exercise how the saints are to be ministered to, but, as the Lord is owned, the supply is always sufficient to meet the demand. There is always good measure.
Rem. This was not a small meeting.
J.T. You are not meaning to say that we ought to have local meetings of this size? You can minister to five thousand, but a meeting of this size would be impracticable for assembly services. In feeding the large numbers the Lord made them sit down in fifties.
Rem. It is a question of administration, is it not?
J.T. This would come out in the Lord's feeding of
{60}
the multitude. The Lord said, "Make them sit down in companies by fifties". The Lord saw that they were all fed.
One has often thought of the early days in Jerusalem; there must have been about a hundred meetings in Jerusalem at one time, as there were five thousand or more saints there.
Rem. Obadiah must have known that principle, when he hid the prophets in the cave by fifties. He fed them with bread and water.
{61}
LIFE AS SEEN IN THE MINISTRIES OF ELIJAH AND ELISHA (3)
@2 Kings 6: 1 - 7; @2 Kings 13: 14 - 25
J.T. It was remarked previously that the sons of the prophets have a great place in this book; that is, they suggest a generation following a generation owned and used of God. It was remarked that we cannot be sure of them, uncertainty marks them; for instance, in the early part of the book, they seem to know that Elijah was to be taken up, yet when it took place they were surprised, and they persuaded Elisha to allow fifty of their strong men to go and seek Elijah; in this they are infidel, they discredit the ascension. Yet they are under the wing of the prophet in chapter 4; and now they are seen in chapter 6 as taking the initiative, and they persuade Elisha to follow them. But what they proposed only brought out their defectiveness, though they had good intentions. They are working with borrowed things. The application is very evident. Young brothers have excellent intentions, and sometimes they persuade older brethren to follow their lead, but they expose themselves as working with borrowed instruments, not having yet learned to go to the Lord and get things direct from Him. You will have observed this very often.
C.C.E. Very markedly. The truth has to be made one's own; even when you really have something, it must be made your own practically before it is effective in ministry.
J.T. We shall see in chapter 13 that instruments employed in the service of God are to be used first against ourselves. The word of God is to be used against oneself, that is, against the flesh, before we use it on others. It is a two-edged sword, and must be used against ourselves. In the meantime, in this chapter, we see the seriousness of using borrowed instruments, and withal, an assumption to lead in a very important matter. It is a question of a dwelling-place. It is right to
{62}
enlarge the dwelling, but in the procedure this defect comes to light. It says, "the sons of the prophets said unto Elisha, Behold now, the place where we dwell with thee is too strait for us. Let us go, we pray thee, unto Jordan, and take thence every man a beam, and let us make us a place there, where we may dwell. And he answered, Go ye. And one said, Be content, I pray thee, and go with thy servants. And he answered, I will go. So he went with them. And when they came to Jordan, they cut down wood. But as one was felling a beam, the axe head fell into the water: and he cried, and said, Alas, master! for it was borrowed".
D.M. What is the idea of their saying "the place ... is too strait for us"? Was it too narrow?
J.T. Yes, the suggestion is right. It is enlargement in a good sense that is meant here, because it is at the Jordan, a type which alludes to death. The natural mind does not wish to approach death, it would keep away as far as possible from that, but here the thought is to be near it. Chapter 5 shows how Naaman ridiculed the Jordan as having no cleansing virtue, and recoiled from it. The natural mind, however religious, recoils from that. Death has cleansing virtue. The water and the blood flowed from the side of a dead Christ, implying the termination of the man after the flesh, whom the Lord represented in death. The Jordan, therefore, alluded to as a type in this way, would not be attractive to the natural mind, so this would be a spiritual proposal. The prophet consents to go too. The knowledge of the Jordan and what it means in this book, is important. It comes in in connection with Elijah and Elisha. Both divide the waters. Elisha has it in mind in the cleansing of the leper, and now the sons of the prophets have it in mind. They want to dwell in the neighbourhood of it; but it discloses that even with spiritual intentions, we may be exposed as working with borrowed tools. We may have the order of the assembly and of the meetings and all the symbols of grace, and yet this may come to light.
{63}
R.S.B. Will you tell us what borrowed tools are?
J.T. It is a question of using what other servants have said without having made it our own by spiritual appropriation.
R.S.B. At meetings like this we get certain impressions or may read notes, and use them without really making them our own.
J.T. Quite true. It is right enough to profit by ministry, and use the words if you are in the good of it yourself. The man that borrowed the axe did not, in principle, use the axe on himself. It means that one has to cut down in himself what is of the flesh. The word of God is the instrument. It is a two-edged sword. It is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. The old man delights in those features of flesh -- pride, ambition, and rivalry. All these things may enter into ministry. One may have intelligence and light, and yet there may be rivalry and pride, of which he may be but little conscious. The Word is a searching thing -- a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart -- a remarkably fine distinction.
F.J.F. He only seemed exercised about the axe when he lost it.
J.T. That would show that there was a certain amount of honesty with him.
F.J.F. Would it be that in using those tools, the Lord did not give His support? You may find you have a piece of wood in your hand instead of the axe.
J.T. Just the handle. You will not accomplish much in felling a tree with just the handle of an axe. The start of the process leading to adjustment is that I acknowledge the actual situation.
A.W.P. Ministry as received needs to be held in the power of life in our souls.
J.T. These scriptures bring out what it is to be in the power of life. The leading feature in Elisha's ministry is the power of life.
{64}
R.S.B. If a crisis comes up among the saints there is often a turning up of authorities, and you may be confirmed either way.
J.T. Yes, you may get confirmed either way if you are seeking confirmation of your own view. If your eye is single you will be helped to distinguish what is of God in reading ministry. In Jeremiah's time (@Jeremiah 26), certain persons wanted to put him to death and they referred to precedents, but the judgment of Hezekiah -- manifestly right -- was by some put on the same level as that of Jehoiakim -- manifestly wrong. You are sure to receive confirmation for your point of view if this is only what you desire. It requires spirituality to use ministry, just as it requires spirituality to read the Bible. Things must be viewed in their context, whether in the Bible or in books like the *Synopsis*. You can prove almost anything from the Bible. If you have not a single eye you will ignore contexts. If there is light in me I discern what is meant. I am balanced and sober. "To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them", @Isaiah 8: 20.
C.C.E. Every protestant sect founds its doctrines on Scripture, but yet they are contradictory.
R.S.B. We often use what this or that brother says as helps. I was wondering whether these are borrowed things.
J.T. Well, all you *can* do is to use these as helps, they cannot be regarded as final. One can get help from writers, but the Scriptures alone can be used as final.
F.J.F. Would testimony include what spiritual men are saying at the time?
J.T. Well, it is whatever God has given us. That is the idea of testimony, and nothing can be final, save that which is inspired.
J.F. I was wondering why the law and testimony come together.
J.T. The idea of the law is that it is imperative, you cannot evade the law with impunity. The testimony is a
{65}
wider and more spiritual thought. You have the law and the prophets and the psalms. The law conveys the idea of what is binding. The judge sits and hears the case, it is his business to make the law clear. The jury has the responsibility of the verdict. The testimony is rendered, and the judge has to sift the evidence and make clear the law governing the matter. You get the law of Moses, the law of the house; whatever it be, there is a law governing it. I believe that is what is meant in all the Scriptures. The priest's business now is to make that law clear. We may say, Mr Darby says this or that, but that cannot be final. It is helpful but the law is in the Scriptures; compare @Psalm 119. Coming back to our scriptures, the lesson is especially for young brothers. Here it is a proposal by the young men, and the old brother consents to go with them. They are respectful to him. He says, "I will go". Now let their proposal work out. He goes with them at their request. The Lord allows these things to happen. Sometimes energy amongst the young is held in check by the old asserting too much authority. In @Revelation 4 the elders lead, they have the mind of God, they have thrones and crowns, but in chapter 5 it is the living creatures, referring to energy. Elder brethren asserting too much authority may hinder spiritual energy. The young men are strong, and the word of God abides in them. The point here is that Elisha allows them to have scope. They are allowed to make the proposal, and Elisha accedes. They go to the Jordan and cut down the trees, and one, as felling a beam using an axe, reveals the underlying state. This is not to say that there should not be proposals from the younger brothers, but they should be careful of the underlying state.
D.M. In Rehoboam's time the younger men gave advice leading to the cleavage of Israel.
J.T. Yes. Rehoboam first consulted the older brethren, but did not accept their advice. The old men had stood before Solomon, but he consulted the young
{66}
men. It says they had been brought up with him, and they stood before *him*. The advice they gave him led to disaster. Water will not rise above its own level, and Rehoboam is the level of that situation. Therefore, for advice go to the older brothers normally, for they have had experience. "I write unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning". The assemblies are composed of men, women, and children, but old brothers and young brothers particularly. In John's grading of the families he has not a word to say to the old save that they knew Him that was from the beginning. The young men are in danger of the world, and the little children are in danger of the antichrist. So the young brothers are normally to take counsel from the older ones.
F.J.F. Would this have any application in the formation of a new meeting?
J.T. Well, I think it is very like that. It denotes enlargement. The place is too narrow. The feeling often arises that meetings are too large. Fifty ought to be the regulating number in the assembly, as in Luke. Mark gives fifties and hundreds, but a hundred is too large, fifty is better. The suggestion here is enlargement. It may happen that the young propose a hiving-off because they are not quite comfortable where they are. They sometimes want to be by themselves, but here they do not want to get rid of Elisha, they are so far commendable.
F.J.F. I was wondering about the application. I suppose it is necessary, if there is a hiving-off, that there must be exercise as to what material is available.
J.T. We must not be bankrupt to start with. You cannot start a business without capital, if you desire prosperity, speaking figuratively. Starting a meeting with borrowed things will not do at all, you cannot expect any prosperity on that line. Not only numbers, but spiritual
{67}
wealth is needed. But if there be simplicity and singleness of eye, the Lord makes a little go a long way.
C.C.E. Although the axe was borrowed, yet the man used it to advantage. Verse 5 says "as one was felling a beam".
J.T. It says "as one was felling a beam". He was *doing* it, but the axe head fell off; this revealed the underlying state.
H.T. What is the meaning of the casting of the stick into the water?
J.T. That is Elisha's act. The man of God says, "Where fell it?" and he cut down a stick and cast it in and caused the iron to swim. As we had yesterday, Elisha's act was to cast in the meal. He does not ask any of them to cut down the stick, he does it himself, which shows that *he* must have had some weapon, and there is no disaster in the action of the man of God. The man of God does not do anything with borrowed tools. It is to bring in the divine side. God comes in to overrule our failures, and to bring in greater things.
H.T. Is there the cutting of the stick in our day?
J.T. The casting in of the stick into the water is Christ entering into death vicariously, and the power of Christ in resurrection. We are raised "through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead", @Colossians 2: 12. We are brought up by the virtue of Christ having entered into it; we are brought up in power. The Lord says, "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live". That is the idea -- dead but living; the word "living" is not the same as being raised. The word "living" signifies health and energy, and enjoyment too. Here there is energy -- the axe head swam, showing life having power over death. You are not afraid of death. Paul was ready to face death. He does not deprecate it, for he says, "*I die* daily". No one can serve God unless he understands it is life from the dead.
{68}
R.S.B. Would you make anything of the fact that he was able to tell the prophet where it fell?
J.T. There is something of God in the man. He acknowledges that it was borrowed and he knows where it fell. He is an exercised man. This brother is now set up in life, he has gone through the thing, and has learnt by it. The man can go on in energy. He is superior to death. He is now to be identified with the swimming iron.
R.S.B. It is a good thing to look back over our experiences, and be exercised as to where things went wrong.
J.T. Exactly. The word is "iron" -- to bring out the idea of *weight*. It is not merely that it floated, but it is marked by energy. The Lord and Peter walking on the water denotes energy, and the ability to go on in spite of death. They are not just standing on the water, but walking, showing superiority to death. This is important, especially when it is a question of building.
R.S.B. He took it to him. Now it was not borrowed any more.
J.T. Spiritually that is what is meant, it is the man himself, he is identified with it. There was not a piece of iron in the whole universe like this. It says in @John 12: "where was the dead man Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from among the dead". That is how the Spirit of God puts it. We never hear of Lazarus saying a word. See what a piece of iron it was! People would come hundreds of miles to see an axe head that swims! It is a testimony to the power of life. It is not what I say, but what I am. Paul says, God delivered us from so great a death. That is the setting of 2 Corinthians, it is the product of a man come up from the grave.
F.V.R. The man of God was able and ready to help, and to redeem the position.
J.T. The chapter brings that out -- where God comes in at the critical time and gives deliverance.
J.F. It is wonderful that the man of God knew what to do in the crisis.
{69}
J.T. That always comes out. If we are dependent on God, we can be sure that God will come in at the appropriate time, as with David. He waited on the Lord. His mighty men did great exploits, and in connection with them we get: "Jehovah wrought a great deliverance".
N.de L.M. Is that what you get in the next chapter read?
J.T. Yes, that is the final word as to Elisha. It says, "Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he died. And Joash the king of Israel came down unto him, and wept over his face, and said, O my father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof". That is what Elisha said himself at the beginning of his ministry. The king of Israel is reminding him of what marked his ministry.
The king of Israel has the right thought, and Elisha put his hands upon the king's hands in shooting, and he shot. It is an objective thought -- what God has wrought in Christ. One arrow is shot. But then he says, "Take the arrows ... Smite upon the ground". This is to bring out where we are in our service. In using objective truth we may be very effective, but then what effect is it having upon ourselves? Are the Syrians going to be overthrown entirely? Success now depends on yourself. The ground represents the subjective side of things, we plough the ground and sow and harrow it. It is a question of how far we are meaning to go with ourselves, once or twice, or five or six times? If five or six times, it would be effective; the victory would be complete. What is left to myself in this sense is a very important lesson: am I to go all the way?
R.S.B. Is this a question of self-judgment in ministry?
J.T. Exactly. It is left to yourself. If I do not deal with myself I shall not be successful. One is to have no confidence in oneself at all. God helps us by discipline.
A.W.P. "Take heed unto thyself, and unto the
{70}
doctrine", @1 Timothy 4: 16. The line we are on should be applied to ourselves.
J.T. So the apostle Paul says, "But I keep under my body and bring it into subjection: lest ... when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway", @1 Corinthians 9: 27. That is the principle.
C.C.E. One finds that practically in every bit of service one undertakes.
J.T. You are to turn to the Lord; if you have a desire to serve, you must judge what your motive is. You do not think of yourself, but of Christ.
R.S.B. The question of motive is most important.
J.T. The most spiritual man, even Paul, was exposed to the influence of fleshly motives -- "lest I should be exalted above measure". He must never have the thought in his mind that nobody has been in the third heaven before. The flesh profits nothing. The Lord says, "without me ye can do nothing".
C.C.E. Where there is success in public, there is *scourging* in private.
J.T. "I buffet my body". God does it, too, in discipline. Paul took the thing on himself. He bore about in his body the dying of Jesus.
J.F. Is that what is meant by "death worketh in us, but life in you"?
J.T. The discipline would allow the light to shine. Our body undisciplined would obscure the light.
R.S.B. I used to wonder why the prophet did not tell him to smite six times. Now I see.
J.T. It is not that God does not help us, but He leaves it to ourselves to bring out where we are. We must find out for ourselves. The king was not equal to the thing, so he never consumed the Syrians.
The final thought is a dead Elisha. This incident, of which we have been speaking, is a sick Elisha, but now it is a dead Elisha. That is, the idea of Christ going the full length -- into death itself.
A band of people coming in, the Moabites, signifies
{71}
the world in its social status. The world is brought in by our association with cultured persons and unspiritual christians, by our considering social status and by brethren attending social functions. This is disastrous. It was a "band". Cultured people are recognised by saints on equal terms.
G.H. To go back to verse 19. It seems strange that Elisha was wroth so close to his end.
J.T. He knew the spiritual meaning of the king's failure, that it would prevent the overthrow of the enemy. The prophet understood that it was a serious matter.
H.J.R. The Moabites had no sympathy with the body being buried.
J.T. No, they prevented it. They did not want burial; no Moabite accepts death. Of course, I am speaking of death spiritually, as in @Romans 6. They represent worldly christians, or refined unconverted people; they may be relatives or unspiritual christians. If there is any burying going on, it is not in their presence; they want to keep death as far as possible from them. The burial was prevented, but the man was let down on the bones of Elisha. He stood on his feet. What a picture that is of the power of God in death! It says, "he revived, and stood up on his feet".
A.W.P. Is this a Colossian picture?
J.T. Yes; I think that is the thought. Indeed the sixth chapter has to do with Colossians, too. This is a very remarkable type, for the man stands on his feet; he is in balance, as risen from the dead. This man overcame the Colossian snare. It is the full thought of what we have been dealing with in chapter 6. A man revived -- it is not only that I am risen by faith in Colossians, but I am quickened. That is, I have faith in God's power to raise me, but quickening is an actual thing by the Spirit, and that is what is seen in this man. He revived; he is a spiritual man, a man out of death in figure.
A.W.P. Self-judgment is one thing, but is life reached through burial?
{72}
J.T. That is what the apostle says, speaking of the gospel which he preached "that Christ died for our sins ... and that he was buried". He did not lie in death, save vicariously, and He was buried vicariously. The burial is part of the vicarious work of Christ. It would be derogatory to Christ to think He would die, save vicariously.
Rem. The man now represents Elisha.
J.T. You have a living, balanced man now. He is standing on his feet.
H.T. Did he go beyond Lazarus?
J.T. He corresponds with Lazarus. The man here is standing on his feet, as it were, ready to do something.
{73}
DIVINE TREASURES
@Matthew 18: 2 - 6; @Malachi 3: 16, 17; @John 14: 21 - 23
My remarks will bear on the saints according to what they are in the divine mind as treasure; in other words, divine values. Scripture abounds with these values, for the Lord regards the saints as His heritage; and what *He* regards as a heritage and treasure is supremely so. No one values more accurately than He, and in the passage in Malachi we have an allusion to the time when He makes up His jewels, His special treasures. We read too of the Lord referring to Himself as a merchantman seeking goodly pearls. He would have us to know what a connoisseur He is as to values; He finds one, a pearl of great price. We often quote that verse and overlook that it includes *ourselves*, just as also does this verse in Malachi. "When I make up my jewels"! One who understands treasures of that kind has His mind on them in making them up and in comparing them with others. How His whole being is brought into it! What an array there will be and how perfectly appraised -- each one in its own setting! Not hidden, but where it will have the best effect. 'Setting' is a jeweller's term, and the setting of diamonds and other precious jewels calls for skill. "They shall be unto me a peculiar treasure", Jehovah says. That that should include me is a thought that should come home to my heart and affect me as to whether it is practically so in any way.
I thought, dear brethren, of speaking of this subject from the moral point of view -- that is to say, as to how the jewel appears *now*, when the setting does not enhance it, when outward circumstances are adverse. It is now that the moral idea applies, for the value is there in spite of conditions. By and by, the value will be seen enhanced *by* conditions. You may be sure conditions will be calculated in every way to enhance the peculiar treasure
{74}
God has in mind. So that @Matthew 18 helps as to one moral feature in this regard. The Lord is seen here in the midst of a group of truths. As to the order of the truth, chapter 17 follows on 16, in which He had spoken of *My* assembly. Whenever that possessive thought occurs the Lord's affections are in the matter under consideration. Think of belonging to that! My assembly!
Chapter 17 opens up the personnel of it -- the great persons who are in the structure, leading up to the idea of sonship. We have the great privilege of putting ourselves into this wonderful picture of chapters 16 and 17. Peter, James, and John were actually in it. We are in this setting of things theoretically, but in them very poorly *practically*. The question arises here, Is the Lord to pay tribute? Someone raises this question with Peter, who had just been on the mount and had heard the voice from heaven. He said later, "such a voice being uttered to him by the excellent glory: This is my beloved Son". He had just heard that voice, and someone says, Peter, does your Master pay tribute? What Peter had heard on the mount had no influence on him. Certainly, he replies. He makes the Lord just an ordinary tributary person here. This He never was; this He never could be, and Peter should have been assured of it.
The Lord knew of the incident. Be assured that if we have a good time on the Lord's day, we shall be challenged on the Monday and we may forget what we enjoyed, be dull and blunted in our sensibilities; our remarks may have no light or wisdom in them, and the Lord knows. He who hears our thanksgivings on Lord's day, hears our remarks next day in the office or in the workshop when we are challenged. The Lord anticipated what Peter would say: "What dost thou think, Simon? the kings of the earth, from whom do they receive custom or tribute?" Peter knew. He was conversant with general conditions, which is to be noted. He was only a fisherman; probably never in his life in a royal court, but he knew what went on there. They exact it from
{75}
strangers, he answers, and Jesus said to him, "Then are the sons free". That is the setting in which we are. The sons are free! Then the Lord says, "go to the sea and cast a hook, and take the first fish that comes up, and when thou hast opened its mouth thou wilt find a stater; take that and give it to them for me and thee". One of the great items in this setting is the important truth of sonship, applied to Christ and then to you and me. Peter had missed the thought. In chapter 18 the disciples ask the question, "Who then is greatest in the kingdom of the heavens?" Peter, who must be regarded as included among them, has failed again. He was not absorbing the truth. The disciples asked Jesus the question in that hour -- the hour in which He had spoken of sonship.
This brings me to the verse I read. "Jesus having called a little child to him" -- a child -- someone who is not asking such a question as mentioned, not vying with anybody else for distinction in the kingdom, but just leaving it with God. We know not what that little child had been engaged in, but we may be assured the child's occupation had been morally right, for he came to the Lord at His bidding.
The Lord looks out on christendom. Allusion has been made to the labours of brethren who preceded us. God blessed them and the results of their labours, but the devastations of the devil must be owned. These are due largely to the ambitions seen in the disciples¬ question -- to the absence, in some, of the spirit of the little child. How many have turned away from the path they once seemed to tread so steadfastly and with joy! "Will ye also go away?" @John 6: 67, the Lord had to ask. Others are doing it. If you turn aside, you have company. And the Lord looks abroad on the labourers of christendom, for no labourer works in a smaller field than that, discriminating between those who are true and those who are thinking of their own distinction, and are lacking in the character of "this little child". There have been those, thank God, marked as separating
{76}
the precious from the vile: "If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth", @Jeremiah 15: 19. Could anyone aspire to anything greater than that -- to be as God's mouth? Jehovah said, "What seest thou, Jeremiah?" Jeremiah says, "Figs: the good figs very good; and the bad very bad", @Jeremiah 24: 3. One always notices that if a prophet's attention is called by God to anything, he is always alert and he knows what to say. There are good figs shown, and very bad ones. The latter have had reputations, they have been in the position of good ones. It is a question now of separating the precious from the vile. The Lord calls: will any answer to His call? The Romans are said to be "called" ones. They had heard the call and moved in answer to it; they gave evidence of God's work in them. The Corinthians were called through Paul's testimony. The gospel is a call. It is not simply that you are brought to where you get relief -- that is how Luke presents the gospel, but John says, "Come and see". That is the idea in the gospel -- it is a divine call. Whom God "has predestinated, these also he has called", @Romans 8: 30. The point is, do I move in response to the divine call? That is the feature I wish to dwell upon. The child here answers to the call. The Lord called it *to* Him. It was not an infant, but one capable of understanding a call and answering to it. It is a type of a Christian, not exactly of one who has received a little blessing and gone to its mother to tell her, although very good so far; but the point here is of moving in answer to the Lord's call -- going to *Him*. The next move is to be yours. If you have light from God, you move -- as the little child moved; and the Lord set him in their midst, as though to say, Someone I can call, one not occupied with the thought of greatness in the kingdom, not occupied with honour accruing from the service he was going to render, but a little child! Who does not admire what is presented in a little child, as life is beginning to show itself in intelligence and response to affection? Who does not feel attracted to the movements
{77}
of such a one? Matthew is full of that thought. His is the assembly gospel, but he also makes a good deal of the child. He presents Jesus under that term, as a little Child, some nine times. "The little child and his mother", how beautiful that is -- to see Him there as the magi saw Him!
Transferring the thought of a child from the literal to the spiritual, the Lord through him presents something to His disciples; He sets him down in their midst so that they can see what He has before Him in mind for them. This is a little child divinely called, and no one is answering to God's call, however they may be blessed in the gospel, unless they are moving in this way; so that the Lord can have them as His little ones. "Unless ye are converted and become as little children, ye will not at all enter into the kingdom of the heavens". And then, "Woe to the world because of offences!" "Woe to that man by whom the offence comes!" How solemn this is!
Matthew carries the thought of the child all through his gospel, beginning with the Lord Himself, as we have seen. In chapter 11 we have "babes", presenting a smaller idea -- persons unsophisticated, with no worldly education or religious status. "At that time, Jesus answering said, I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes. Yea, Father, for thus has it been well-pleasing in thy sight", @Matthew 11: 25. Think of being the subject of conversation between divine Persons! Is it not attractive that we may put ourselves in there? Has heaven ceased to talk in that way? No indeed! The greatest exercise is to grasp what is current in heaven now. The gospels give us an inkling. There is continual joy there. The theme is largely the saints, and the joy and conversation in relation to them goes on.
The full result of the work in the children is seen in chapter 21, when the Lord is in the temple. What a
{78}
frigid place it had become! The Lord should have received a warm reception -- but how frigid it was! They were buying and selling in the temple, there were money changers, there were sellers of doves. How foreign to His blessed mind! And here are "children crying in the temple and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David!" You can see how Matthew dwells on the thought of a child, and develops it. As we have seen, in Luke the Lord expresses it in Himself. At the age of twelve He had been in the midst of the teachers, hearing them and asking them questions. What a spectacle to heaven that was! In @Matthew 18 the Lord set a little child "in their midst", and in chapter 21, in the temple the children were crying "Hosanna to the Son of David!" What a note of praise! And what a note of praise today when children praise in the midst of the indifference of christendom! -- those who praise the Lord Jesus, who know Him, who know what to say, and are able to worship according to the truth of the moment. The blind men have just cried out saying, "Have mercy on us, Lord, Son of David". They had come to Jesus for aid. But what a beautiful note in the temple! -- "Hosanna to the Son of David!" The enemies of Christ say, "Hearest thou what these say? And Jesus says to them, Yea; have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise?" @Matthew 21: 16.
In spite of what is going on in the paraphernalia of man's religious systems around, the Lord hears such a note of praise as this -- which refers to His dignity in His own sphere -- and it issues forth from those who are children in the true sense. We today can say more than was said by those in the temple. The Lord has taught us of love itself. We have a spiritual vocabulary and we are able to speak suitably to Him. How He loves to hear us! This is one side of the truth and it ought to appeal to every young christian -- what the Lord had in mind in setting the child in their midst, and what, as in Matthew,
{79}
He works out in young christians whom He is not ashamed to call His brethren.
His traducers call attention to the children crying in the temple. We need not expect anything else but to be despised by them; but how serious to be of those who despise! They call the Lord's attention to what the children were saying, but He knew what was there, a note of praise of real value to Him: "perfected praise". You can see what it is, and how it should move us into the position into which we are called. A position we value, a position we must hold on to and develop there -- the courts of praise. What treasure God has in the saints viewed thus!
What comes out in Malachi is the *fear* of the Lord -- that is at a particular time. Solomon says there is a time for everything. In this feature we have a beautiful treasure shining in its own setting in its own particular time. When disregard for Him prevailed, "Then they that feared Jehovah spoke often one to another". They did it *often*; heaven's ear was attentive, as it were, to hear; there would be no impure, unholy remarks in these conversations. It is no question here of assembly formation, but of such persons as these. There is no hope for any who do not fear the Lord. This is not slavish fear as we have in those of the Gadarenes who asked the Lord to leave their country, but a reverential, restful fear; such as dreads to do or say anything contrary to the divine will. I know that I have to do with God, I know that I have to answer to God as to my religious position, my business affairs, my household matters, and I fear Him. It is not here ought to, but *did* fear God. It is a divine treasure, that in this country there are those who fear the Lord. Who can afford to be outside that circle? None.
They spake *often*. I suppose heaven looked for the hour when they were accustomed to come together. I am sure our footsteps are watched as we wend our way to the meetings, or wherever we can come together to speak
{80}
to one another of Christ. Heaven looks for that hour, even more than we do. Jehovah says, "they shall be unto me a peculiar treasure", @Malachi 3: 17. All their natural thoughts were awed; national feelings had gone; the items of every-day news were not the subject of their conversation. Instead, as fearing the Lord, they spake often one to another and the Lord declared, "they shall be unto me a peculiar treasure". Can any afford to miss it, by turning aside to the allurement of the world? Our hearts are so treacherous that we need to be constantly on our guard as to this danger. "I will spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him", says Jehovah. What an incentive to stand true, is such a promise!
The word "son" is used in the Old Testament with wide bearing. We have to understand it contextually wherever it occurs. The Holy Spirit enables us to do this. The setting here is special. It is a question of one's own son, and is an allusion to @Exodus 4, where Jehovah sends the message to Pharaoh, "Let my son go, that he may serve me". It is the greatest thought in God's mind with regard to Israel. "Then they that feared Jehovah spoke often one to another". It was not that they spoke to Him, but to one another, and that in itself was pleasing to Him. The Lord loves to hear our spiritual conversation. It resounds in heaven; it is fit for that holy scene.
Now just a word on @John 14 -- a well-known passage. The point is the *persons* who love Jesus. The conversation of those who feared the Lord was the outcome of love, I am sure, but it is not the point emphasised in that connection. In @John 14 it is a question of those who love the Lord when others do not, or have ceased to do so. That is the point in this chapter. Profession only of love for Jesus is not valid, it gives no status in heaven. There must be *evidence* of your love, and that evidence is given in keeping His word. Let none talk of throwing aside, or giving up, any part of it. The test is the commandment
{81}
of the Lord. May it ever be that to us! The Lord goes on to say how He values such persons. "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him". Is not that attractive, dear brethren? Is there not something in it to induce real love in us, so that we keep His commandments? "Judas, not the Iscariote, says to him, Lord, how is it ... ?" John discredits the Iscariote at every point. *That* Judas is the only man who is called a devil in Scripture; not a demon, a devil. John records it. The Lord called him a devil. We are not left in doubt as to what he was, and he is ruled out here. It was another who says, "Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself to us and not to the world? Jesus answered and said to him, If any one love me, ...", He opens up what I may call tabernacle conditions, for the persons who love Him and keep His word are the tabernacle, the dwelling-place of God. The conditions the Lord indicates here afford an abiding-place for the Father and the Son. All that is involved in the word of Christ. How extensive it is! How imperative that we look into it in order to understand what the Lord said! He adds: "These things I have said to you, abiding with you; but the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, *he* shall teach you all things", @John 14: 25, 26. He will teach us the truth. What a fact that is! Are we not proving it? "And will bring to your remembrance all the things which I have said to you". Nothing is lost if the Spirit is but given His place. The ministry is cumulative -- He gathers it all up and presents it to us to the end that there may be those tabernacle conditions in which the Father and the Son make their abode.
So you see how divine valuation is seen in these chapters, and how every passage refers to ourselves. The difficulty in reading is to make it apply to oneself. Scripture always speaks to its *reader*. We never get the good of it unless we allow this. These scriptures include
{82}
ourselves and impress us with our *value* in the mind of the Lord, of the Spirit, and of the angels who are looking down all the time, seeing what is going on; for they are active creatures, constantly doing God's will and sympathetically interested in all that is current in heaven. May the Lord bless His word!
{83}
PARENTAL INSTINCT AND ADDITION
@Genesis 30: 23 - 25
What I have in mind to say, dear brethren, will bear on parental instinct, spiritual instinct, seen in Rachel and Jacob, and will include something on *addition*. What is to be observed, is that a certain occurrence, which, in the light of subsequent facts had a spiritual import, drew forth certain comments from these parents, the one bearing on addition -- Rachel's remark -- and the other on the place and circumstances suited to addition. Rachel says, "Jehovah will add to me another son"; not two sons, but another. She is limited to one more, and hence calls her son, just born, by the name of Joseph, which indicates what was in her mind, "addition". Jacob immediately says to Laban, "Send me away, that I may go to my place and to my country". A spiritual occurrence is the basis of this remark, suggesting that Christ had come into his vision in Joseph; and if there is to be any addition to Christ it cannot be in Padan, spiritually it must be elsewhere; that is to say, in Jacob's own country, in his own place. Adding to Christ in the world is what marks christendom, and so much of the toil of so-called evangelists ends in this increase, additions to Christ in the wrong place. It is "my place" Jacob speaks of now, which was not Padan, and "my country", which also was not Padan, but Canaan.
Now Rachel's remark deserves first consideration here because of what was in her mind. "Jehovah will add to me another son", she says. She had been very urgent as to sons, and had said that she would die if she did not have them. Her maternal instincts for sons were strong, and now that Joseph was born, her own first-born, she says this, "Jehovah will add to me another son". That is a spiritual remark, for it indicates that whatever she might have understood, it synchronises with the divine counsels that there were to be twelve sons of Jacob. There were to be twelve, not thirteen. Were she simply controlled by
{84}
her natural instincts, according to earlier facts, she would have expected other sons, but she says "another son". Her remark synchronises exactly with the divine thought, and so must and should every spiritual remark. If we are under the control of the Spirit we shall be in accord with divine purpose. The nearer we get to God and to the end of our service, the more divine counsels are to us. God has His own thoughts, He is a God of measure; and the number that He seeks is known to Him, and He will have that number, no more and no less.
We are, therefore, dear brethren, working within a realm of certainty, as the apostle Paul at the end of his service says, "For this cause I endure all things for the sake of the elect, that *they* also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory", @2 Timothy 2: 10. What a realm he was in, speaking thus! He laboured and suffered reproach in relation to it. Maybe it would be said that he should have gone further afield. He had said that he purposed to go to Spain, but we are not told that he went there. Some may have said that he was remiss, and that he was imprisoned on account of that, but it was not so. He laboured and suffered reproach; whatever people thought, whatever reproach may have been heaped upon him, he laboured that the elect might obtain the salvation that was in Christ Jesus, and that with eternal glory -- what a great thought! Not simply being saved as by fire, he had a greater thought than that in his service, although he says there is a possibility of that, but his thought was that they might "obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory". So it is that the divine number is to be secured. This does not set aside that the righteousness of God is "unto all". The gospel is to all, but nevertheless there are those that are called the elect, and they are to obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. What a salvation is that to my soul! You do not want anything less than that. It is not that they might obtain forgiveness of sins simply, although that is a very great matter, but
{85}
that they might obtain salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. There will be additions on those lines. Hence Rachel had no other thought than one other son, that is, the twelfth. She had him with sorrow. The accomplishment of divine thoughts, in the sense I have spoken of, lay with her, but it was with sorrow. She died at the birth of Benjamin, showing the lines on which God is working, as the apostle says, labouring and suffering reproach. Indeed that apostle is about to die for the truth, and die *he would* for the truth. It is surely worth dying for; and so Rachel suffers and stands out in that way as a type of a mother in Israel, which is another great matter.
There are not many so styled, nor is she, yet she stands out because of this spiritual remark, and because of the mention of her in the prophets, "Rachel weeping for her children". That is another thing that God honours, weeping for her children because they are not. The Spirit of God carries the thought further into the New Testament, where it speaks of the sorrowful incident of Herod's murderous destruction of the first-born in Bethlehem, near which Benjamin was born. It was the place of Rachel's sorrow. She named him 'son of my affliction'. The last of Jacob's sons is the son of his mother's sorrow, but also the son of his father's right hand. These two things go together and come in in the last days -- maternal experience of sorrow intelligently expressed as Rachel dies, for she says, "Son of my sorrow". She little thought of that perhaps when she said "Jehovah will add to me another son", but there it was. Nevertheless, there was the promised addition -- and what an addition! for he was the son of his father's right hand! So that we have in Benjamin the complete number, that number by which the right hand of God can accomplish its desires. For the twelve alludes spiritually to the working out of love. It is a great divisible number, suggestive of manipulation, and love works on those lines, disposing of each brother and sister according
{86}
to what there is in wisdom, and there is no complaint -- each is in his place.
Rachel has a great place in that way, and I am speaking of her so that we might take in what the maternal idea is in this great matter of addition. If there is to be addition, this is the thought -- discernment as to what is needed; for there is so much needed, and then suffering so that the need might be supplied. For there must be suffering. The Lord Jesus has brought about the counsels of God by suffering and the greatest servant is spoken of in that way; "I will show him how great things he must suffer", the Lord says. Paul was a true Benjaminite. He was the son of Benjamin and he corresponded with the maternal thought in his mother, for she was his mother in suffering, so that the complete number should be there. Whatever that number may be, whether it be for the meeting, the service, or the full accomplishment of the counsels of God, it must be attained; and so she says, "Jehovah will add to me another son".
Now much has to be stated both on her account and on Leah's account. They two, we are told in the book of Ruth, built the house of Israel, a great matter. That is not building with wood, hay and stubble. These two women built the house of Israel. And so Leah begins with a son, it is the first great thought in this family. Sonship is the great thought governing the counsels of God, whether they be the heavenly or the earthly, for sonship applies to the earthly as it does to the heavenly. For us, that is, for those who have part in the heavenly calling, it has a greater significance, for it underlies that wonderful movement spoken of in @Revelation 21, the heavenly city seen descending from God out of heaven. It is an act of her own. What grace, what liberty, what dignity in that movement! Israel will have no such greatness, but nevertheless the word applied to Israel was, "Let my son go": the message sent to Pharaoh, "Let my son go, that he may serve me"; and the apostle Paul says of them, "to whom pertaineth the adoption". This
{87}
great thought of God was applied to them. So that the idea of sonship applies to Israel, but not in the full glorious sense in which it applies to us who have part in the heavenly calling. And it begins here, as I said: Leah says as Reuben is born, 'A son'. What feeling entered into that! It was not accidental. It was not a mere natural thought, it was the great thought of God. Of course, she could not have understood it, but she says, 'A son'. The whole scene is to be filled with that relationship.
Then the next child is one who *hears*. You can see how the sons of Jacob set out consecutively the divine thoughts amongst the brethren. First we have the great thought of sonship that must dominate all. Then the next is the person who hears -- Simeon, for if God sets out His thought in Christ, the thing is to take in what is in His mind as to that thought. "He that has ears to hear, let him hear". Then we have Levi, the servant; also representing the heavenly family, his name signifies *united*. There is the idea of union in Levi. Judah was the fourth son of Jacob -- *praise*. The divine thoughts are thus opened up to us in this family. Praise, that is what Judah means. How glory fills the scene as we can see it now, and how glory after glory filled the scene in that house! Incongruous indeed, the maidservants coming in, but nevertheless the glory was there. And then Dan comes in to judge. One of the most important things in the divine economy is the ability to judge. And then we have Naphtali. Gad, Asher -- each one of them adding his own quota to this wonderful domain of glory, the family of God; all to be opened up in due course as the apostle Paul says, "the testimony to be rendered in its own times". Genesis is like a seed plot, as has often been remarked, and the beautiful fruit of the divine sowing is manifested as time goes on under the nurture of God, for Jacob is said to have been a field. "See", says Isaac, "the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which Jehovah hath blessed", and here it is opening up. And so we get Asher, a blessed happy man; and we get
{88}
Issachar, *hire*; and Zebulun, *dwelling*. We get a daughter too, Dinah, whose name corresponds with Dan -- the feminine side in judgment, for the sisters are to have a true judgment about things in the care-meeting, as the brothers have. If they are interested they will find out what takes place, for they should know so as to be in accord with the decisions reached. And lastly here we have Joseph, as if God waited to bring in the spiritual thought in him, so that the whole family should be lit up with the glory of Christ. As it shines in, everything is lit up.
<blockquote>"For heavenly light makes all things bright, <br>Seen in that blissful gaze". </blockquote>
Rachel saying "Jehovah will add to me another son" involves that there is to be completeness in this matter. God would have our minds run in this channel. It is a scene of glory opening up to us, and we can see it now by the Spirit and the incoming of Christ, for Joseph is typically Christ, the great spiritual thought casting its rays on all that had preceded it. Peter says, "going he preached to the spirits which are in prison, heretofore disobedient, when the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah". The light reflected backwards and forwards is Christ, and there is completeness. Many saints, although they are sons, have no definite divine thoughts, no certainty about things; but God is working on firm ground with a view to completeness. Indeed things are completed already in His mind and it is only a question of time. It is a great thing to get into accord with what God has in His mind -- He is graciously opening it up to us, drawing us to Himself to see the completeness of His mind, and how He is reaching it in detail. Rachel says, "another son" -- just enough. There are no loose ends in God's work. There is just enough -- one other son. That son comes in in chapter 35, as I have said before, the son of his mother's sorrow, but of his father's right hand. Things are ending up that way, and how great a thing it is to be in these matters, to see the perfection of things in the mind of God.
{89}
Well now, there are illustrations of this in the Book of Acts, if I may just touch on them. You have in chapter 2, for instance, Christ as risen and glorified, and the Holy Spirit comes down and three thousand are added. All these things awaited the death, resurrection, and ascension of Christ, the presence of the Holy Spirit here and the formation of the assembly, so that three thousand are added. It is not so much there the question of quality as of quantity; nor is it the question of who added them; it is the great thought of *addition*. That is to say, what was possible. These three thousand were needed, of course. Myriads were needed, but things began well, three thousand were added. Not here "were saved". That is not the point now, but it appears later. What is before us is the working out of the thought of addition.
In the same chapter you get, "the Lord added ... such as should be saved". There you get another side of the divine counsel. Not such as would be saved; but such as *were to be* saved -- such as, in the sovereignty of God, would be saved. These were the ones. So that on the one hand you have the great number, and on the other quality. They were persons who had a place in the counsels of God, known of Him before the foundation of the world; for it is said, "whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified", @Romans 8: 30. I quite admit that this statement in @Acts 2: 47 alluded to the remnant of Israel that should be saved, but it is the question of the sovereign election of God nevertheless.
The next reference to addition you get is in chapter 5, when judgment had been executed on Ananias and Sapphira. Some may say, Do not be too severe, and of course we never should be unnecessarily severe, but we need to be severe when severity is required, and it is necessary in the case of such a sin as that of Ananias and Sapphira. The root of it was pride, which worked out in united deception in the assembly, and so they suffered the severe judgment of God. It might be said. Brethren
{90}
will not grow so fast now; there will not be three thousand added any more in one day; but it says in that chapter that "they were all with one accord in Solomon's porch". That is where they were, as if they said, We accept that judgment; we regard it as right. Then it goes on to say that multitudes of men and women believed, and "were ... added". Mark says, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved". These were real believers. You know there are believers *and* believers. John's gospel is largely to stress the idea of real believers; that is, persons who are in the state of faith, and remain in the state of faith, and get the benefits of those who are in that state. And so it is with believers in @Acts 5. Believers "were added", great numbers of them, showing that discipline is no detriment to the work of God, but the contrary: it is *essential* to the work of God. And so believers were added in numbers, both of men and of women. They were added to the Lord. You may inquire what the difference is between the Lord adding, and being added to Him. Well, it is quite obvious that being added to the Lord means that the persons are in accord with the Lord, that there is nothing contrary to the Lord in those that were added to Him. The fact that they were in Solomon's porch, implying that they were fully recognising the need of the discipline that had been exercised, qualified them to be added to the Lord.
Well, I just touch on those points so that you might see what the filling out of this thought of Rachel's signifies; how addition is in accordance morally with what it is added to, and at the same time it is just the number required. The result would be exactly answering to the divine thought. And then I want to show you just for a moment how Jacob's remark fits in. He was affected by the spiritual thought of Christ, seen in Joseph. It is shown in a small way, for he was yet a babe, but there it was. It was spiritual. Joseph fills the eye of faith from this point onwards in the book of Genesis. It is Christ figuratively, and I may say, substantially, for Joseph was
{91}
not a mere figure. And so Jacob says, We are not in the right place. There are thousands of God's people like that, in the wrong place. They are God's people, but they are not separate. They are making money; it may be they are making a name for themselves in this world, and that they have the world before them as a prospect. Jacob had remained in Padan twenty years. The thought of his mother and father in sending him there was not that he should stay twenty years; but now this powerful thought, expressed in Joseph came into his soul. It is the true spiritual thought. What are you going to do now -- continue here making money, increasing your cattle? That is what Jacob did, alas, and brought sorrow to himself. The thought was right and spiritual, and he proposed to act on it at once; if he had done so, he would have saved himself trouble, and he had to do it subsequently; if there is anyone here into whose soul has come the precious light of Christ, the next exercise is what are you going to do? Will you continue where you are with your worldly prospects, or will you leave and get into your own country? You do not belong where you are at all. What is our place? Heaven is our place; provisionally, the assembly is our place. The assembly is the reflection of heaven, and it belongs to us. You belong to it, too, if you are a true christian, that is your place provisionally. Heaven is your own eternal place; your calling is heavenly: "the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus". The assembly is provisionally that, where the enjoyment of heaven is a present reality -- and some of you are not there, not in the fellowship of God's Son. Your prospects are elsewhere, your outlook is elsewhere. As Joseph is born, Jacob, in effect, says, This will not do. Rachel is brought into it, the maternal thought is kept in view: "when Rachel had borne Joseph". Jacob says, "Send me away, that I may go to my place and to my country".
The Lord has a word for someone here tonight -- it may be for every one of us -- as to where we are really
{92}
in our outlook, in our feelings, in our affections. Are we in our own place? Jacob's own place, his own country, was Canaan -- figuratively, heaven; and if any little bit of light has come into your soul now at this meeting, the idea is that you are to go to your own place. There will be addition. We ought to be looking for that, looking for results from the testimony, from the gospel, but let us be in our own place. Do not add to the world. Christendom, as it is now, is the result of adding to the world what belongs to heaven, what belongs to the assembly. There is not a denomination so-called that, in principle, is not linked with the world. The assembly is based on the idea of being "called out". "Come out from among them, and be ye separate", says the Lord. What fellowship has light with darkness, what fellowship has Christ with Belial? We must come out from the world if there is to be addition according to God. Do not add what is of Christ to the world. It is just making the world more respectable. God's additions, additions to Christ, are to be in His own place. The Lord added to the assembly, or added to what was there of God, such as should be saved. Not to the world, but something quite out of the world. Let no one here conclude that he can have practical part in the holy things of God and remain linked with the world. If you are to be an addition, you are to be in your own place in the assembly. The Lord is appealing, I am sure, to the young christians here at this time; and would affect us by the thought of the light of Christ in Joseph coming into Jacob's soul. He lingered afterwards, it is true; even as it often happens that a brother makes up his mind at a time like this to move, but some other thing comes in after the meeting, and he does not move. He remains on in the world for some time and adds to his riches, and they are an encumbrance. So that the word tonight is, Move to your own place, to your own country.
May the Lord bless His word.
{93}
A FIELD WHICH JEHOVAH HATH BLESSED
@Matthew 13: 44; @Matthew 23: 17 - 39; @Matthew 27: 26 - 29
I read these scriptures because they present to us the idea of a field. It has a wide place in Scripture. The thought runs through @Matthew 13; but these three scriptures will suffice to convey what is in view. The first refers to it, in a very wide sense, as the world. The thought of a field may be a small area -- just a few acres, or it may be large, here it is the whole world. The Lord Himself, in an earlier parable, says, "the field is the world", and "He that sows the good seed is the Son of man", @Matthew 13: 37. This is the title that alludes to the Lord's universal rights. He sowed good seed in His field, we are told, but while men slept, His enemy came and sowed darnel in the same field. It was the kind of opposition that requires time for maturity. Satan does oppose, suddenly, as in a gale of wind, in order to overwhelm in a moment; but in other instances he operates over a period of time, and in this case it has lasted a long time; the wheat and the tares are growing up together. This state is running on now, and will do so until the end, when God will send His angels to remove the tares -- clearing the kingdom of them -- and the sons of the kingdom shall prevail. A very great prospect! When "they shall gather out of his kingdom all offences" (verse 41).
This other parable, in verse 44, alludes in principle to the earth, not, however, as a place to be tilled and sown, but as having something in it of value -- a treasure; it alludes to what came to light when Christ was here as Man. "He came to his own, and his own received him not" (@John 1: 11); but in coming to Israel or to the Jews, He found His treasure, that is, what He regarded as such, and He hid it in the field and bought the field. You can see therefore how the Lord would regard the world, notwithstanding its actual history or state at any given
{94}
time, as entirely in relation to the treasure. And so we have an era instituted in Scripture which is called the "times of the Gentiles".
The book of Daniel discloses that, as the throne of David was given up, God transferred His authority to the gentiles, but all in view of what this verse speaks of, and that the field should be kept in some sort of order until the treasure should in due course be taken out of it. That is how matters stand and have stood since the Lord Jesus was here. The "times of the Gentiles" preceded the advent of Christ, by hundreds of years. Nebuchadnezzar was raised up and he ruled; subsequently, the Medes and Persians, the Greeks and the Romans. These were not powers arising accidentally, they came up under the government of God. The times of the gentiles are current now; they still obtain and are divinely allowed to rule with a view to this treasure that is in the field. God has an eye to it; and so these powers are to be prayed for that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. We are not called upon to rule the world; the time for that has not yet come. Paul tells the Corinthians, "Do ye not then know that the saints shall judge the world?" "Do ye not know that we shall judge angels?" @1 Corinthians 6: 2, 3. We are to have part in the great government which God is about to inaugurate over the world, but in the meantime our King is in rejection. The Lord is rejected, and our part is to suffer rejection with Him, awaiting the time of His advent when He will come and take up the reins of government. It is not therefore given to us to rule the world now, but we are being trained for it; and meanwhile, we understand that the world is not wholly given over to the devil, although in one sense it lies in the wicked one. God holds the reins of government, and in all this He has an eye to the treasure which His beloved Son found when here, and hid. Heaven is always watching that treasure, and in every great monarchy that is allowed to rise, what is in view is that conditions may exist, enabling God to secure
{95}
the treasure. Paul goes so far as to tell us that the world is in reconciliation. The attitude of God changes towards the world in the casting off of the Jew. "If their casting away be the world's reconciliation, what their reception but life from among the dead?" @Romans 11: 15. A remarkable word! The Spirit of God goes on to say that the receiving of them will be as life from among the dead; that is what Israel will be as born in a day. The gospels afford evidence of what life from among the dead is. What a great triumph for God to take one from among the dead! The receiving of Israel by and by will be like that.
We must not make too much of what is current in these times of the gentiles, what transpires is not to be taken too much to heart, because when God moves to recover His ancient people it will be as life from among the dead; a nation will be born in a day, a sudden happening to bring out what God can do! In the meantime, there is this wonderful statement that perhaps some of us have not sufficiently understood, that is, the reconciling of the world. It does not mean that every person in it is reconciled. Christians are, of course. "And you, who once were alienated and enemies in mind by wicked works, yet now has it reconciled in the body of his flesh through death; to present you holy and unblamable and irreproachable before it", @Colossians 1: 21, 22. That refers to christians, not to the reconciling of the world, which is a provisional thing; God taking account of the world in view of the treasure in it, so that the gospel should go out freely and that those who are to be saved should understand that God in grace is not against them, but for them, not imputing trespasses. The time will come when He will return in judgment, that is His strange work. Meanwhile He is looking out favourably on the whole world, regarding it as in reconciliation.
I say that, that you may understand what is meant by this field, and how the prime thought is of the treasure in it. It is not here a question of cultivating that field.
{96}
Legislators and administrators -- for whom we pray -- cultivate and do what they can to keep order and promote better social conditions and so forth, but heaven's eye is on the *treasure*; it is no question of the field, but what is hidden therein. God is concerned with what is going on daily on the earth for the securing of that treasure. Every believer, the elect in the counsels of God, those that are to be saved, are of that treasure, and in order to secure it for Himself. God is viewing everybody in reconciliation in a provisional way. That is the situation and it ought to move us as to this treasure, both as to ourselves being of it and as to securing others. The idea presented in this field is of great importance to have before us as long as it shall last, that we may have our part in this great service of securing the treasure therein. The actual instrumentality is the gospel and that is to go on; there is no thought of the gospel ceasing. It is still the day of salvation, the acceptable year of the Lord, the time of grace and of God's long-suffering; hence the gospel is going out and will go out until the end, until the last one of the elect is gathered in. As Paul says, "For this cause I endure all things for the sake of the elect, that *they* also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory", @2 Timothy 2: 10.
I pass on to the field presented in @Genesis 23. A solemn matter comes up as we touch this field. It is bought, as was the other. The Lord is seen as going to great expense in buying the field in @Matthew 13: 44, and, in this particular case we have in Abraham a figure of the Lord again buying a field, not this time because of something in it, but on account of what He is about to put into it. In the meantime before He returns, His own are constantly falling asleep. It is well to face this matter. It is not to be dreaded by the christian, but welcomed; indeed Paul could say, "to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better", @Philippians 1: 23. Departing -- what is it but that we are put to sleep through Jesus? No less than that! He puts His saints to sleep; what a very precious
{97}
service to render to us! Indeed we are told, "Precious in the sight of Jehovah is the death of his saints", @Psalm 116: 15. Normally, the death of a saint is a victory; still it is not resurrection, but death. The Lord said, "Lazarus, our friend, is fallen asleep", @John 11: 11; and then He said to them plainly, "Lazarus has died". In whatever way you look at it, death is a solemn thing, and it is well for christians to face the fact of death, pending the coming of our Lord. Paul says, "while yet we do not wish to be unclothed, but clothed, that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life", @2 Corinthians 5: 4. That is what he looked for, though, in writing to the Philippians, he says, "to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better". Paul recognises that that state is not perfection, but a disembodied condition is "far better" in the sense of joy and peace and rest; though what he ardently desires is "to have put on our house which is from heaven", @2 Corinthians 5: 2. That is what faith looks on to. Faith understands that if the testimony is to go on, one generation passes and another comes.
We may as well face this as we get older; and indeed for the younger ones too, it is a sound and wholesome exercise. But if I am of the generation of faith, if I belong to Jesus, then the Lord shows me typically in this chapter that He has His eye upon me, and that burial is in the light of resurrection. The first burial mentioned in Scripture is in this chapter, and what is stated about the person buried is the period of the years of her life. It is twice mentioned, in verse 1: "And the life of Sarah was a hundred and twenty-seven years: these were the years of the life of Sarah". It does not say of her age, but of the years of her life. That is what God values -- the life. Think of what the life of a christian is! what the life of Jesus was here, under the eye of God! It was infinitely delightful. And Jesus gave up that which was so delightful to God, to do the will of God. And so the life of Sarah, as being a life of faith, had been delightful to God. It was not a question of what was going into the
{98}
grave but what was to come out. "Thus ... is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruptibility. It is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body", @1 Corinthians 15: 42, 43. In that sense, you see that although identity remains, what comes out of the grave is not what has gone in, but something in which God Himself delights.
That is why this field has such a place, it was carefully bought under auspicious circumstances. The Canaanites were there, but not opposed; they were not saying a word against Abraham. Indeed the sons of Heth were ready to give him the choicest of their sepulchres, but Abraham's thought was "the cave of Machpelah, ... for the full money let him give it to me amongst you for a possession of a sepulchre", @Genesis 23: 9. He speaks very respectfully and bows himself to the people of the land but he wanted to buy the field. It was not for a very great price, "four hundred shekels of silver, current with the merchant", but it was enough to show that it was worth buying, and the money was there to pay for it -- not paper money either, it was weighed to Ephron, in money "current with the merchant". It was duly purchased.
Now that field is very interesting to us, because the saints are all in it in principle. Faith regards this as a place of burial, the place where the saints lie until the day of resurrection. You may say, They are scattered all over the world, and some in the depths of the sea, but that is nothing from the standpoint of this chapter; these distances apart are nothing to God. The point is that they are buried under the eye of the Lord, carefully cared for and buried in relation to *Hebron*, which alludes to the coming world -- "that world and the resurrection" -- they will all be there. One shout of Christ will bring them all out. Those who are in the grave shall hear His voice and shall come forth, showing how real and intelligent they are, they will recognise His voice and come
{99}
forth. It is a beautiful thought, "the field, and the cave that was in it, and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all its borders round about, were assured to Abraham". How carefully the Lord considers those of His own who have fallen asleep, and how the graveyard would afford the needed comfort for those who do the burying. The one who buries in this instance is Abraham, the man of faith, and it is in faith we bury. He calls it *his dead* -- "that I may bury my dead out of my sight". He buries Sarah in this field. I have no doubt the cave suggests that the place of burial is divinely prepared. The burial -- place of Jesus was no accident; it was "in a tomb hewn in the rock, where no one had ever been laid", @Luke 23: 53. @Genesis 23 gives the burying place for faith, and there can be no doubt that the cave alludes to divine provision, and it is for the saints, they are all there. Those of us who know what it is to lose a loved one can say that they are all there -- not one of them is unknown; they will all be found there and will come forth; they will stand up in victory here. The Lord is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead", @Romans 1: 4. Now we are "to know him and the power of his resurrection", @Philippians 3: 10. Thus as we fall asleep through Jesus it is in the full assurance that He will raise us, that is the light and comfort associated with the field of Ephron.
I will now go on to chapter 27. Here I have largely in mind that we should see what is *cultivated*. Neither of the other two fields we have had before us was cultivated, although in the field of Machpelah there is that which is sown. "It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body", @1 Corinthians 15: 44. Though the saints are buried there to come forth as a goodly crop by and by, yet the thought of cultivation does not come into it. This field, however, is a present cultivation, and includes everyone of us here today, especially the young people. For *now* is the time for cultivation. This field does not represent the
{100}
world, but it is a narrower thought, it is one person. Any christian might be so regarded. I would single out the young to come into this. The Lord, I believe, is singling them out peculiarly in these last days -- the babes, the little children, boys and girls, young men and women; these are all peculiarly in the mind of the Lord in present ministry, I feel, and each of them is, so to speak, a field.
Some of them may be moving as Jacob was here, not in a very creditable way, but nevertheless the smell of the field is there, and it is for parents to acquire the power in this respect to discern -- to be able to tell if the smell of the field is in the youth -- in the family. And if not, why not? Surely it is a matter of grave concern if our families, if any in them, do not come into the realm of faith. I believe it would be well if parents began to exercise this power, this sense called smell in a spiritual way, so that they might be able to discern the bent of mind in youth.
You all know that Esau was a man of the field. Rebecca had the advantage of knowing the mind of God when these twins were born. It is well for parents to be on the alert, we should always be on the alert. Rebecca had the mind of God before her children were born, what an advantage that was! How important it is for parents or prospective parents to be before God in prayer! Rebecca inquired of God as to it, and God revealed His mind about the children, "the elder shall serve the younger", @Genesis 25: 23. That elder was Esau; and subsequently, hundreds of years after this, it was said that God loved Jacob and hated Esau. Esau had a different smell. He was a man of the field; not in the sense of Isaac's blessing of Jacob, but the football field or the tennis field; he was that kind of man; you could smell that sort of field on him. Yet in spite of that, Isaac loved him, because Esau gave him of his venison; but Rebecca loved Jacob. What a model she is for mothers! She loved the right man. Mothers, of course, love all their
{101}
children, but she had the mind of God about Jacob and loved him accordingly; she was a pious woman.
I believe the secret cause of children turning away is largely lack of piety, vigilance and care in mothers. Now, as I said, Rebecca understood the mind of God as to Jacob, she was in accord with God about him. She loved Jacob, it says in Genesis; God loved Jacob, we are told in Malachi. What an intervening stretch of time! What consonance between faith and God! And that is how it should be; faith is always in agreement with God. Without faith it is impossible to please God, and you may be sure that Rebecca pleased Him in that she loved Jacob. So here she is in principle laying down her life for him. "On me be thy curse, my son!" -- what an example for mothers, she is ready to go that far! She puts the skins round him, she would have the mind of God carried out, whatever happened. Let the mind of God go through, concerning the children! It did go through, by a subterfuge, alas! -- yet even that did not interfere with the carrying out of the purpose of God. It was carried through in *spite* of her subterfuge. If we understand the mind of God about our children, we move so that it may be established. Many things may happen to distress us, but if you inquire of God and lay down your life, if necessary, to be in accord with what He reveals to you, the mind of God will go through as regards your children.
So we find Jacob goes to his father with the carefully cooked meat. At this point Isaac represents God; in principle all the patriarchs do. Isaac rises to that and he says to his son, "Come near, now, and kiss me, my son". It is not now the old man who has a taste for venison, he is representative of God, he is rising to that. God has come in. How beautiful it is to see God coming in! God came in in Isaac here; he is rising above his natural sensibilities and coming into divine sensibilities which he had as a child of God. It is with divine sensibilities that he says, "Come near, now, and kiss me, my son". What an invitation, beloved young people! How God would
{102}
appeal to you! Love hates distance, as is seen in the father of the prodigal when he ran and fell on his neck and covered him with kisses. The prodigal had come back, he had come near to his father: now it is a son to kiss. Isaac says, "See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which Jehovah hath blessed". I have no doubt there are many here like that tonight. With many young people it may be only potential, not developed, but the thing is there. In fact, from the very time that we have the dry land mentioned in Scripture, the potentiality of fruitfulness is there. The ground is to bring forth, "Let the earth cause grass to spring up", @Genesis 1: 11. There is the power of life in it. How does a young person -- young man or woman, boy or girl, get the power of life? It is the power of God that works in them. The parents request for them, and pray for them, they pray earnestly for them, and such prayers God answers. The principle of life, of fertility, is brought in. It is in divine order. The sensibilities of the patriarch now were spiritual, he was sensing the right thoughts. "The smell of my son is as the smell of a field which Jehovah hath blessed". It is a question of potentiality as yet, but think of what is opening up in Jacob! What a history, what Jacob is to be! Israel restored and blessed on the earth -- all that entered into the smell that Isaac smelled then. What a wonderful blossoming of that flower, as it were, the opening up of that great field of fruitfulness for God! It is to appear on the earth presently when Israel shall be blessed, and shall fill the earth with fruit for God. All that was there potentially in that man. The father smelled it and said, "The smell of my son is as the smell of a field which Jehovah hath blessed".
I have brought these thoughts before you so that we might have light for the young, and learn how to smell the odour of divine blessing in them, and if it be not there, to get to God about it. God is available for parents, and in a wider sense for the assembly, because the father and
{103}
mother spirit is supposed to be in the assembly so that in this way the saints are brought in.
If God is not working, why not? As Isaiah says, "ye that put Jehovah in remembrance, keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he establish", @Isaiah 62: 6, 7. Prayer is to go on and on until the great matter is established; "give him no rest", because if the young are not secured, the testimony must die out, for one generation passes away. I think you will see the practical need, in this and all other countries, of fruitfulness and spreading out for God, so that the young must be secured and thus have part in what is so pleasing to God in fruitfulness.
{104}
THE LORD COMING INTO OUR CIRCUMSTANCES
@Genesis 17: 1 - 8; @Mark 6: 45 - 56; @Luke 24: 36 - 43
In these scriptures I purpose to show by the Lord's help how God comes into the circumstances of His people. In @Genesis 17 He comes in in relation to the *age* of the believer, and as approving his progress as a believer. In Mark the believers are in circumstances that are testing, but they are in them by the *Lord's appointment*, not of their own volition. He comes into these circumstances. In Luke the circumstances are the outcome of light; they are the choice of the believers involved, they are of *their own making*, and right so far, inasmuch as they are the outcome of light. He comes into these too. Under these three heads I desire to speak, so that we may see the divine interest in us. No doubt these three sets of circumstances would cover most of us, so that I hope every one here will get something.
First as to Abram. He was an old man, but he had made good use of his years, and is approved. He is presented to us as a characteristic believer. He is Abram the believer, and is said to be the father of all believers -- a very great distinction, but he is now an old man, although he lived a great many years after this, he had come to the time of life when nature is weakened. God knows that the weaker the nature, the greater the advantage of the work of God in us. So that elder brothers and sisters have a certain advantage in that way, and God knows that and never fails to use it. He never fails to use anything that furthers His work, or that enhances it, so if a brother is advanced in life and consequently nature is weakened -- ninety-nine years of age here -- God takes account of that, and He comes in to help him at this point, to further what He already approves of. For the principle is "more and more". Whilst we are down here the
{105}
education goes on, the work goes on to perfection. God intends to fill His universe with *men*, meaning persons of full development. There is no suggestion as far as I can see of any growth after we enter on our final state, answering to the counsel of God. Now is the time for growth, and in God's mind it is "more and more". Even the apostle Paul says, "Not that I ... am already perfected". There was still something beyond, and he says to us, "Paul the aged", being such an one as that. God would help him peculiarly, using his very age; for as I said, the weaker nature is, the greater the advantage of the work of God.
Here we get God appearing to Abram. It is one of several such appearings with which Abram was honoured. We have other interventions of God. In chapter 15 we find God speaking to him by "the word of Jehovah", it is the first mention of this that we get in the Scriptures, and it means that God intends to make him intelligent. One of the most important things for us is to be made intelligent as to His mind, so God communicates by the word of Jehovah Himself. That is what you get in chapter 15. In chapter 16 Abram fails, but still he is moving on in faith, and has reached the age of ninety-nine years, so what I want to say will bear largely on the older brothers and sisters.
Advancing age should help us, as in Abram's case. God had in His mind, "walk before me, and be thou perfect". Paul said, I do not count that I am already perfected, but he was aiming at it. The idea of manhood is conveyed when the senses are fully developed, but there is a fuller thought of perfection involving the apprehension of the heavenly calling (@Philippians 3) which corresponds with the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ -- the full-grown man. The apostle did not count that he was just up to that, he did not consider that he had apprehended fully what he was apprehended for. Think of what we are apprehended for! Were we really to take it in, it would cause great jubilance of soul.
{106}
It is the great thought of God for us, and the apostle aimed at that.
Now God says to Abram, "walk before me, and be thou perfect". God was entering into covenant with him, "I will make my covenant between me and thee". A personal link is about to be established between Jehovah and this believer, this favoured man. It is a personal matter. God is usually spoken of in Scripture in the singular, sometimes in the plural, but we know from Scripture that there are three Persons in the Deity. We must bear that in mind, and so here it is a personal matter, the personality, speaking reverently, of God. The thought opens up much. The great possibilities of personal relations with God! Think what is brought into it! "Baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". That means we have personal relation with Them, with any or all of Them, and in Each we have to do with God. That is what I want you to keep in mind in what I have to say; God comes into the circumstances of His people. Now as to Abram -- the name Abram as most of you will know signifies father -- "high father". It signifies moral dignity and elevation. The name Abram carries that with it. It is not cancelled by the new name, but rather carried forward, and added to it is the great thought of increase. Increase on lower ground is pernicious. What has happened in the history of the testimony is increase on lower ground; there has been constant descent in the history of the church, one divine principle or truth after another being given up, because it could not be maintained; so that lawlessness became legalised. The laws governing God's house and truth generally could not be maintained, and so they were given up legally. Thus men could go on with a good conscience with a spurious christianity. That is a most terrible thing in the history of the church -- the gradual setting aside of the great principles and the truth of God because they could not be kept. It is all around us, and God is calling us back to
{107}
the law and to the testimony. "To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them", @Isaiah 8: 20. So Abram's name refers to a high standard of things. He was called out, setting forth typically the principle of our position -- "called saints". "Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house". Why is the father's house not put first? It is carefully stated. It is country first because the patriotic idea is so ingrained in us, and so difficult to eradicate. I am not here to preach anything against the authorities, I am only presenting the truth that our citizenship is in heaven, our commonwealth is in heaven; it includes the idea of politics. The saints of God have politics of their own in heaven. Not simply that they are of heaven, they are *in* heaven, where we belong according to divine counsel; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our bodies and fashion them like His glorious body.
Abram is called out of his country, kindred, and father's house, into the land of Canaan. He came into the land of Canaan. He is in it now, according to this chapter, and has this name Abram, which means high father, and yet he has no children. He has Ishmael, but no children according to God, for Isaac is not born. But he is suited now to have increase. He corresponds to the idea in @Psalm 113, "He maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children". You must have the housekeeping before the children. The children are to be brought into an orderly house, and hence the mother is joyful. Abram corresponds to that. His name signifies moral elevation, as I said; and God says, I will give you children, a great number of them; you shall be father of a multitude. In saying this God says, I am God Almighty. He has called the universe into existence. He who has raised Christ from the dead by His exceeding power, can give increase in children -- spiritually, I mean, but the conditions that God honours
{108}
in this passage are the conditions that were present with Abram, the moral state of things in his house. How elevated he was as compared with what was current! This is a very loud voice to us who are parents as to how things are in our houses, and in a wider sense, how conditions are in the assembly, whether this moral elevation exists, or whether there is gravitation to the lower levels of religious order, and society. God would say, To increase you there is to increase the confusion; I am to increase you on the high level, on the level of the upper room, and so He says to Abram, "I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect. And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly"; and Abram fell down before Him -- very beautiful! It was the result of the appearing. The appearing signifies some sense in which God intends Himself to be known, as fitting into the particular circumstances. In this case it is God Almighty, but the appearing involves even more than the words. God Himself -- in His love -- was in the appearing. There was something that Abram saw as well as heard, and now Abram falls down. He is in keeping with this very great occasion; he falls down before Jehovah, and now Jehovah says to him, "It is I" (verse 4). Beautiful! God Himself coming in to talk to His faithful saint -- God and Abram. One might ask as to whether brethren are in any way conversant with divine talking, and in a personal way. In the fifteenth chapter, we are told, God spoke in a vision, by the word of Jehovah -- not an appearing. That is a question of the word of God, by which He opens up His mind, and leads us into it, but an appearing and conversation following is more personal. This is a personal matter, and it is very apropos to inquire whether we know anything at all about it. God has to say to us. He speaks to His people in this way. The "word of God" is a great general thought, but appearing and saying, "It is I", and continuing a conversation, on the part of God is most touching.
{109}
Think of the blessedness of that! God says, 'It is I. I want to converse with you and you with Me, I want to be in close relation with you, to enter into covenant with you, and bind Myself to you'. Think of God Himself coming to us in this way! God is not acting on the principle of mediator here. It is God with Abraham, it is a personal matter. How honoured this man was! Is it written for him alone? No, it is written for us, to show us what is open to us and what God is ready to do for us, but it depends on the state of things with us. God is approving the state of things in Abraham's circumstances here, and He is coming in, in this way, to show what He thinks of a believer who is controlled by and is in keeping with faith. He says, "I am the Almighty God", and again, "It is I". He says to Moses, "I AM THAT I AM"; it is the personal thought. God did not say, "It is I" to Adam, or to Enoch, or to Noah; it is to the man called out, the man of faith moving in faith, and approved in that way.
Then God says to him, Your name is to be changed; that means that there is promotion. God comes in for that purpose, the believer is promoted before Him. He says, Your name is to be no longer Abram, but Abraham. God pronounced that name first. I have no doubt that is how spiritual things take form. God pronounces it first as far as we can see, and Abraham is to bear it ever afterwards. He is our great progenitor spiritually, he is called the father of all believers, and thus we are in direct relation to him. You may talk of ancestry, but think of this! The children of Abraham are not those born after the flesh but after the Spirit. We are all the sons of Abraham in that sense, and this is how our great ancestor spiritually was honoured of God, and He has in mind that all the seed are to bear the marks of this great distinction. We are the seed spiritually, the seed of Abraham, and God would intimate to us what a place we have with Him, and how we are brought into covenant with Him. Circumcision is the answer to this on our
{110}
side. It is a question of the Spirit given consequent upon the death of the Lord Jesus; by whom we disallow the flesh in a practical way. We are thus, as seen here in type, bound up in everlasting covenant with God.
I will now go on to Mark. As I intimated, these circumstances are not the circumstances of the disciples¬ own making; the Lord made them, and I may say that is the position of christianity. The circumstances are divinely made; the path of the will of God is never optional, it is always imperative from the divine side. Paul says, "if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward: but if against my will, a dispensation of the gospel is committed unto me". Our position as true believers before God is against our natural wills. That seems a peculiar thing to say, but it really is true. Our natural wills are against our position in subjection to God.
The Lord having fed the multitude says, I will send them away; He then constrains the disciples to go into the ship, and to go over to the other side. He constrains them to do it. Thank God they were constrainable! Some one here may not be constrainable. You come here under constraint, yet it may not go beyond what is merely natural. We thank God you are here, for even if you are unconverted you are in the range of the truth; this meeting is to bring you under divine constraint, and that will militate against your will. These disciples were amenable to the Lord's constraint, so they went into the ship and crossed the sea to the other side, while the Lord sent the multitude away, and went up to the mountain to pray -- an elevated position. Their position is on water level. How great a thought it is that we christians have Jesus interceding for us above! We can say, "such an high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens", @Hebrews 7: 26.
In the previous verse it says "he ever liveth to make intercession for them" as if He did nothing else. Surely the intercession is to maintain us in moral elevation, to
{111}
keep us from gravitating to the level of the world, whether religiously or socially.
Now we are told that He was alone on the land, but they on the sea; and they were toiling in rowing, the winds being contrary to them. Satan knew they were in a plight. There was a state of hardness of heart there. This constraint came in immediately after the feeding of the multitude, as if the Lord would say, Surely there would not be doubt in your minds as to Me, you will not have hard hearts now. But they had, and they carried their hard hearts into the boat, and with hard hearts strained at the oars. We are told then that the Lord came into their circumstances -- the oars being pulled and tugged, the winds being contrary to them, as if something were working against them. You say, you do not know my circumstances, but the Lord does, and He is not far away -- He is interceding for you, that your faith may not fail; He knows all about what you are going through, and He is about to come into those circumstances. I made these circumstances, He would say, and put you in them for a purpose, to test you, to bring out what is in your heart, and I am coming into them. It may be there is someone here like this, in difficult circumstances, and you are complaining of them. The Lord knows that contrary wind, He knows the source and author of it. He knows your weakness, He knows the thing that is directed against you. He knows that the enemy is trying to overwhelm your faith, to make you give up your faith, and He says, I am coming into those circumstances. Are you ready to receive Him? Would you know Him if He came in? I want to bring home to you that in such circumstances we are very apt not to know Him. They did not know Him here. We have a word which signifies a phantom, they thought it was this -- an apparition. That is how they understood their Lord. It is a poor thing if that is the kind of thought you have about Jesus as coming into your circumstances. Something to be recoiled from, that is what they thought
{112}
it was, and yet He was feeding the multitude just a moment before. Here He is now on the sea, but not as they are, He is walking on it: they are in a boat, pulling their oars against the storm and waves. He is walking triumphantly. It is a triumphant Christ. What will He not do? Is there anything He cannot cope with? He has triumphed over every foe, if He comes in now He comes from heaven. He comes in spiritually. It is not a spirit, but a Person, a Man. God manifest in flesh, no less than that. Here they are afraid and are troubled. Is this a phantom? Is it against you? Do you not recognise the well-known form? Did you ever know of a person walking on the water before? Never. It is the Lord Himself -- it can be no other, He is walking on the water. But now He made as if He would go past them. This is a most serious matter. There is a voice in this as regards our position; the Lord has come near to you to help you, and things are not just right. You have just seen a gracious miracle by the Lord, the outcome of His compassion -- and still your hearts are hardened. He does not deal with externals, but internals. God looks at the heart, and the Lord knew the state of their hearts, and saw the unbelief. He would say, You may be without Me altogether, you are not in a state to receive Me, you do not know Me, you forget Me, and it may be I shall have to go on to others. It is a most serious matter; it applies to individuals as well as to companies of saints. You may be overcome by hard circumstances, but the Lord intends to make something out of you for His service through them. You may be nominally in His service, but ineffective, and He needs *effective* servants. In the meeting you are not serving as you should. He put you in these circumstances, but you are not hearkening, you are hard, you are complaining. He may have to go past you, and you do not want that. All these thoughts enter into this remarkable scene. But in result, He came up into the ship and the wind fell. Think of the scene -- He came into the ship and the wind fell! As soon as the Lord comes into
{113}
your circumstances, their hardness ceases: the wind falls. One important lesson here is to keep a clear vision. Use what you already know about Christ to discern Him when He comes into your circumstances and do not retain a hard heart. A hard heart may mean that He will pass you by; He has done it to many. They are not amenable to discipline. He made as if He would pass them by, but His love knew the real thing was there, and He came into the ship. As Peter says, in @John 21, "thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee". In his first answer Peter used a word meaning conscious knowledge; he appealed to the knowledge Christ had divinely; but finally he referred to the *external* evidences of his love, and so he used a word denoting objective knowledge -- as if to convey to the Lord that He could *see* that he loved Him. Some little thing was manifest in Peter that the Lord could see, and it was no longer a question of appealing to His divine knowledge. There is some little thing that shows you love Christ and He takes notice of that. When we have a refractory brother to deal with, how refreshing it is when there is some little thing that we can see that shows there is love for Christ. That will spread, and we pray that it may spread, and the spreading of it will mean the dissipation of what has caused the trouble. The Lord came into the ship and they come to the land, and there is a wonderful time. You see how He was recognised on the land, and how they ran everywhere to bring their needs to Him. He has the cure for every ill, even a touch cured people. What a Person He was to them now! You can hardly get a passage greater than this one that speaks of the wonderful works of Christ. He had said, as He appeared to them on the water, "it is I". He would have you to know it. It is not an apparition, "It is I", and now they know Him and others know Him, and they bring all their needs to Him. He has a cure for every ill; not only can He silence the storm, but all the diseases that sin has occasioned are dispelled by Him.
{114}
Now in the final scripture, it is a position of our own making. It is agreeable to the Lord. The circumstances are of our own making, the outcome of light. God has been gracious, and has given us much light; many of us here have moved in this light, and we have circumstances similar to what is described in these verses. The two disciples from Emmaus came to Jerusalem and they found the eleven and they that were with them gathered together. The assembly is in view here. How we thank God for the light of the assembly! Through grace many move in that light, and there are little meetings in many countries throughout the world, all known to heaven, and the Lord has His eye on them, and visits them constantly. But now the question is whether we are equal to His visit in these circumstances of our own making, and whether there are conditions in keeping with heaven, where the Lord can come in and find a welcome. Why this perturbation? Why not readiness to receive and enjoy and reciprocate the love of this glorious Person? The position for Him here is a little better than in the house of Martha, seen in @Luke 10. He was received there, but He was criticised severely, and Mary, who sat at His feet, was criticised too. It was a very uncomfortable state of things. We do not want to make the Lord uncomfortable, so to speak; we may be gathered on the right ground and according to right principles and yet things may not be comfortable, and He has to set them right. Time has to be spent putting things right that ought to be spent in the enjoyment of happy reciprocal affections. The Lord has to spend a good deal of time correcting our state. They came together here intelligently, and the Lord came into their circumstances on account of that. He says, "Peace be unto you". He did not come in to criticise, He does not imply there was anything wrong. He acts as if all was right, and that He was expecting things to be right, but they were not. He said, "Peace be unto you", as if they were ready for Him, but they were not. He has to do much to adjust them, so that they may be intelligently
{115}
restful in His presence. He was in a spiritual condition, but nevertheless as a real Man, and so He says, "it is I myself". That is the position. It is now clear; and He proceeds further to open up the Scriptures, and to open up their understanding, so that great results follow. Where the Lord comes into our own circumstances, great results follow, there is great hope in it.
The Lord would encourage us to take up this line of things, and see what there is in these last days in the way of divine visitations -- divine Persons coming in in a personal way and having to say to us, and we to Them.
{116}
THE FIRM FOUNDATION OF GOD STANDS
@2 Timothy 2: 19; @1 Corinthians 3: 10, 11; @Matthew 16: 15 - 18
From the scriptures I have read you will have observed that my thoughts are running on divine foundations -- the foundation of God, as it is called in Timothy. The idea of foundation extends very far back, the earth itself being founded. "Jehovah by wisdom founded the earth", @Proverbs 3: 19. Its foundation is often alluded to in Scripture, and is particularly linked on with what I would bring before you. "He built his sanctuary like the heights, like the earth which he hath founded for ever". @Psalm 78: 69. So that the thought is very old, as old as the earth; and connected with it is joy, for the foundation indicated what the great structure was to be. "Whereupon were the foundations thereof sunken? or who laid its corner-stone, when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" @Job 38: 6, 7. Intelligence was brought into it in God's creatures, and it was discerned that great things were in view, so that it occasioned joy.
If it occasioned joy then, it would be right to expect that sympathy would be aroused in our hearts as the matter comes before us at this time; for we are the sons of God as christians, and we should not be wanting in sympathy in following up this thought of the foundation of God; the matter is so great and involves so much. Without it, there can be nothing permanent; with it, we have unshakable conditions; a kingdom that cannot be moved. I speak of it that we might be established in the apprehension of it, as Paul says, "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God", @2 Corinthians 1: 21. God loves to have us fixed and clearly apprehending the foundation upon which we rest, the
{117}
immutability of it, for storms come and waves arise, and our hearts are apt to fail us. Hence God would establish us that our feet might be firmly set and that we might know they are on a firm foundation.
I would begin with the thought as it appears in view of our own times. It is said of our times that they are difficult, and it is in this very connection that we have this great thought introduced, for the difficulties that arise tend to baffle us. We say, Why should this be? Why has God allowed it? Why are there so few actually walking in the truth? How often do such questions arise in our minds -- questions having their root in *unbelief*! And this is alluded to in the first passage read. Paul was concerned about his child Timothy that he should be able to carry on after he left, for Paul was about to suffer martyrdom and he knew difficult days were coming, in view of which he wanted to prepare one man at least to stem the tide. He was concerned that Timothy's feet should be on the rock. In this connection he tells him to shun vain babblings (@2 Timothy 2: 16). Christendom is full of them nowadays. They offer much, but they are just the effusions of the human mind, without the Spirit, but stimulated by the truth of christianity. Such vagaries find their votaries, and the word is not to look into them, not even to test them out, but to avoid them as poison is to be avoided. They make an effective appeal to the imaginative human mind. One meets with their votaries here and there, and one is impressed with the readiness with which certain minds become occupied with, and inflated under, these profane vain babblings. They lose themselves in occupation with them; they lose their balance, and are utterly inconsistent and illogical in the conclusions they reach. It is a matter of much consequence, for even christians may be affected as coming in contact with minds imbued with such thoughts, in persons carried away as with an evil spirit. Among these, Paul singles out one kind of evil; speaking of two men, Hymenaeus and Philetus, he says they are men who
{118}
have missed the mark. They aimed too high and had gone beyond anything ever proposed or suggested in regard to Christian truth, asserting something that is utterly false on the face of it. Men, including Christians, are dying every day, and yet these have the temerity to say the resurrection is past already. Others will tell you that the Lord Jesus came back to earth in 1914, while another asserts publicly in a long speech that the Lord Jesus will come on a certain day which the speaker attempts to indicate, and people are taken with it. Certain minds are capable of being captured by such vagaries, such nonsense, such palpable falsehood. These are among the things that make this time difficult, and the apostle proceeds to tell Timothy to avoid this, saying, "profane, vain babblings shun, for they will advance to greater impiety, and their word will spread as a gangrene", @2 Timothy 2: 16, 17. Do not touch these things, have nothing to do with them; they are terrible things, and one of the most vicious is Christian Science. That has captured thousands upon thousands. I take it no one here is exposed to it, but the tendency of the human mind is towards these vain babblings, unless through grace we are kept. "I stir up ... your pure mind", writes Peter (@2 Peter 3: 1). These vain things stir up *impure* minds, minds carried away by such fallacies. Christians should have pure minds, not "following cleverly imagined fables", as Peter again writes, as having been an eyewitness of our Lord's majesty, when He "received from God the Father honour and glory, such a voice being uttered to him by the excellent glory". The voice said, "This is my beloved Son, in whom *I* have found my delight; and this voice *we* heard uttered from heaven, being with him on the holy mountain", @2 Peter 1: 16 - 18. *Such* a voice -- that is Christianity, there is nothing vague about it, or extreme. It is all on accredited testimony, and God has called us back to it. Many have responded and come back from their vagaries, they have come back to a sure footing. Many here tonight have a
{119}
sure footing, I know, but I speak of it that we may be on it more firmly than ever. "The firm foundation of God stands". Whether it be rendered "the foundation of God standeth sure", or "the firm foundation of God", the force is the same. God's foundation is immutable and has a seal upon it.
I want to occupy you with this, that your affections may be brought into the matter of this seal, "The Lord knows those that are his". Do *I* know all that are His? I have to admit constantly that I do not. The Lord knows *all*. This aspect of the seal belonging to the foundation ought to appeal to us. It is not mentioned elsewhere in Scripture. Paul does not refer to it in writing to the Corinthians, nor did the Lord Jesus allude to it in speaking to Peter of His building the assembly. The thought of the seal belongs peculiarly to the remnant, the bearing of it is on ourselves, on our times, when we do not know a tithe of our brethren, alas! Today, to attempt to compute how many Christians there are would be as the sin of David (@2 Samuel 24: 10); but this seal is that the Lord knows all that are His. He can tell you at any given time how many there are. He is *not* telling us, for it is for us to find them; were we told, it might inflate us. The Lord reserves that knowledge, but He tells us that He knows, and that is a comfort to all of us. "The Lord knows those that are his", that is on one side of the seal.
We read of the foundation in Ephesians: "the household of God, being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the corner-stone" (@Ephesians 2: 20), and in type "Solomon's foundation", but nothing of this seal. It belongs to our times. It ought to humble us that we do not know our brethren, but, on the other hand, it comforts and encourages us that the Lord knows all. He knows where they are and He is at the door knocking. That is the Lord's present wonderful service to His own -- He is knocking. He is solicitous for them all, He wishes to
{120}
come in and sup with them (@Revelation 3: 20). Have *you* supped with Him? It may be there is one here who has not, someone who has never opened his door to Christ. The Lord knows all about you; He has a seat for you. He bears your name on His breastplate, He intercedes for you. It may be you have just turned in here that He may give you light; this meeting may be as the Lord's knock. Perhaps He has been knocking at your door before, and you have not answered. He may have taken away some loved one, or your money, or you may have lost your position. The Lord uses these circumstances to knock at your door, and you have not opened to Him. He is knocking again, telling you that He knows you and that you are one of His, that He has a right to you. One of His -- how precious! "Jesus, knowing that his hour had come that he should depart out of this world to the Father, having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end", @John 13: 1. You, among them, loved to the end, and yet you are not available to Him. He has to get along in the testimony without *you*. He will not be without you in heaven, but now, He is. I take it you are a believer, that you do love Him. He would touch you now and would say, will you not open the door that I may come in and sup with you? The truth is, if He sup but once, you will love Him more than ever. He is so considerate; He lets us constrain Him. Of some it is said that "they constrained him, saying, Stay with us, for it is toward evening and the day is declining. And he entered in to stay with them. And it came to pass as he was at table with them, having taken the bread, he blessed, and having broken it, gave it to them. And their eyes were opened, and they recognised him. And he disappeared from them", @Luke 24: 29 - 31. They were affected by it, they thought more of Him than ever! They went back to Jerusalem and related to the disciples what had happened on the way, and it was at that moment that the Lord stood in their midst. He would sup with them. "Have ye anything here to eat?" He
{121}
inquires, and He took what they provided, and ate before them.
This part of the seal, that the Lord knoweth those that are His, is in the foundation. It is an integral part of the foundation reserved for remnant times. The other side of the seal is, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity". These are the things that meet you if you want to get your foot on the foundation, firstly that the Lord knows those that are His; and secondly, that if you are linked up with what is contrary to Him, you must leave it. This is like a notice put up as you approach. You know, as you read it, that if you are associated with iniquity you must depart from it. It is written thus upon the seal and it is imperative. "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity".
Paul has indicated to us one feature of iniquity in the profane, vain babblings; but there are many others. It is for us to discover them and where we are ourselves, whether we are linked up with anything iniquitous, anything that affects Christ adversely. The seal is before our eyes with its imperative message, "Let every one ... withdraw from iniquity". You must depart from it if you have anything to do with this matter of coming on to the firm foundation, for the foundation of God *does not support iniquity*. It is utterly foreign to it, and that is the foundation that stands in relation to remnant times, and we are in these times. The Spirit of God is operating throughout the world, making all this known. Many have answered to it, and God is appealing to you here tonight. Depart from iniquity! What the iniquity is, is for you to determine. Do not let this night pass without doing it.
Turning to @1 Corinthians 3, you will notice I am working backwards from the present day. It is an intelligible way to develop this thought. For if I move in the light of 2 Timothy, then I am ready to move in the light of 1 and 2 Corinthians; and that brings me to
{122}
move in the light of @Matthew 16. The subject intensifies as we go backwards, till we come to the supreme thought in @Matthew 16. The foundation of God is the great general thought, but there are three definite points to note in 2 Timothy -- that it is God's foundation, that it stands firm, and that it has this seal of which we have spoken.
Now at Corinth the question was, what was laid there? What is laid *here* -- for that matter, or in London, in Melbourne, or in New York? What has been laid? What testimony has been rendered? What have the saints come on to? What kind of a foundation is it? What are we standing on? If I were an Episcopalian, a Roman Catholic, or a Presbyterian, I should be bound to inquire what kind of foundation that is. What is it that is laid in any given place, as at Corinth, where it was a local matter, where the saints addressed resided; what was presented there? Paul says, "Ye are God's husbandry", it is a question of God's rights in Corinth. He had property in Corinth. "Ye are God's husbandry, God's building", @1 Corinthians 3: 9. Paul was about to speak to them of that building and its foundation, which he says he had laid. "According to the grace of God which has been given to me, as a wise architect, I have laid the foundation, but another builds upon it. But let each see how he builds upon it. For other foundation can no man lay besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ", @1 Corinthians 3: 10, 11. There is none other. The foundation is Jesus Christ. There were rivals of Paul there who would lead people on to other lines, but he says there is no other foundation, and it was laid there in Corinth. Now you may say, Why is it Jesus Christ here in 1 Corinthians? Why is it different from @Matthew 16? The apostle is dealing with a locality here and it was that feature of the foundation they were needing; he wrote thus that the saints might be brought on to that feature of the truth needed to meet current proclivities; for the city of Corinth was proverbial for its wickedness; the natural man was cultured and rich
{123}
in this world's goods, and looseness of all kinds prevailed. It marked the place. So the foundation laid must be over against this to nullify it. "Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified". You could not connect loose things with Jesus Christ. "For such a high priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners", @Hebrews 7: 26. That is the kind of Man who is presented now in the city. If a wicked profligate comes in, he hears Paul present Jesus Christ and Him crucified. "For I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified", @1 Corinthians 2: 2. He would not preach more than that; it is the exact opposite of the Corinthians naturally, and he goes on, "that your faith might not stand in men's wisdom, but in God's power", @1 Corinthians 2: 5. Many did believe and as believers they came on to that foundation of which Paul had written that there was no other. "As a wise architect, I have laid the foundation". He knew the thing that was needed in the town and presented that; many were set up on that foundation, and that being so, Paul says, Ye are God's building.
To Timothy, Paul speaks of the foundation being God's; but here, to the Corinthians, he says, "I have laid the foundation". All these things were requisite that they should see what they were standing upon. You may be a believer and standing on a certain testimony presented to you, and yet there may be other features not known to you. The testimony of Christ is to be confirmed in us, "according as the testimony of the Christ has been confirmed in you", @1 Corinthians 1: 6. God confirmed Paul's preaching, as he said, "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ ... is God", @2 Corinthians 1: 21. They were set up on that foundation and the result expected was that they might indeed refuse all wickedness, all looseness, and all that is inconsistent with Christ. That is how it works out. "Let each see how he builds upon it", @1 Corinthians 3: 10. You have here in this city of Cape Town a pure foundation, one is rejoiced to see it, but each one should be adding to it, taking heed how he
{124}
builds, for he may damage others. There is a voice to us all in this verse, "Let each see how he builds upon it". "I have laid the foundation, but another builds upon it". Paul was not building there any more; each had to contribute and to build upon that which the wise architect had laid. The building is to grow, but take heed how you build, that it be according to the foundation. Let the test be Jesus Christ and Him crucified, and that shuts the door effectively against all that is contrary.
In @Matthew 16 we come to a most exalted side of the truth; it is a challenge as to what people are saying about Jesus. They have arrived at a state of things in which all kinds of questionings were rife as to Himself. The Jews are great questioners, great wranglers, great disputants; they contended with John's disciples about purification instead of listening to the truth. The Jews today are, of course, literal Jews, but there are those spoken of in the address to Philadelphia who are not literal, those "who say that they are Jews, and are not, but lie". Many things mark them, but the Lord says, "I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee". What a distinction! Everyone is to know how great that is! -- to be loved by Christ, and every one to know it! These Jews have many traits, but they are always militating against the truth in one way and another, and questioning marks them. So the Lord says, "Who do men say that I the Son of man am?" @Matthew 16: 13. We are supposed to know what they are saying. You will understand I do not want to make you read the newspapers, yet the Lord intends us to know what is current that affects Him. Who do you say Jesus is? What is your own judgment? Well, you say, So-and-so says ... and I have just read ... but the Lord would ask, "who do ye say that I am?" The question implies, what have you come to in your own soul? The disciples knew what was being said -- that he was Elias, Jeremias, John: all dignified persons; but men did not know the Person of Christ. Even a Unitarian might say
{125}
this, or that He was greater then Elias. They did not know the Person of Christ, but that is the test for the moment; Who is He? The devil beclouds the truth by dropping his suggestions into the hearts of God's people, so the Lord asks, "But *ye*, who do ye say that I am?" @Matthew 16: 15. It is a very pertinent question. There is not one here but should be able to answer it for himself. He is my Saviour, you say, but who is He? What is your conclusion as to Christ? Well, each of the evangelists, Matthew, Mark, and Luke, gives an answer according to the point of view of his respective gospel. Matthew is concerned about the assembly and gives a full answer; he gives Peter's answer in full; "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God". What I am concerned about is to get you on to the line of knowing who your Saviour is. Scripture is full of inferences as to who He is, inferences as to the deity of Christ; inferences that work into your whole being as you read the Scriptures. If I think of the very names of Jesus, those contain the idea of His deity. Emmanuel means "God with us"; and Jesus, "Jehovah is Saviour". So with every name of Christ, each impresses us with the thought of His deity, whether inferentially or by direct statement. If we cannot answer the Lord's question as to who He is, we are not able to stand up against false teaching, and our footing will be weak as to the foundation. Simon Peter answering said, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God". What a moment that was, and what a moment in our soul's history when we are able to say that, not because Scripture says it, but because we have our feet on that foundation, our salvation depends upon it. The knowledge of Christ as presented here is to be definitely in our souls. What a moment for Christ this was! It is the first time He had been addressed in this way, from the mouth of any creature of His, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus answering said to him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the
{126}
heavens" (verse 17). Now this a blessing the Lord intends to rest on every christian. They are all blessed, of course, in the salvation of their souls, but this is a blessing beyond that; far exceeding the blessing Jacob came into. Isaac told Esau that that blessing was irrevocable, for the blessing he had given Jacob was fixed. Here we have a peculiar blessing. It is not that the Lord lifts up His hands and blesses Peter; the point is that he is blessed in having such light in his soul. See what a man he is, what any christian is! What light you have in your soul! -- and that light in principle, is yourself, for God regards you in that way. Blessed art thou, He would say. There is not a christian here to whom the word does not apply, I mean a christian in the full sense of the word, one in whose soul there is light as to the Person of Christ.
I would refer you to Zacchaeus of Jericho, who is an excellent example of this. He was said to be the chief tax-gatherer to the Jews -- a very odious kind of man; he would not be well thought of, and he was little of stature and rich. The Spirit of God gives us this description, but also says that "he sought to see Jesus who he was". The Lord knew that, and it made him exceedingly interesting to Jesus. It may be that someone listening at this time is saying in his heart, I cannot understand what you are speaking of, I cannot say much as to the Person of Christ, I know what the Scripture says and I believe the current teaching -- like Martha -- yet I have not in my soul what you are speaking of. To any such I would say, Have you a desire to know? If you have not the desire to know Jesus, your christianity is very questionable, but if you have a desire to know who that glorious One is your christianity is assured. He will see to it that you do know. Zacchaeus ran forward and went up the sycamore tree to see Jesus who He was, and the Lord knew that. There was something in his way; he needed adjustment, and you do too. You have not as yet arrived at the knowledge of the Person of Christ, your eye is dim, and the Lord would adjust it;
{127}
He knows what is in your heart. He says, Zacchaeus, you are looking down on Me, you are in a wrong position. If I do not know Christ I am apt to despise Him. I despise Him practically in the way I despise His people. In speaking ill of christians we are speaking ill of Christ; as we despise christians, we despise Christ. They are identified with Christ, they are bearing His reproach, and the flesh does not like that, so they are despised. The Lord said to Saul, "why persecutest thou me?" He identified Himself with His own. So here, He says to Zacchaeus, You are in the wrong position, you are looking down on Me, "make haste and come down, for today I must remain in thy house"; as if to say, I will make myself known to you, I will come into your house, and you can look at Me from every point of view, and see Me as I am to be seen. The Person of Christ is infinite, but He has come into manhood, and we can see Him in all His perfections. How the bride in Canticles can describe her Beloved in His varied beauty! -- she can name every feature that marked Him. So the Lord says here, I will be in your house today, I will abide there. He knew what was in his heart, and Zacchaeus came down and received Him gladly. What an honour it was for him to have this glorious Person in his house! The Lord says, "Today salvation is come to this house". He needed that. The difficulty often is that we are in need of salvation; we are not free from ourselves, not free from the blur that the world causes in our eyes; we want to be saved from these things. Salvation is come, it is just what you need, and you need it in your house.
Zacchaeus stood and said to the Lord, "Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken anything from any man by false accusation, I return him fourfold". He showed he was a righteous man. There are certain questions to be settled before we can arrive at this great question of the knowledge of the Person of Christ. This question of righteousness must be settled. Things are not just right with us; we are not
{128}
clear about this matter. Zacchaeus showed he was; a righteous man, and the Lord says he is a son of Abraham, He links him up with Abraham. He is a true believer, he is of the true family of Abraham, and hence is able to enter into the knowledge of the Person of Christ. The knowledge of Christ extends right back to Abraham's time; Isaac was a figure of it. The knowledge of Christ's Person shone from Abraham onwards. Now here is a son of Abraham, and he is to come into all this. What a heritage is the knowledge of the Person of Christ! Peter acknowledged it fully, and the Lord said, You are blessed. Would that everyone were in the enjoyment of that blessing, the blessing which goes with the understanding and confessing of the Person of Christ! The Lord says, "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona"; he is veritably blessed in himself because of the acknowledgment. He has that light in his soul, and it is for every one of us here tonight. I would not go outside this room without this blessing, the blessing that attaches to the knowledge of Christ as the Son of God. Peter says, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God". The Lord says, "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona". All the colleges in the world, religious or otherwise, could not reveal this to him. It is a spiritual matter. Christians are supposed to be spiritual, their minds are supposed to be renewed in knowledge, after the image of Him who created them, and hence they are able to take in this wonderful thought, the knowledge of the Son of the living God. The Lord says, "flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens". It is a direct transaction between the Father and the believer's soul. Can we afford to be without it? We cannot. It makes us stand up on a firm foundation, it is the most exalted feature of the truth before us, the *Rock*, as the Lord calls it. Peter is not only blessed, but he is part of the building. The Lord says to him, "*thou* art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly". He is Peter -- a stone, the same kind of material as the rock.
{129}
He himself writes later, "To whom coming, a living stone, ... yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house". You see how great all this truth is, how spiritual it is, how attractive it is. Can christians do without it? -- they cannot. To be without it is to be without the greatest heritage. To know Jesus, the Son of the living God, the Christ, the Man that does everything for God, the Man that delights His heart -- the Son of His love -- is incomparable blessing. It is not here His abstract deity, always an inscrutable fact, but what is before us refers to Him as incarnate. That is the Man we have to do with, the Man that has come within our view, who maintains everything for God, and builds up this wonderful structure which He calls "my assembly". It is as become Man that He is the foundation of the assembly, so He says, "on this rock I will build my assembly, and hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it". You will see, dear brethren, that as in the light of all this we are to be consciously in it, and consciously going through; we thus fear nothing, no power in heaven or on earth can overwhelm it.
May God bless His word. It embodies one of the most important things I can put before you; and God will give you understanding as to it as He gave understanding to Peter.
{130}
FAITH AS CHARACTERISTIC
@Mark 16: 1 - 20
J.T. It occurred to me to take up the subject of faith, and how all must be in the region of faith. Service is only effective as carried on on the principle of faith. The jailor at Philippi in @Acts 16 asked, "Sirs, what must I do that I may be saved? And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house"; then something was added to this statement of salvation, "they spoke to him the word of the Lord with all that were in his house". In that house itself there was the state of faith, and of joy too.
This that I speak of is not just the faith that brings one into salvation; it is not a faith that afterwards lapses. It is intended to characterise the believer so that the Lord accredits certain with having it, and it is also intended that it should be continued. Whether individually or household-wise, the believer is to be marked by it. Yet in this 16th chapter of Mark we see how, even with positive ground for faith, our hearts may be unbelieving; and where such a condition arises, individually or household-wise, the Lord must come in. What had preceded had resulted in no testimony being rendered. "They said nothing to any one, for they were afraid", (verse 8.) The Lord takes the matter up and the result is a clear ending, but He holds to the thought of faith right through, drawing our attention to the fact that it is by believing we shall be saved.
C.C.E. What is your thought of faith -- how would you define it for us?
J.T. One always reverts in one's mind to the definition given in @Hebrews 11: "Now faith is the substantiating of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen". It is an assurance of things hoped for, and a conviction of things not seen. In contrast to sight, it is the conviction of things not seen. It stands in relation to
{131}
things in the unseen realm, outside the realm of sight. Adam, the first man, was set up in relation to things seen. There is no word to him about believing, but testimony was there for him to see and the facts given indicate that he was affected by it. When Adam called his wife's name Eve, she was not yet a mother, nor had anything of the judgment pronounced yet been executed. So there was in Adam a conviction that there would be such happenings. There was to be the bruising of the serpent's head; "he shall crush thy head, and thou shalt crush his heel", @Genesis 3: 15. That is how matters began, with a conviction. This is followed up in Abel. Though Adam is not spoken of as having faith, he certainly had conviction. I think it arises in that way. Things are substantiated to us; the assembly is outwardly formed by that principle, the constitution and continuation of the assembly is, of course, also by the Spirit. Eve, too, is convicted by the testimony given by God -- she had the thought of acquiring a man with Jehovah as Cain was born.
H.W.R. Would you say faith for the believer is the receiving of fresh light?
J.T. Yes; and then the state of faith is to continue. Many think of faith as a historic matter, as exercised at a given time, but they neglect the need of the continuance of it as a state in the soul. The jailor took in the word "with all that were in his house". The apostle had spoken a word that would enhance and open up what had been first announced to him. "And he took them the same hour of the night and washed them from their stripes; and was baptised, he and all his straightway. And having brought them into his house he laid the table for them, and rejoiced with all his house, having believed in God". The experience was sustained and the state of faith was in relation to his house; the conditions of faith were in the house. John's gospel works it out in a peculiar way, repudiating what is spurious. There is a kind of faith that is not trustworthy,
{132}
as seen in @John 2: 23 - 25. New birth is the only ground for true faith. "These are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name". Notice that. It is as *believing* that we have life. It is the state of faith.
H.W.R. It is a state in which we are maintained, ready for whatever comes along.
J.T. We refuse or throw off things that cause disease, in that way, but where this state is non-existent, we are not ready to meet such things, and we become damaged.
J.St. How is the state produced in us?
J.T. The beginning of it is the presentation of Christ to our souls. "Believe on the Lord Jesus ..." You receive a clear presentation of the Person, who is to be the object of your faith. Possibly the jailor had never before heard the Name. Now it was presented to him in a beautiful, feeling way. Then the word of the Lord was spoken to him and to all in his house. The apostle sees the opportunity to open up the mind of the Lord, to open up the truth to him. The point is to be in the state of faith and thus within the range of the word of the Lord. The next thing is what move you yourself make, because faith worketh by love (@Galatians 5: 6). Faith being a living thing, there are works. The doing of these is sustenance in itself. "He laid the table for them". It was not just that he saw that the servants did it, but it was an act of love on his own part. Then he "rejoiced with all his house, having believed in God". The state of faith continues.
H.W.R. Of the courtier in Capernaum whose son was sick, it is said in @John 4, "the man believed the word which Jesus said to him, and went his way", and in verse 53, "The father therefore knew that it was in that hour in which Jesus said to him, Thy son lives; and he believed, himself and his whole house".
J.T. That shows the thing growing. He was confirmed in his faith. He had taken notice of what the Lord said, he had noted the time when the Lord spoke,
{133}
and marked how the recovery had transpired exactly as the Lord had said; so his faith was nourished. It is nourished in us continually by subsequent things. The point is to be ready. When the servant brought the message, it was a confirmation to faith. Light comes in, but faith must be sustained -- "for by faith ye stand", @2 Corinthians 1: 24.
J.H.H. Would you say more as to the house coming under the benefit of this faith?
J.T. What a benefit it was to the jailor's house! He rejoiced with his house. The word "house" here involves the household and the believer's faith in relation to it. He would not be an irritable, complaining father, and thus there would be nourishment of faith; a soil in which the children will grow according to God. @Mark 16 is searching to our hearts, for it gives us to see how prone we are to be unbelieving. The most valued of the Lord's disciples are here, and all are marked by unbelief, Mary Magdalene among them. The best are liable to it, and we must not think that others only are meant; it is for us all; the tendency in *us* is to be unbelieving.
J.St. The substance of their conversation had been of an unbelieving character.
J.T. Questions are useless, when the thing to do is to *look*. "Who shall roll us away the stone?" They were not looking. The stone *was* rolled away. There was no gain in that particular talk. Conviction should have been by the position of the stone, and then by their going into the sepulchre.
B.T. We are apt to raise difficulties that are perhaps not there.
J.T. There is no difficulty if you go the whole way, not expecting other people to go and return to tell you. You should go yourself and see. Brethren of course are glad to tell you, but why do you not go yourself? You might, as it were, be staying at home, discussing it; you do not know a brother who can roll that stone away.
{134}
But the stone is no longer there and you will discover this if you go to the sepulchre; you get light there. They look and "see that the stone has been rolled away". Those women were honoured in the journey they took. It is Peter and John who go in, according to John's account, not Mary of Magdala at first. But here in Mark, they go in and see the young man. That is remarkable. When they are looking for the Lord, they see a young man, and he is peculiarly clothed. He has cheering words for them, and knows what he is saying. He is a young man, but saying the right things, clothed in white, suggesting purity in service. He is there to *impress* you. Before you see the Lord, you see this person.
C.C.E. What does that signify to us?
J.T. The Lord is not here. There is no suggestion here of an immediate meeting. The message is "go, tell his disciples and Peter, he goes before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him, as he said to you" (verse 7). I think what is presented in the young man is to have its bearing *during the period until you see the Lord*. For each of us the application is that I am to be that young man, *taking the Lord's place here in testimony*. The Lord has definitely risen (verse 6). It is a fixed matter. The young man is a person who can testify and tell you about Him. There is with him definiteness and purity. If you are prepared to give a message, these are necessary attributes. The dispensation is set on foot, not in the old, but in the young, and that is because it is to go on.
J.St. He was the vessel of testimony for the moment.
J.T. I think he represents the dispensation. "There shall ye see him, as he said to you". He told you. You should know. You did not pay attention. There is adjustment in all this. "But go, tell his disciples and Peter, he goes before you into Galilee". It is not that He will see you as He says in John, but that "there shall ye see him". That is, we are left here in a scene of responsibility, of heavy responsibility. The place Galilee is a good way off. Things are not made easy for
{135}
us, but what we have before us, how glorious and how, great! How worth the while to go in definitely for it!
H.W.R. Mary's message in John conveyed a wholly new thought to them. This in Mark was what was mainly already known to them, but not received in faith.
J.T. There is no distance to travel in John's account, nor in Luke's. Here in Mark what is stressed is that it is an important matter, involving sacrifice, but how worth while, for we see the Lord there! It is a peculiar garb in which the young man is seen, and he is on the right side of the sepulchre. "They saw a young man sitting on the right" -- the place of power. This is to be understood by the levites, by those who are to serve. We begin by marking what is presented to us in that young man. There has to be both purity and definiteness in service; we should be able to answer questions accurately, clearly, and in purity.
J.H.H. David brought the age of the Levites down to twenty, emphasising this same idea of youthfulness in service.
J.T. Yes, in @Numbers 8 the Levites are presented to Jehovah. Twenty-two thousand there are, and they had been told what to do. "This shall be the service of the families of the Gershonites, in serving, and in carrying". It was all in the sovereignty of God. Chapter 5 had dealt with the leper; "both male and female shall ye put out; outside the camp shall ye put them". And in the woman and her husband, (verse 12), we have the thought of the Lord's jealousy introduced, His holy jealousy in love. Then in chapter 7 the princes indicate the richness and unity that marked Israel. It is then that the Levites are brought and presented to Jehovah, and He is so pleased with them that "Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying, This is that which concerneth the Levites: from twenty-five years old and upward shall he come to labour in the work of the service of the tent of meeting", @Numbers 8: 23, 24. God made the age less, evidently because the Levites were pleasing to Him. The Levites had been
{136}
offered to God and He found them so acceptable to Him that, as it were, God says, I would have more of those. God is calling to the young, but on His own terms, of course. Then as our brother has mentioned, by David's last words the age of the Levites for service was further reduced -- there were to be still more of them. The position of Solomon, one young and tender, the son on the throne, bore on this. There was no jealousy with David. He was not an old man saying in effect to the younger, You must wait until I die. But he would say, Come and have part with me in this service. Yet, in those young Levites, there would be subjection to, and respect for age. God wants the service distributed as widely as possible.
J.H.H. The colt and foal are mentioned in Matthew.
J.T. Only in Matthew are they mentioned, for that is the assembly gospel, but although the young are to work with the old, they must not seek to supersede them. The women at the sepulchre represent the aspect of feelings, the affectionate side. What is presented in the young man is correct position, and then purity and definiteness in service. He would rely on the power of God; this is seen in his being on the *right* side. That is the principle of our service. The empty sepulchre speaks to us of God's power in resurrection. "The surpassing greatness of his power towards us who believe, according to the working of the might of his strength, in which he wrought in the Christ in raising him from among the dead", @Ephesians 1: 19, 20. This dispensation was inaugurated in power and in youthfulness. The disciples became old, but they began young. Paul was called when he was a young man, though there came a time when he wrote of himself to Philemon, "I rather exhort, being such a one as Paul the aged", @Philemon 9.
C.C.E. Nearly all distinguished servants of the Lord begin when young.
J.T. I have often thought of that. They are taken
{137}
according to foreknowledge and the specified levitical age shows that God would use them in the prime period of their lives.
J.S. What does the Lord's appearing (verses 9, 10), bring out in effect?
J.T. The ineffectiveness of the efforts of these women to reach the truth is brought out in the first part of this chapter. In spite of the message they had received, in spite of what they had seen in the sepulchre, look at what Mark has to tell us of those women! (verse 8): "And trembling and excessive amazement possessed them, and they said nothing to any one, for they were afraid". That was the state in which they were. It was not faith. There could be no testimony to God from those in such a state. All that had preceded had not been effective in their souls. A brother does his best, but the general state of a given meeting is such that it requires the Lord's own hand to put things right. When you come to a point like that in a crisis, it is best to admit it. You find things not nearly what you had thought they were. Because of strong leadership and spiritual ministry, things go on well outwardly, but in a crisis you are surprised to find how persons are governed by what is false, and by fleshly feeling. Here are these women -- could you get any like them in devotion? Yet look at their state! They are no longer free people, but *possessed* by amazement. That is their general state.
C.C.E. Surely when the young man sitting on the right and clothed in a white robe spoke, that should have allayed their alarm! His words should have encouraged them, but it was then that excessive amazement possessed them.
J.T. We get carried along by ministry, but unless it affects us morally, when a crisis arises uncertainty and confusion will ensue, whereas if we are with God, profiting by what He ministers to us, we shall see "all things clearly". The absence of this clearness of vision is one of the most distressing symptoms as troubles
{138}
arise. It is disastrous in brothers who are in the position of leadership. Instead of judging by the *facts* of a difficult case, which the law of God's house requires, we are governed by our personal relations to, or knowledge of the persons involved, or what others tell us of them.
B.T. The devotion of these women was not in question.
J.T. But what a state of unbelief! Am I characterised by these things in a crisis? Does darkness lay hold of me? The Lord allows difficulties to arise to expose our *state*. Acknowledging our weakness, we shall all say, if we are wise, The only One who can put the matter right is the Lord; and He will come in as in verse 9. Even His movements seem for a while ineffective, the unbelief is so great. Nevertheless, ultimately He secures His end with them. He brings us there to the point of realising that we thought we had more spirituality than we really had. We might as well come to that point and turn to the Lord about it. Some critics say that verses 9 to the end should not be included in the chapter, but they are Scripture. They strikingly show how the Lord effects complete victory when things seem to have gone to the wall.
C.C.E. It would have been a terrible calamity, surely, for the gospel to end at verse 8!
J.T. I have often thought that. Mark says, "he appeared first to Mary of Magdala", as if He had selected that particular person. She had been among the others, but she shows up better by herself. The practice of sisters getting together does not help; it is a wrong principle. They should keep with the brothers. Mary went to the brothers at once. She *ran* to them, according to John's account.
C.C.E. I am concerned about sisters meeting together in a crisis, it does much harm.
J.T. I have seen it. Let the sisters keep by the brothers. The head of the woman is the man; and of the man, Christ. That is the divine order.
{139}
C.C.E. I think we have proved by experience what you have said.
J.R. What is there for us in the fact that Mary was the first here to be recovered?
J.T. She represents what God usually has in such circumstances -- one who is true and hence easily adjusted. She had been the subject of a great work of the Lord. It is mentioned of her -- "out of whom he had cast seven demons". The Lord had so wrought in her that their position had become untenable -- a striking fact. It was her *state*. John's account follows this up particularly. Here Mark would set out the truth as to the leading brothers. That is what we need to keep before us; and that in spite of the facts stated He made them trustworthy, confiding the testimony to them.
H.W.R. Here, it looks as though the women did not carry the message at all.
J.T. Of Mary it is said, "*She* went and brought word to those that had been with him, who were grieving and weeping. And when these heard that he was alive and had been seen of her, they disbelieved it". Those who had been with Him! They disbelieved such a testimony! "Neither did they believe them". There is nothing to be said for the leading brothers here. When the Lord takes up the matter He brings the state of unbelief to an end. Mark says, "And after these things he was manifested in another form". What grace! His love would go the full length, even to the extent of taking another form. He will never stop till He reaches His end with us. Though it looks hopeless, the Lord is not giving up.
H.W.R. Each case needed the Lord's own personal intervention.
J.T. Some of us were noticing in @Luke 22 the Lord's power in dealing with every situation that can arise. The disciples were asleep while the Lord was praying in agony. He says, "Why sleep ye? rise up and pray that ye enter not into temptation", @Luke 22: 46. That
{140}
was the word for that situation. To Judas the Lord said, "Judas, deliverest thou up the Son of man with a kiss?" That settled his case morally. And Peter smites the servant of the high priest. "Jesus answering said, Suffer thus far; and having touched his ear, he healed him". That word was intended for the whole dispensation, to settle such a matter. The Reformers missed that bit of instruction, although it was there for them. The chapter is a great array of the power of the Lord to deal with any and every situation that arises. To the captains of the temple He says, "When I was day by day with you in the temple ye did not stretch out your hands against me". They were acting unfairly, as enemies do, and that word settled it. Peter denied the Lord, and the cock crew. "And the Lord, turning round, looked at Peter; and Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he said to him, Before the cock crow thou shalt deny me thrice. And Peter, going forth without, wept bitterly". In principle he is restored. There is no matter that He will not settle. There is never a difficulty among the saints that is settled but by the Lord coming in. It is settled by His hand of power. In verse 14 the Lord has to reproach them "with their unbelief and hardness of heart". This is a challenge to all, "Because they had not believed those who had seen him risen". We are not to depend on more instruction, it is a question of state. The Lord takes it up with them. How quickly He sets them right! "And he said to them, Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation". That follows on directly. It is wonderful that He could say that immediately. He knew exactly the potentiality of each of the disciples. His knowledge of us is exact. Peter said, "Yea, Lord; *thou* knowest", @John 21: 15.
N.G. We need faith in a living Christ. These were unbelieving, thinking only of a dead Christ. They would have kept on mourning.
J.T. They were full of sorrow, but after all it was in unbelief. Although the Lord would value their grief on
{141}
account of Him, what is the outcome of unbelief cannot help. Faith should permanently mark the believer. We read of "a *believing* woman", and again of "the unfeigned faith which has been in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and in thy mother Eunice", @2 Timothy 1: 5. Faith *in thee* -- the thing is there characteristically.
Ques. Would "Go into all the world" apply today?
J.T. Here the point is to "preach the glad tidings to all the creation". "Go into all the world" is that the preaching is to go on in spite of opposition. Man had a link with God as His *creature*. The world referred to thus is the place of the preaching, but it is in opposition to it. The preaching is to the creatures of God.
Rem. We need faith for that.
J.T. All that follows is to encourage the servants. "And they, going forth, preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word by the signs following upon it", @Mark 16: 20. There is spiritual power which follows us when upon this course. The Lord is here tonight helping us. The whole course of things in view here in @Mark 16 is supported, and signs followed; all is realised in the realm of faith.
C.C.E. The Lord is at the right hand of power to carry on to the end.
J.St. The idea of power specially belongs to Mark. The young man was in keeping with it.
J.T. He represents Mark's view. There is no giving in, even in the worst situation that can be thought of. The Lord stands by us in power, as we stand by His testimony. There is nothing too hard for Him.
S.S. In what way do we get confirmation by signs today?
J.T. There is what corresponds. There are evidences of the Lord's power in this room. You see the saints getting on in their souls. It is evidence to faith that God is here. There is no shadow of doubt as to what is going on. The signs are public. These, of course,
{142}
were literal miraculous signs, of which we have no need today.
All our operations are to be carried on in the faith of the Lord's session at the right hand of God: "And they, going forth, preached everywhere, the Lord working with them". That is the position until the end, from the standpoint, not of the assembly here, but of the levites.
Ques. Must you have the breaking of bread before the preaching?
J.T. The assembly existed before the preaching at Pentecost, but generally the preaching is needed to procure people to break bread. Peter did not preach before the assembly was there. Nevertheless, "Philip, going down to a city of Samaria, preached the Christ to them", @Acts 8: 5. There had been no breaking of bread at Samaria.
C.C.E. It looks as though the disciples went further afield than did the apostles themselves.
J.T. Yes, after Stephen's death, "all were scattered into the countries of Judaea and Samaria except the apostles" (@Acts 8); then later Peter and John came down to Samaria, (verses 14, 15). We do not get details of others, but those scattered at the time of Stephen's death went as far as Antioch, and preached, and many turned to the Lord.
H.W.R. Can we count on verse 18 now?
J.T. It has to be understood spiritually; yet, as in christendom, we are certainly kept from terrible things so that we may carry on the preaching and service of God generally. What deadly things have existed in the professing body through the ages! Now we have the Lord accompanying the word with power. The Lord opens up the position to us. It is Christ at the right hand of God. "The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem", @Ecclesiastes 1: 1. Wherever we are, we can count on Christ at the right hand of God to support us as in His service.
{143}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD
@Romans 8: 1 - 11, 20, 21; @Romans 15: 1 - 7
J.T. The kingdom of God is presented in Scripture in a variety of ways, and is a very extensive subject, so that it cannot be compassed in one meeting, but I would dwell on our entrance into it, and what it is that we enter; and how as having entered, *we* in a sense become the kingdom. John says, "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom", @Revelation 1: 5.
I think it would help us at this meeting, in view of others, to dwell a little on this truth, for many things militate against our apprehending intelligently what is meant by it. Although the term is familiar to us, its significance is not much known. Its practical application may be seen, but not so as to be distinguished intelligently.
When God began with the idea of a kingdom in Adam, giving him dominion (@Genesis 1: 28), He tested him as to whether he could give suitable names to the animals of the field and the fowls of heaven, and evidently Adam qualified in that, for God altered none of the names which he gave. God allows us to take as much part in His realm as we are equal to.
@Romans 5 helps us as to initial ideas concerning the kingdom. In @John 3 we have the idea -- first of *seeing* it, and then of *entering* it. @Romans 14 tells us explicitly that "the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit". That is to be arrived at, and this chapter presents the idea of "access by faith into this favour in which we stand" after the unfolding of the gospel in its doctrine in chapters 3 and 4. It opens with our entrance into it. Paul speaks of the character of christians, and, making his subject more attractive, speaks buoyantly. Those who read this epistle should be drawn into divine things, learning to name them aright. The term "kingdom" would be readily understood in Rome, as it was the centre
{144}
of the government of the world of that day. How much more necessary it was for the saints in Rome to understand the principles underlying the kingdom of God into which believers come. "Therefore having been justified on the principle of faith, we have peace towards God through our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom we have also access by faith into this favour in which we stand", @Romans 5: 1, 2. We *have* access. The earlier part of the epistle has to do with God's movement toward us. It is the "gospel of God ... concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord", and the unfolding of His righteousness and power in chapters 3 and 4. Then in chapter 5 there is the question of *our* movement, which perhaps is not so much noticed as it should be. There is presented the idea of our having access. Do we take advantage of that?
H.W.R. Is "this favour in which we stand" the kingdom? @Romans 5: 2.
J.T. It is one of the features making it attractive. The nearer to God you get on this line, the more liberty you have. It begins in Romans with being in favour with God and ends in Ephesians where we have access to the Father.
C.C.E. What is the entrance into the kingdom that is presented to us in this epistle?
J.T. The beginning of it is a sense of favour. John quotes the Lord as saying, "Except any one be born of water and of Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God", @John 3: 5. So that it is a question of what is effected in us in relation to the kingdom, but the thing is there for our entry into it. Romans does not raise the question of birth, but it is made the underlying principle in the believer. What do you say as to that?
C.C.E. Certainly. John does not tell us so distinctly what the kingdom is, but that we enter in. Paul describes it.
J.T. In Romans, and particularly in this chapter 5, it is all through Christ's instrumentality, what is opened up through Christ, what He has effected for us,
{145}
what has come in for us through our Lord Jesus Christ. That is a title which involves the kingdom.
J.S. You spoke of being able to name things. Is that in relation to our entering the kingdom?
J.T. Yes. As reading Romans, one ought to be able to name things; for this would show that we understand our characteristics.
L.W. Naming implies intelligence.
J.T. Exactly. You see the need for intelligence. God "breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and Man became a living soul", @Genesis 2: 7. Adam thus was intelligent, and this was shown, as we have said, in his naming the animals.
H.W.R. Is it only as indwelt by the Spirit that we can name things?
J.T. It begins with new birth. It is remarkable how soon a child begins to speak as others do. You might train a dog, but it will never come to what a child will. The faculty is not in him. John shows what is effected in us, so that we are constituted able to name things. Take the American constitution as an illustration. A *citizen* would be supposed to know and understand its legislative and administrative features, and be able to use its current phrases in speaking of the government. He is rendered able to do so by coming daily into contact with it, and should he come to Washington, because he is a citizen he has the privilege, at certain times, of shaking hands with the President. A citizen has a sense of favour, of being brought into all the advantages of the State; he is conversant with whatever is there, the country's wealth and its society. The more he knows of it, the more richly he enjoys his citizenship. So in spiritual things you become the richer in your soul as you can name what you have come into. It has a delivering effect from man's kingdom. You have come into what is so much greater.
J.H.H. In that way the kingdom is a means to an end?
J.T. "So also grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord", @Romans 5: 21.
{146}
It leads up to eternal life and to the assembly. A sense of divine favour is a very great thing. It has an effect upon you. You want to spread that thought and also to show it to others. You must have discernment to see what you are coming into. John says that, first you see it and then you enter into it. "Except any one be born anew he cannot see the kingdom of God", @John 3: 3. "Except any one be born of water and of Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God", @John 3: 5.
In @Colossians 1: 13, it is "the kingdom of the Son of his love", a further and more exalted thought -- we are *translated* into it. Here we have access into this favour in which we stand, we move into it.
J.H.H. In presenting the kingdom, is your thought that you present all these details so that souls enter into it more thoroughly?
J.T. You make it attractive, acquainting the believer with the power of God in raising Christ and with the lengths to which God went on his behalf. "Him who has raised from among the dead Jesus our Lord, who has been delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification", @Romans 4: 25. We dwell on the power that is effective on our behalf. The earlier teaching of the epistle would simplify the idea of favour, and in the sense of that "we boast in hope of the glory of God", @Romans 5: 2. One is in favour and has a great outlook, so great that he is boasting in it. Paul calls upon us to think of these things and how worth while it is to go in for them.
L.W. What is the glory of God in the hope of which we boast?
J.T. What God is, shining out in the future. It is God coming out in the millennium. Of course Romans does not touch on the assembly properly. Here it has the general significance of the coming out of God and the establishment of His kingdom publicly.
J.M.B. Has this a bearing on verse 3, where we are said to glory in tribulations? Does it correspond with,
{147}
"Jesus ... who, in view of the joy lying before him, endured the cross, having despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God", @Hebrews 12: 2?
J.T. Yes. A great prospect is set before us. "Boast in hope of the glory of God". Thus it is future, but the passage continues, "And not only that, but we also boast in tribulations". That is to say, though circumstances now are adverse, there is before us a great prospect entirely in our favour. In the meantime, things are outwardly against us; the very confession of Christ brings persecution, but we boast in these things. We see how much the hope of the glory of God laid hold on Paul -- he boasted in tribulation.
J.M.B. It would help us in regard to tribulation to realise what Jesus endured "in view of the joy lying before him".
J.T. Paul told the disciples in Lystra and Iconium and Antioch "that through many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God", @Acts 14: 22. He reminded the Hebrews how "having been enlightened, ye endured much conflict of sufferings", @Hebrews 10: 32. Through *many* tribulations, says Paul. We may as well accept that, yea, boast in it, and in verse 5 of @Romans 5 he gives the reason. The idea of knowledge comes into it -- the intelligence we have by which we name these things. Tribulation is different from the glory of God -- which I can also name. It makes a great difference if I am experiencing these things *knowingly*. Then I am not confused and baffled by my circumstances. Eternal life comes at the end of the chapter. Tribulation is pretty sure to come on Monday, following on Lord's day. I put a name to it and I am not overwhelmed by it, because, though the devil causes it, I know God has allowed it.
J.M.B. "I went down to the potter's house; and behold, he wrought a work on the wheels", @Jeremiah 18: 3.
J.T. It is one of the things used for that purpose. An intelligent christian knows what he is experiencing
{148}
in his circumstances and the enemy gets no advantage. "In all these things we more than conquer through him that has loved us", @Romans 8: 37.
H.W.R. If we are intelligent, we shall neither faint under tribulation nor despise it.
J.T. A young christian does not stop to analyse, and so gets baffled, but tribulation works endurance, experience, and hope. What are they but *workers for us*? It is a great advantage to the young believer to realise that these actually work for us.
N.R. "But we *do* know that all things work together for good to those who love God", @Romans 8: 28. This brings out the spirit of buoyancy.
J.T. That is how it works out. The teaching is cumulative.
C.M.M. If a believer stops short of tribulation, he will get no further.
J.T. If you do not use these workers, you make no headway; you must come back to them. Tribulation discourages many young believers -- because they do not know what it is for.
C.C.E. You would not limit the tribulation referred to as that which is endured for the sake of the testimony?
J.T. I think it includes all tribulation. Paul said, "What persecutions I endured", @2 Timothy 3: 11. As soon as a christian takes his stand, the devil says, I will upset that. He brings in a wave of tribulation. Now intelligence in believers enables us to name that as a worker in our favour.
C.C.E. Those Thessalonians were troubled in their souls because of tribulation, @1 Thessalonians 3: 3.
J.T. Quite so. Those epistles had that specially in view. In the second Paul can say, "so that we ourselves make our boast in you in the assemblies of God for your endurance and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations, which ye are sustaining", @2 Thessalonians 1: 4. They had not been intelligent as to this at the first.
{149}
C.C.E. They had not apprehended what they would have to contend with.
H.W.R. "And they came to Marah, and could not drink the waters of Marah, for they were bitter; ... And the people murmured ... and Jehovah shewed him wood, and he cast it into the waters, and the waters became sweet ... and there he tested them", @Exodus 15: 23 - 25.
J.T. It turned out for their salvation. Jehovah *shewed* Moses. The thing was there, but he had not seen it. It was what we have been saying, there are things all round, but we do not see them and God shows them to us. Then we have to name them. The passage here runs on to hope, "hope does not make ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us", @Romans 5: 5. Everything helps us because of the love of God. The Holy Spirit is able, through Paul, to call our attention to all these things, and they culminate in "eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord".
V.P. Is this all individual experience?
J.T. Yes; the individual coming into it. We have the collective thought in chapter 12. In this section believers are like the boards of the tabernacle. God said to Moses, "the boards for the tabernacle thou shalt make of acacia-wood, standing up", @Exodus 26: 15. That is remarkable. A carpenter does not make them so. "Standing up" is a spiritual thought. This chapter shows how young christians are made trustworthy, so that God can hang things upon them. The curtains of the tabernacle were supported by the boards. How great a thing to have the love of God in the *heart*!
J.H.H. The experiences mentioned in @Romans 5 go on. When I reach the love of God I am not finished with tribulation.
J.T. All things work *together*. Here they are working one after another. God has set them up in relation to one another. Things are in our favour. Everything that comes up in the government of God is in our favour. As
{150}
you apprehend this you are a board of the tabernacle standing up; a man upon whom God can put something in the way of testimony. The collective thought is reached in chapter 12: 5: "we, being many, are one body in Christ". "In Christ" is our status. When we pursue the principles in this chapter we are able to name things as they come before us: Paul says, "I speak as to intelligent persons: do *ye* judge what I say", @1 Corinthians 10: 15. We survey the realm of God and are able to name what is therein. Satan also is a worker, under the Lord, for our good. "Jehovah said to Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job?", @Job 1: 8. Satan had, and God allowed him certain latitude, but only to the extent needed for Job's good: "Only upon himself put not forth thy hand". It was all in view of Job's deliverance. For us, too, discipline is ordered, so that God can spread out His thoughts before us for our spiritual apprehension and growth in Christ.
J.M.B. As one has such experiences he moves on into the divine thoughts.
J.T. It all leads up to sonship (chapter 8). "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God". Sons have knowledge corresponding with the Father.
J.H.H. Chapter 14: 4, with reference to the weak brother says, "he shall be made to stand; for the Lord is able to make him stand".
J.T. That involves the kingdom. In that chapter the kingdom of God is *named*. It is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit. Chapter 12 shows the saints contemplated as *overcoming* evil with good. They are possessed with the good. The Lord Himself overcame evil with good. None of the world's administrators do that, they merely endeavour to restrain evil with physical force. In the kingdom of God evil is overcome with good. A christian knows also how to behave with regard to the external government. We are not radical in opinion. We respect what is of God. The book of Daniel helps a christian to see these kingdoms in perspective.
{151}
God ordained the four great monarchies in view of christianity, in view of what this epistle teaches. The world is said to be reconciled (chapter 11: 15); this is in view of the testimony of the gospel. In keeping with this "God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself", @2 Corinthians 5: 19. Alongside of that is the truth, "behold, the kingdom of God is in the midst of you", @Luke 17: 21. Romans opens up that very thing; the presence of the Spirit here in the saints involves the kingdom. It was in Rome, the metropolis of the empire -- a kingdom in the midst of the kingdom of this world. Yet we pray for Caesar and his servants all the time the kingdom of God is here. What can Caesar do for a weak brother? He is no good for Caesar's army, but in the kingdom of God he has a place and is cared for. So in chapter 14 we get the kingdom and the fact that it functions in the saints. We are to exhibit the features of the kingdom; exercising its power in a practical way.
J.S. Is eternal life the normal life of the kingdom? It is based on the reign of grace.
J.T. It is the great end in view; "the end eternal life". "The act of favour of God, eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord", @Romans 6: 23. In chapter 5, it is *through* Jesus Christ our Lord, but in chapter 6 it is *in* Him. It is morally outside of the world.
J.R. As we cease to do evil, do we become stronger as we move on?
J.T. Yes. We specially become rich in *goodness*: "despisest thou the riches of his goodness?" (@Romans 2: 4.) We cannot overcome evil with good if we have not the good. That is the idea. We *must* have it. The saints are made a kingdom so that God may set down in Rome what is greater than Rome. "Forasmuch as thou sawest that a stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it broke in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold -- the great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter", @Daniel 2: 45. "And the stone that smote the image became a
{152}
great mountain, and filled the whole earth", @Daniel 2: 35. All this exists today in a moral sense, and affords the means of moral superiority in the people of God.
N.G. Are we made conscious of being in the kingdom by the love of God being shed abroad in our hearts?
J.T. Yes, although it implies more than the kingdom; it links on with God's purpose (chapter 8: 28). The love of God gives lustre to all that you do or say, it gives us a glorious character, we are to serve one another in love. Christ is set before us in the epistle as the great example of those serving in the kingdom: "*We* ought, we that are strong, to bear the infirmities of the weak ... the Christ also did not please himself", @Romans 15: 1 - 3.
W.S. In @Romans 14 we are told what the kingdom is. Then that "he that in this serves the Christ is acceptable to God and approved of men", @Romans 14: 18.
J.T. We turn round as it were, having come into it, we become part of the kingdom. He has made us a kingdom -- obviously to set out this great principle.
V.P. Peter says, "Beloved, take not as strange the fire of persecution which has taken place amongst you for your trial, as if a strange thing was happening to you; but as ye have share in the sufferings of Christ, rejoice", @1 Peter 4: 12, 13.
J.T. That would qualify us to function in the kingdom. Many give way in tribulation and hence become ineffective in this sense. The Lord Himself said, "when tribulation or persecution happens on account of the word, he is immediately offended", @Matthew 13: 21. The word is given up. When it is received it works effectively in those who believe (@1 Thessalonians 2: 13); then tribulation is accepted and is a worker for us. The throne of grace relates to the kingdom. We may draw near to it with *boldness* to obtain mercy and find grace for seasonable help. How available and how great is this source of supply!
{153}
MOTHERS IN ISRAEL
@Judges 5: 6, 7; @Judges 4: 4 - 6, 7; @2 Samuel 20: 16 - 22
J.T. I thought it would be helpful to pursue the subject of mothers in Israel. Deborah and the wise woman of Abel seem to represent the thought. No others are called *mothers in Israel*, though Scripture furnishes us with many examples of those who *could be* so styled. The maternal side works out in the formation of the assembly, and the thought goes so far as to appear in connection with "the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem", @Hebrews 12: 22. "The Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother", @Galatians 4: 26.
The beginning of the subject is found in Eve's remark when she "bore Cain, and said, I have acquired a man with Jehovah" (@Genesis 4: 1); that is to say, with the help of Jehovah. Perhaps the word "babe" had not yet come into the human vocabulary, but the use of the word "man" is of spiritual significance. It is indicative of what is potentially seen in a babe, in a male child. The Lord spoke of it Himself -- "she no longer remembers the trouble, on account of the joy that a man has been born into the world", @John 16: 21. There are those who speak of preserving a child as a little child, with its more pleasing traits, but the potentiality of the male child is what should be in mind; and if that is applied to the babe spiritually, the same is true. The important thing to bear in mind is that each should be a man, no longer a babe but full-grown, for the assembly can only be maintained by such. The maternal thought worked out leads to what is collective. Each of us is to be nurtured in view of manhood, otherwise it will be with us as Deborah describes the condition in Israel, "The roads were unused, and the travellers on highways went by crooked paths. The villages ceased in Israel", @Judges 5: 6, 7. The word "villages" is suggestive of assemblies, or meetings. Without men, we cannot have these. The
{154}
babe condition, abnormally continued, disintegrates and tends to make the thought of an assembly to cease.
In @Exodus 16, immediately after "the whole assembly of the children of Israel came into the wilderness", the manna is spoken of, and it is stipulated that each member of the household in Israel was to be provided with an omer of manna, the divine thought for each being the same. God has no other thought but that we should be men, and hence a babe is viewed in the light of what he is potentially. God has no thought of the little ones *remaining* little ones.
H.W.R. Is your thought that if there be no mothers in Israel, the assembly will not prosper?
J.T. Yes; manifestly it cannot. In her song. Deborah looks back to the days of Shamgar, and the thought of the assembly typically is not there. The roads were unused, the spiritual highways were not used, people went along byways, and villages ceased in Israel.
J.H.H. Had the Lord this thought in mind in speaking to the Father of "the men whom thou gavest me out of the world", @John 17: 6?
J.T. *Men* -- they were not men spiritually when they were given, but in His mind they were so regarded. In @Matthew 11: 25, the Lord calls them babes. "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes". This would be relative to "the wise and prudent". *They* were the wise, spiritually. On leaving the world and going to be with the Father, the Lord regards them as men. Yet they were to need much from the Father, for much was to be put upon them. The weight of testimony was such as only men could bear; men only would be eligible for such a charge. The term "men", while conveying an order of being, is also used to signify fully developed christians, and is inclusive of sisters. When the Lord arose, it was to women that He first appeared.
H.W.R. Is He not still hiding things from the wise
{155}
and prudent? From that point of view, we would desire to be babes.
J.T. Yes. The allusion there is to what we are from the standpoint of men in the world, from that of their religious leaders. Matthew's idea carries with it the thought of impressionableness of what is of God. Peter exhorts us in his epistle to "desire earnestly the pure mental milk of the word" (@1 Peter 2: 2) as "newborn babes". Viewed thus we absorb what is spiritual, and are open to receive divine impressions.
R.B. In relation to the assembly, should we not be as the little child whom the Lord set in their midst in @Matthew 18?
J.T. The Lord had in mind there the thought of simplicity and transparency. He "set it in their midst" -- to present forcibly to them His idea for the kingdom, that there should be transparency and simplicity. We always should retain these traits, even as advanced christians.
L.W. Solomon prayed to Jehovah, "I am but a little child: I know not to go out and to come in", @1 Kings 3: 7. Should not that mark us?
J.T. That is the thought. Solomon was perhaps farther on than any in Israel at that time, but his was the attitude of mind that God would honour. How soon he had the divine answer!
C.C.E. What would you say are the features of a mother in Israel?
J.T. I think one would have a sense of the need for men in the sense of which we have been speaking. Deborah has to make the move herself to get Barak who, though he stood out well afterwards, was somewhat wanting at this juncture. "She sent and called Barak ... and said to him, Hath not Jehovah the God of Israel commanded?" @Judges 4: 6. That is the state of her mind in view of the need in Israel. "And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of Jehovah", @Judges 4: 1. For twenty years had Sisera mightily oppressed Israel
{156}
with his nine hundred chariots of iron. That was the situation. What could meet it? That would fill her mind. To lead an army against the powerful oppressor was a serious matter. We have the description of Deborah in @Judges 4: 4, "a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, judged Israel at that time. And she dwelt under the palm-tree of Deborah between Ramah and Bethel in mount Ephraim; and the children of Israel came up to her for judgment". That is how the matter stood. She was serving profitably even in days of oppression, but could she overthrow this oppressor? "Hath not Jehovah the God of Israel commanded?" Is anyone able to take it up? Was Barak? One can understand the yearnings of a mother's heart with regard to the terrible oppression under which Israel had laboured for twenty years. Her exercise would be as to how that could be met. Adverse things are always happening around us; the mother-heart is concerned. What has Jehovah commanded? Can we carry it out? Paul wrote to the Corinthians, "If anyone thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", @1 Corinthians 14: 37. "And *I*, brethren, have not been able to speak to you as to spiritual, but as to fleshly; as to babes in Christ", @1 Corinthians 3: 1. Paul could not talk to *them* as to men. How would they meet the enemy that was coming in like a flood? Paul would exercise the assembly in Corinth with the thought of how the enemy was working and how he was to be met.
W.S. There was need for men to quell the inroads of the enemy.
J.T. "There is not a wise person among you", Paul had to tell the Corinthians. The incestuous person had been left untouched; the matter was unjudged for want of a man. Is there no man? God said, "Wherefore did I come, and there was no man? I called, and there was none to answer?" @Isaiah 50: 2. Deborah says, "Hath not Jehovah the God of Israel commanded?"
{157}
H.W.R. It takes a mother in Israel to feel the situation.
J.T. It is symbolic of spiritual feeling in the assembly.
J.H.H. Did not the apostle himself set forth that element?
J.T. He spoke of the Galatians in chapter 4 as "my children, of whom I again travail in birth until Christ shall have been formed in you". That is to say, until they were as fully developed men. It is a most crying need. In moving about, one is made conscious of it; troubles drag on because Christians have come under the influence of darkening thoughts which would never have had admission to their minds had they been men.
What is presented to us here is a collective thought which you will find worked out in Galatians. "The Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother", @Galatians 4: 26. Not in heaven, but *above*; it is the thought of moral elevation belonging to the spiritually fully-developed man, who is above bias and natural feeling.
P.G. Hannah was before Jehovah that He would "give unto thy handmaid a man child", @1 Samuel 1: 11.
J.T. Hannah had before her the thought of the house of God and of the conditions existent there. Eli thought she was drunken (@1 Samuel 1: 13). He was not a man according to God, or he would have discerned that she was a woman who felt things before God. She understood what was suitable; and although Eli came round to her thought, he was not able to give a lead to the people of God. What disintegration there would be under such a man! Samuel was a beautiful contribution to the house of God, even in childhood. "And the boy Samuel grew on, and was in favour both with Jehovah and also with men", @1 Samuel 2: 26.
J.H.H. Such men are to be produced by the maternal element in the assembly.
J.T. Yes, and the assembly being always under pressure they are always needed. The situation is
{158}
always militant; it is the present position. Who can carry on, except men? We must promote that thought, and be no longer babes.
F.J.F. Jael also took action against Sisera.
J.T. Deborah alludes to her in her song by way of contrast to her own service; but now she acted under a maternal influence. She was in the spiritual current of the moment. One may compare this with the way in which the Corinthians developed and became more than they had seemed to be. Jael, although wanting earlier, now takes a triumphant part, and Barak became a mighty warrior. The Corinthian saints, through the apostle's faithful efforts, come into line with him. He had urged them to quit themselves like men.
C.M.M. What do you consider had been lacking in the days of Shamgar?
J.T. Shamgar had acted individually, but he was a mighty man. "He smote the Philistines, six hundred men, with an ox-goad. And he also delivered Israel", @Judges 3: 31. He represents an individual acting by himself. Many such have arisen, for example, Luther and Calvin, who give no evidence of ever having understood the assembly. They never moved on assembly lines, and so the highways of God were not taken. Now God comes in. He brought in the collective thought which requires men in this sense to maintain it, for a tremendous struggle was involved. It is a conflict that has continued ever since and it requires the constant power of manhood to maintain the collective thought. The word is, "Hath not Jehovah the God of Israel commanded?" The Lord says, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me", @John 14: 21. Paul's first epistle to the Corinthians corresponds to Deborah's word to Barak. There was oppression in Corinth. Paul says, "For this reason I have sent to you Timotheus, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ", @1 Corinthians 4: 17. This is as
{159}
much as to say, 'I set a *man* in your midst, one like myself'.
H.W.R. The first step in recovery is obedience to the commandment of the Lord.
J.T. Anyone who takes that up shows his manhood. As soon as we act on the commandment, the Lord is with us and makes use of us.
R.D. It should be encouraging to each of us to see that Timothy was naturally a timid man, but nevertheless was greatly used in the conflict.
J.T. He was the one set down in the midst of the Corinthians.
C.C.E. Paul addresses Timothy as "man of God", @1 Timothy 6: 11.
J.T. The only one so called in the New Testament.
R.B. Paul knew Timothy cared with genuine *feeling*. He had the maternal spirit, also.
J.T. So had Deborah. Of her it might have been said, "What *she* could she has done", @Mark 14: 8. She sat under her own palm-tree, indicating that she had secured the victory over herself. She is in a fine spiritual setting; there is nothing unseemly about her. She did not act to make a show of herself. She was a *wife* -- a woman prophetess, the literal Hebrew reads. That shows how womanly she remained while she was of necessity in prominence, and God was with her. They *came* to her for judgment, but there was no thought with her of interfering unnecessarily in every matter. "Hath not Jehovah ... commanded?" was her thought for Barak. She brought in the mind of God. "The villages ceased in Israel, ceased until that I Deborah arose". It is not said that she was "raised", but that "I Deborah *arose*", @Judges 5: 7. This has reference to great subjective powers in her! "I arose a mother in Israel".
P.G. Esther cared for the people of God when she "put on royal apparel, and stood in the inner court of the king's house", @Esther 5: 1.
J.T. She took her life in her hand then, but Mordecai
{160}
had put it on her to do it. He was undaunted and had she failed him, he says, "then shall there arise relief and deliverance to the Jews from another place", @Esther 4: 14. That spirit is what is needed.
C.M.M. A mother in Israel has the mind of God.
J.T. The important thing in prophecy is that one not only has the mind of God but has power to convey it. Meetings for ministry take on the nature of prophecy where brethren come together as feeling things, and are with God about them. They are thus enabled to convey His thought to the company generally, so that it is set in motion. They need *regulating* more than any other meeting.
J.R. How is the prophetic word given?
J.T. Under the impulse of the Holy Spirit; @1 Corinthians 14 deals with such meetings. It is preceded by the way of surpassing excellence, the way of love. If any desire gift, it is to be for the edification of the assembly. A prophet bringing in the mind of God affects people so that they fall down and confess that "God is indeed amongst you", @1 Corinthians 14: 25. It is a great thing for a company of saints to have that public reputation.
N.G. How would a babe in Christ become a man?
J.T. "Be no longer babes" is imperative. Babes are carried along by any wind, everything that comes to their ear affects them; @1 Peter 2 and @Ephesians 4 show the way of spiritual growth. Growth is by the knowledge of God. As in natural things, so in the spiritual: there must be family affection and also good food and *appropriation* of it; besides, Christ as the true Model must be before the mind and affections.
N.G. The man of God is complete, fully fitted to every good work through the Scriptures (@2 Timothy 3: 17).
J.T. Scripture is the divine test, inspired of God and so profitable in every way. It testifies of Christ. In all matters the appeal must be to them: "To the law and the testimony!" One of the most important injunctions,
{161}
as bearing on constantly arising difficulties amongst the saints is, "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every matter be established", @2 Corinthians 13: 1. *Every* matter. Go to the *other* person and see what he says. Instead of getting at the facts, babes are apt to listen to reports without proof, which may not be true at all.
W.S. @Matthew 11: 28 is the line of true development in manhood. "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me; for *I* am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest to your souls". Learn from Me! That is the way to reach the rest of God and maturity according to Him.
J.T. "Learn *from me*" gives the complete idea, the complete thought of manhood. It is as having a Model before you. That was said at a crucial point in the Lord's life, at a turning-point in the building as it were, where the greatest pressure was felt. "Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me". @Matthew 12 opens up what there is that has to be contended with -- satanic pressure! As seen in the succeeding chapters, only what is set up in Christ meets that situation. In chapter 12 He walks through the cornfields: "At that time Jesus went on the sabbath through the cornfields; and his disciples were hungry, and began to pluck the ears and to eat". The Lord did not tell His disciples to do that, but they did it and went even further. So they were brought under reproach, but it was He who brought them there. They were men, having learnt from Him and He defended them. God delights in it when you show you know what to do in a crisis and do it.
W.S. You suggest that they do that, as learning from Him?
J.T. What He does, they do. He is our Model in that way. "Behold, more than Jonas is here", @Matthew 12: 41. It is not so much *who* is here but *what* is here. Now this includes the saints, the Spirit being in them.
J.M.B. It was the maternal element in the wise
{162}
woman that met the crisis in @2 Samuel 20.
J.T. It is a question now of how to save the city from destruction. She said, "thou seekest to destroy a city and a mother in Israel", @2 Samuel 20: 19. She calls herself that. How dreadful would such a destruction be. She calls to Joab, who is responsible, and he makes known what is needed; and she acts in wisdom to meet a situation thus made clear.
R.B. Does Joab represent the king's requirements? -- the commandments of the Lord?
J.T. Joab is acting for God, but evidently in a wrong spirit. Thus he may destroy what is of God. A man may come from another district and blunder in attempting to set right a difficulty. It were better to consult the local brethren first. Joab, as spoken to in wisdom, comes to this. He says, "I am listening". If a man is wise he will want to know local conditions, so that he may not destroy the best elements in a place.
C.C.E. Yes, indeed. We have known of that happening.
J.T. Even a spiritual man or woman may be put under a cloud by an influential brother acting unwisely. The thing is to inquire in Abel (verse 18).
R.B. "Then the woman went to all the people in her wisdom" (verse 22).
J.T. She spoke to Joab first. "Hear, hear: say, I pray you, unto Joab, Come near hither, that I may speak with thee". Those are words addressed, as it were, to a visiting brother. Such should not take things into his own hands, but acting in wisdom, he can help. Gifts should be available to the saints, for they are not intended to be merely local. "Governments" are included (@1 Corinthians 12: 28). They are always universal in aspect, having the whole assembly in view, but if they are wise, they inquire in Abel. The wise woman puts this on Joab. She delivers the city by her wisdom.
C.M.M. Would you explain the difference between gift and eldership?
{163}
J.T. Eldership is not mentioned once in Corinthians, whereas gift is given a great place. "And God has set certain in the assembly", @1 Corinthians 12: 28. Amongst them "governments" are mentioned. That is to say God has set in the assembly certain persons with ability to govern. They can give help in government, and such a gift is set in the assembly. For a meeting to refuse such help is to refuse divine provision.
C.M.M. I was wondering if an elder in a locality would have gift?
J.T. Eldership is never viewed as gift. The bearing of it is local -- that is, as seen in the assembly. An elder might have gift, and this, of course, may be exercised generally. Of course a brother may exercise eldership in a locality, and as having gift and moving about, he would work with elders in another locality, but never as in an official sense. An elder, as seen in the New Testament, has no jurisdiction outside his own city: but he certainly could *aid* as present elsewhere. One observes that independency -- congregationalism -- has much place among the saints. On the assumption that a matter is local, available help in another meeting is shut out.
H.W.R. Who were the elders of Israel?
J.T. Persons who had rightly acquired prominence in the nation. In Acts you have them in our own dispensation in the provisional period; the metropolitan thought continued for a while in Jerusalem, but ceased with the destruction of that city and the dispersion of the Jews. The Pope of Rome still takes that ground, and the leaders of the Episcopal system also; but it is not scriptural. The metropolitan thought has ceased for God.
J.H.H. You would expect a meeting in difficulty to avail itself of all helps in government?
J.T. It is not using what God in His grace makes available to us if a brother who could help is shut out.
J.H.H. You would not like to be shut out of a care meeting where you may be visiting, I take it?
{164}
J.T. Most assuredly not. I should feel it; but then I would not be there in another locality as an elder, but as having something that God might apply universally. In such a case the importance of hearing is stressed. Twice the wise woman says, "Hear!" and then, "Listen to the words of thy handmaid", also "Come near hither". Joab might have destroyed the city if he had proceeded without hearing the facts of the case.
W.S. What difference is there in the thought of a "handmaid" and a "mother in Israel"?
J.T. The woman styles herself "handmaid" in humility. It was a customary formula often used, but she calls herself a mother in Israel because she is in danger of being destroyed. She points out that that would be a serious matter for Joab. Everything ought to be gone into first. Let things be sifted. Let action be taken on accredited evidence. A brother moving about is exposed to personal bias, and so it is important to hear the facts of the matter.
R.D. What is the thought as to enquiring in Abel?
J.T. It is a proverb. "They were wont to speak in old time saying, Just inquire in Abel, and so they ended" (verse 18). There must be some spiritual thought in Abel. This woman was not a biased person, but in keeping with ancient principles. I think Abel alludes to divine principles. Inquire there, and see what governs the present position.
D.S. What does the wall of the city represent?
J.T. Usually it alludes to fellowship. Joab's position signifies that of a visiting brother who may have to do with a local difficulty, and the wise woman represents what is of God there. The state she represents is requisite *to get at the facts of the matter, and then to find out the principles that govern the position*. Scripture affords light as to every matter on hand. "And they cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri, and cast it to Joab" (verse 22). Joab declaring the matter to the woman says, "far be it from me, that I should swallow up or destroy.
{165}
The matter is not so; but a man of mount Ephraim, Sheba the son of Bichri by name, has lifted up his hand against the king, against David: give up him only, and I will depart from the city". Joab was wrong in attacking the city before the facts were known. We read that "all the people that were with Joab sapped the wall, to throw it down" (verse 15). That was a great wrong. It is a warning to those not local. Listen to what the brethren in the city say, to those who are with God about the matter. Joab came to this, as we saw: "Hear, hear" is the appeal, and he says, "I am listening".
H.W.R. Divine principles were at stake. Sheba had lifted up his hand against the king. That had to be settled.
J.T. The *man* had to be dealt with. Evil springs up in some *person*, not out of the earth. The first thing is to convict *him* -- the city should not be attacked before this is attempted, but here "they cast up a bank against the city, and it was raised in the trench" (verse 15). Of course we are viewing the matter in its typical significance.
H.W.R. If the man were not judged, the whole city would be.
J.T. And the wise woman would accept that. Divine wisdom is seen in the assembly. The angels (principalities and authorities in the heavenlies) are looking down and seeing the all-various wisdom of God in the assembly (@Ephesians 3). Even difficulties bring out what is latent for God, and angels see it.
N.R. Does it not expose what little discernment there is amongst us when we find ourselves unable to deal with a situation locally?
J.T. It does. This woman gets Joab's ear, and thus facts become known. Then she goes back wisely amongst the brethren and puts before them what the man had done. It was some man with a *head* -- wanting a place. We must get to the root of things. We shall find that ambition is at work through ability. Thus we must get that head and cast it over the wall.
{166}
W.S. Joab's exercise was right, but he had acted in a wrong manner.
J.T. He was an able man, but wanting in right feeling. The incident brought out what he was. Such men are usually too severe in the exercise of discipline; but under the government of God they reap as they have sown.
J.H.H. Would you say experience helps, but precedents do not?
J.T. Yes. We have to judge each case by the facts; and look all round them. This woman represents wisdom in maturity.
R.B. Paul had to tell the Corinthians that none of them were wise.
J.T. Doubtless there were right elements even there, in Chloe and Stephanas, but generally speaking the state in Corinth was not right. They were moving and acting as babes. "Each of you says, *I* am of Paul, and *I* of Apollos, and *I* of Cephas, and *I* of Christ". You cannot get government in the assembly through partisans, and this comes up amongst us, especially as a crisis arises, but the wise woman wants the whole city saved. She is a true churchwoman!
{167}
SPIRITUAL INSTRUCTION FOR PART IN THE ASSEMBLY (1)
@Luke 23: 55, 56; @Luke 24: 1 - 12, 28
J.T. These scriptures are known in measure to us, and are suggested now because they indicate the great pains taken, divinely, to lead the saints not only into faith, but into spirituality. We are to be in the assembly only according to divine guidance and instruction. Luke's gospel, being priestly in character, presents the Lord as concerned sympathetically with us, taking account of that to which we are all prone. This latter may not appear on the surface, but it is really what hinders us from understanding the spiritual side of the position. Even joy of a kind may hinder. "While they yet did not believe for joy", Luke says (chapter 24: 41). The Lord discerned that in them and would adjust it.
I thought we might notice first what we have already dwelt upon; how saints may be outwardly regulated by the commandments of the Lord, as in 1 Corinthians, in the external ordering of the assembly, and yet be wanting as to faith and as to what had been presented in doctrine and teaching. The scriptures just read indicate this, and also show how we are helped into a *spiritual* apprehension of the truth. "It came to pass as they were in perplexity about it, that behold, two men suddenly stood by them in shining raiment", @Luke 24: 4. These men represent the spiritual and heavenly side.
C.C.E. This is not quite the same setting as in Mark where the Lord reproaches them with their unbelief and hardness of heart. Mark is severe in his treatment.
J.T. Luke is more sympathetic in his feelings and they are dealt with less severely. In Mark, it is a question of preachers or ministers, while Luke has in view the assembly and so takes up the thought of public order and position, and he stresses the necessity of being marked by spirituality. The underlying state of the
{168}
persons concerned is more apparent. The women are said in @Luke 23: 55 to be those "who had come along with him out of Galilee", and "having followed, saw the sepulchre and how his body was placed". Then the two men remind them -- "remember how he spoke to you, being yet in Galilee" (verse 6). The women in Luke are not so wanting as Mark presents them. "They remembered his words; and, returning from the sepulchre, related all these things to the eleven and to all the rest". There is more definiteness in what they do than in Mark's account. In Luke's record, the Lord is presented as our High Priest and sympathetic towards us. And thus this gospel is applicable today when souls are being graciously helped as to the assembly. Great sympathy and consideration is needed for them. Severity is not the note touched. In individual cases the Lord is severe enough, but here it is as walking with them, as loving to be with them. It is remarkable what a long section, verses 13 - 35, is taken up in recording the Lord's service in love to secure two who were going down to Emmaus.
F.J.F. "Shall two walk together except they be agreed?" @Amos 3: 3. There were two agreed to go the wrong way. How often we need adjustment even as walking together. We may not be walking in the light.
J.T. It has not the character of "if two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens", @Matthew 18: 19. This is what is to characterise two of the assembly. An agreement of this kind -- to go down together to Emmaus -- is to be deprecated. They were talking to one another in *unbelief*, even though they showed themselves conversant with what had happened. We should first see from these scriptures how right we may be outwardly in observing the commandments, and yet be unbelieving. They "remained quiet on the sabbath, according to the commandment" (@Luke 23: 56), yet these women had "prepared aromatic spices and ointments".
{169}
Those were not intended for a *risen* Christ; but for a dead One. These were devoted women, yet this is the state of their minds. That was what had been occupying them and it would be at a sacrifice that they got the spices and prepared them; their thought was of a dead Christ.
B.H.T. It showed devotion on their part, did it not?
J.T. Yes, devotion, but there is not really much value in the devotion of unbelief. This is written for us. Were any to have talked later with these two, how they would be able to instruct such not to go that way!
J.H.H. Does their course show what characterises christendom today?
J.T. Yes, and there is a great deal of unbelief even in those nominally in the truth. They "having followed, saw the sepulchre and how his body was placed". *How* -- that is, they had observed all the externals, such as the placing of His body in the sepulchre, and the keeping of the sabbath -- all in themselves right observances; a commandment of the Lord is noted, yet in all this their thought was of a dead Christ.
F.J.F. If we pursue that line, it amounts only to ritualism; whereas we ought to be on the line of what faith brings us into.
J.T. They were right as to externals, for love observes the commandments. We may come together and be right in form; we may even break bread and yet be wanting *inwardly*. If we are not touched spiritually, we may go through the whole meeting in this way.
H.W.R. Mary of Bethany is a contrast to this. "For in pouring out this ointment on my body, she has done it for my burying", @Matthew 26: 12.
J.T. She showed faith and intelligence in doing it at that time. These had heard the Lord say He would rise again, but the truth was not in their souls. The angels had to remind them of it. "Why seek ye the living one among the dead? He is not here, but is risen remember how he spoke to you ..." We may be right
{170}
in externals, in keeping the commandments as laid down in 1 Corinthians, but what of the truth in Colossians and Ephesians?
W.S. Was the fact that they remained quiet on the sabbath, indicative of their state?
J.T. They had certainly kept that commandment, but I should not think they had much of a day. Observing the law is right enough but what of the inward state and one's outlook?
J.S. A right inward state would enable them to see by the conditions in the sepulchre that the Lord was risen.
J.T. How slow they were to discern it! "They found not the body of the Lord Jesus" and "they were in perplexity about it" (verses 3, 4). These were devoted souls; they correspond with a large number of brethren, some breaking bread with us. Underneath there is love for Christ, and the Lord knows this, but their inward state is marked by perplexity. They do not really reach anything definite. This chapter is intended to adjust us with regard to this. It should impress us with the lengths to which love goes in order to adjust us.
W.S. Perplexity develops into fear. "And as they were filled with fear" follows in verse 5. Perfect love would cast out fear.
J.T. "Behold, two men suddenly stood by them in shining raiment. And as they were filled with fear ..." Light was there, but they were *filled* with fear. That was their inward state. The passage goes to show that heaven knew what they were really aiming at, and knew that they loved the Lord, yet they were in inexcusable darkness. They had to recall His words. Why had they forgotten them? Why had they ignored them?
F.J.F. They should not have been looking for the dead body of the Lord.
J.T. If they had been remembering His words, which they had heard, "being yet in Galilee", they
{171}
would not have been looking for a dead Christ, but for the living One.
C.C.E. Often a state of confusion of mind prevents us from remembering what we hear.
J.T. How little we take in! How little of what is ministered to us is carried in our minds! They had seen the Lord crucified, had seen how His body was placed in the sepulchre, and the next great event for *faith* would be His resurrection, but they were not looking for that. It is a question of applying the truth that has come to us -- whether we are ready and prepared in heart to apply it. The Lord says of Mary of Bethany, "against the day of my burying hath she kept this". She was intelligent in what she did. She had learned that He would die, and discerned that it was near. Ministry brings certain things to our attention; what are we going to do as to this? Has it any present application? Is it not applicable to our business affairs? -- household matters? -- to the assembly? There comes the time when we should be able to apply what we have. The Lord had instructed His disciples as to His death and resurrection. The former had taken place and the next great event, the resurrection, was to be expected, and they were not looking out for it. The Lord's resurrection had been much spoken of to them, yet, when the time came that He rose again, they could not apply that truth. The two men had to remind them how they had heard that He would rise. Their fear was due to their state. Perfect love casts out fear. The term 'angel' is not used here in Luke but they are recorded as being men, which is indicative of intelligent and sympathetic feeling with the women.
F.J.F. It needs spirituality to be ready to take the next step when the time arrives.
J.T. Yes. You have heard hundreds of things: there is a time to apply them. Many of us go through assembly meetings in a routine fashion, right in externals, but without any inward application of the things that have
{172}
come to us from the Lord. There is a time for everything. We must have things in order, of course, but what of the inward state?
M.A. There is a time in the meeting when we should be in expectancy.
J.T. The assembly is the place of expectancy, and heaven will gratify what is normal. Those women should have been looking for what the Lord had said should take place, looking for Himself, the Living One. The word from the two men was what was needed. We get such words in the assembly. The presence of the men shows how heaven is ready to serve us in this way.
J.H.H. It used to be said that we remember a dead Christ when we come together to break bread. In the light of this truth, does that fall short?
J.T. A dead Christ *is* before us in the *emblems*; but we remember a risen, absent Christ. "He is not here", but elsewhere. We are here, and it is here that we have to remember Him; in the emblems we think of Himself as having died, the suggestion being that in love for us He has been into death. In Luke, the aspect in which the Supper is regarded is as a remembrance. In the early years after the recovery, it was more Matthew and Mark's aspect that was taken up amongst brethren, and the emblems were regarded as food. The import of Luke's presentation was not so clear then as now.. It is a question of being able to apply such a truth. The *emblems* refer to a dead Christ. It is food, surely; but it is also the memorial of Christ, One gone away.
F.J.F. Does the thought of an oath of allegiance enter this memorial, testifying that we are here in fidelity to the absent One?
J.T. Yes. Matthew and Mark say nothing of the memorial, Luke nothing of eating. It is "this do". The Lord actually entered into the state of death. He says to John, "I became dead, and behold, I am living to the ages of ages, and have the keys of death and of hades", @Revelation 1: 18.
{173}
W.S. In @1 Corinthians 11: 26 we read, "For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come".
J.T. The memorial is an inward thought. The Lord misses us. We may be present bodily, but the object of the memorial is that we might be present spiritually; thus He has us with Him. Luke speaks of the two going to Emmaus and says, "behold, two of them were going on the same day, ..." @Luke 24: 13. In a sense, these two were occupied with the Lord. "They conversed with one another about all these things which had taken place". That meant that they were conversing of Him, but not in faith and intelligence. Spirituality is needed in the assembly, faith, of course, but spirituality. We may say much, but is it in spiritual intelligence?
L.W. How are spirituality and intelligence produced in us?
J.T. First let us get the thought that it is possible to be right outwardly and wrong inwardly, to have darkened minds and yet love the Lord. These two men represent the sympathy of heaven, and at the same time, they indicate the wrong inward state of these women. They were in shining raiment, in contrast to what marked the women. *They* were not shining. Brothers and sisters often come in to the assembly on the Lord's day and go out no brighter, not taking on the glory (@2 Corinthians 3). It is what happens spiritually that affects us in assembly. In the two men we have what is intended by heaven to adjust us, for the assembly is a place of shining. The shining raiment is the reflection of the glory of God. We are to realise to what lengths the Lord went to secure these results -- that God should shine upon us and that we should reflect His glory. It is now in the face of Jesus, and the assembly normally is radiant with it. The two at Emmaus were adjusted, not by His expounding to them from the Scriptures, but by the spiritual touch which He gave them in the breaking of bread. It was that which affected them.
{174}
L.W. A burning heart was not enough.
J.T. It is important, of course, as showing reality at bottom, but the spiritual side was lacking. It is little understood, but essential for part in the assembly.
S.S. We may know all the facts, but is it only when He Himself is manifested to us that we are spiritually affected?
J.T. We may say nice things in regard to facts concerning the Lord's death and be wanting in that spiritual touch that is needed in the assembly. There was never such an exposition of Scripture as is mentioned in this chapter, yet it did not alter their course. Although the exposition was perfect, there was not yet the spiritual impression that the breaking of bread affords. The state of their souls was such that they were not capable of being spiritually affected by an exposition of Scripture. This was effected in them by the Lord as He broke the bread.
B.H.T. It does depend, does it not, on how we come to the meeting?
J.T. A good deal depends on that. One often thinks of the anointing in this respect. The idea of the anointing should be in our households. There is a dignity proper to the saints in coming to the assembly, so that we may move into things there in a comely, spiritual manner. Certainly we should have regard to externals, but we should, too, be essentially marked by the dignity of the Spirit when we sit down; and be able to say "Lord Jesus" *by the Holy Spirit*. What a beautiful effect there would be in that! Spirituality will respond to it. If I am unspiritual there will hardly be response, no change in me; no shining out of the glory of God, which is suggested in the raiment of the two men here.
L.W. Do we get the touch in the breaking of the bread, when He makes Himself known to us?
J.T. Exactly. "And they drew near to the village where they were going, and *he* made as though he would go farther". There was something in His attitude which
{175}
indicated that He was not occupied with their objective. The Lord has another objective; and *He* made as though He would go farther. Their objective was the country (@Mark 16: 12). The Lord was not governed by that, but He graciously allowed them to constrain Him, as though to say, It is not in My mind, but I will do even this to secure you. At table He took the bread and blessed, and gave it to them. "And their eyes were opened, and they recognised him". The actions here are all His. Although this is not the Lord's supper, it bears most instructively on it. We are in the realm of divine activities. As spiritual we discern these in the assembly.
C.M.M. What does "this do" comprise? There is no eating in what the Lord did here.
J.T. Here you see it. "Having taken the bread, he blessed, and having broken it, gave it to them", @Luke 24: 30. He did not eat here, nor at the institution of the Supper. He broke the bread, having given thanks.
C.M.M. Eating, then, is not included in the thought of memorial?
J.T. No. That is Matthew's and Mark's view. The memorial side is Luke's. It was in the breaking of bread that He was made known to them (verse 35). That is what they understood.
C.M.M. There was a spiritual impression in the way it was done, but how does that work out practically?
J.T. While the brother is giving thanks and breaking the bread.
C.M.M. You mean in the manner of doing it?
J.T. The more spiritual he is, the more spiritual his action. It is, however, not in the brother but in the act.
Ques. What he does -- not how he does it?
J.T. I would not like to exclude the manner of doing it. The spiritual side comes in especially in the breaking of bread.
G.G. Is the breaking of bread an individual act?
J.T. We are all committed to it. It is the action that
{176}
is alluded to, and all that goes with it. *We* come together to break bread (@Acts 20: 7).
J.R. These two had not been present at the institution of the Supper.
J.T. Cleopas is not mentioned as an apostle; and we do not know who the other was, except to surmise that it was his wife.
H.W.R. Even though they had not been at the institution of the Supper, their hearts were now affected. This was by the spiritual touch, was it not?
J.T. Certainly. We were not there, either; those present were competent and accredited witnesses to bring it to us.
F.J.F. Those two would return in shining garments? Where heaven, or one who represents it, draws near, there is shining. "The children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses¬ face shone", @Exodus 34: 35.
J.T. They will contribute to the assembly now. They will have very different countenances, downcast no longer. And we are to reflect this shining. You like to see a change in this sense in the face of a brother. If we are spiritually impressed, we shall go out differently. Our countenances will shine. Passing through without an inward change is to be deprecated.
H.W.R. The effect is cumulative. We do not go back from that. Divine things are always cumulative, are they not?
J.T. There is definite progress made, week by week.
J.R. Is there a present significance for us in the order of the Lord's action that He first *took* the bread and then blessed it?
J.T. There would be several loaves or cakes on the table for the Passover feast. We have only one loaf now, so we need not imitate the action of taking. The Lord took the bread, thus formally detaching what He was instituting from the Passover. Doubtless the disciples had often been at meals with the Lord and He would
{177}
always give thanks. It was an ordinary meal at Emmaus, and so the Lord also took the bread there.
C.C.E. Similarly there would have been several cups on the Passover table. The Lord singled out the cup.
J.T. Yes, with the idea of detaching what He was instituting from the Jewish feast. The apostle says, "The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ?" @1 Corinthians 10: 16. It is not, 'take and break'.
C.M.M. To break bread is a definite act, not an afterthought. You would stand at the table to give thanks, would you not?
J.T. Yes; otherwise one might not know what you are doing. We are to be simple and intelligible in what we are doing. These two who went to Emmaus moved back to Jerusalem. That shows how they had been affected. They were constituted spiritual. They understood now what the Lord meant them to do. He said nothing further to them after He had broken the bread, but He disappeared from them. "Rising up the same hour, they returned to Jerusalem". There, they contributed to the assembly according to the way in which they had been affected. They do not speak of the exposition of Scripture which they had been given, but of what had been spiritually accorded to them.
Rem. The Lord vanished in order that they might go back to the assembly.
J.T. They came with a different walk, different conversation and different feelings. They had spiritual matter now to be contributed to the assembly, and they now recognised the authority of the Lord. We read, "they found the eleven, and those with them, gathered together, saying, The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon".
F.J.F. They were not saying now that He was dead, but that He was risen.
J.T. Yes, and that grace marked Him, for He had appeared to *Simon*: Simon had denied Him, "And they
{178}
related what had happened on the way", not that they had enjoyed a discourse on the Scriptures, but "how he was made known to them in the breaking of bread". It is a spiritual matter with them; "And as they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst, and says to them, Peace be unto you" (verse 36). What the Lord aims at here is spirituality. It is expressed in Himself risen from the dead. It is in One really Man: "Handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me having" (verse 39). It is corporeal, but spiritual. This was a leading thought in the Lord remaining here during the forty days before His ascension.
N.G. In what condition does Jesus stand in *our* midst?
J.T. He does not come in corporeally. Regarded thus, He is in heaven, but the Spirit of God being here, the Lord can come in, and it is really Himself that comes, but in a spiritual way; that is, through the Spirit.
F.J.F. Does the Lord making as though He would go farther apply now?
J.T. The going farther referred to what was in Jerusalem spiritually. That was His objective.
R.D. It was remarked that they had affection, but we see that affection for Him may not prevent the natural element coming in.
J.T. Affection is the basis upon which all this was built. The Lord's service was largely to get them into the assembly. The commandment of the Lord is a great thing; but in the assembly, the spiritual element is essential. There may be love, but we may be in darkness in our minds. This chapter shows how the Lord's priestly service goes on in order that souls may come into the assembly, and then He comes in and, as here, adjusts them further. He says, "behold my hands and my feet, that it is *I* myself". He is in His own sphere. He even comes down to an act of eating so as to assure them. How lowly His grace to come down to us, to get us into the thought of what He is now!
{179}
Rem. He manifested Himself to them, showing them His hands and His feet.
J.T. He testifies His love. We realise the length to which His love will go; how His feet will travel to Emmaus, and farther; His priestly service to adjust us as to *spiritual* conditions.
{180}
SPIRITUAL INSTRUCTION FOR PART IN THE ASSEMBLY (2)
@Luke 24: 36 - 53
J.T. What I had in mind was to follow the spiritual vein of this writer, leading on to the assembly, developed under Paul's ministry. We may be very much behind what we have heard, and even what we have said. Things are very often taken in by the mind and not assimilated so as to be characteristic of us. It is said here, "And rising up the same hour, they returned to Jerusalem. And they found the eleven, and those with them, gathered together, saying, The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon. And they related what had happened on the way, and how he was made known to them in the breaking of bread", @Luke 24: 33 - 35.
They had, as you might say, a meeting like this, in which we speak together of certain facts. Yet when they are tested, it is proved that they had not assimilated the truth they had. The appearance of the Lord in their midst would not have caused them to be confounded and frightened, if they really believed what they had been speaking about. This thought runs on from chapter 23, verses 55 and 56. These women had heard the resurrection spoken of and yet came to look for Him, as believing Him to be dead. This, when the Lord had expressly said, "and after three days rise again", @Mark 8: 31. So they have to be reminded of words already heard; "two men suddenly stood by them in shining raiment" and said to them, "Why seek ye the living one among the dead? He is not here, but is risen: remember how he spoke to you, being yet in Galilee, saying, The Son of man must be delivered up into the hands of sinners, and be crucified, and rise the third day", @Luke 24: 5 - 7.
They had not retained these words, yet, most momentous words! We can understand how the disciples would
{181}
have spoken together of the resurrection; yet when the time came to apply the truth, they failed, and so with us. Have we not often actually spoken of His resurrection in assembly as gathered together? Nevertheless when we were tested, we were not able to apply it. So that it raises the question as to our meetings and our conversations, as to what we may know mentally of what we have heard, and yet may have failed to assimilate. We may have the knowledge of the truth but be unable to apply it. Indeed, it is in the application of truth that it is verified to us.
C.C.E. I remember a brother saying in regard to Mr. Darby's teaching, that he and several others had sat under him and heard what Mr. Darby had said; but that he now realised they did not really receive it into their souls. They had not assimilated it at the time, but another, afterwards a prominent brother, had really taken it in; in him it became effective.
J.T. That illustrates what I have in mind.
F.J.F. Does it not need a touch from the Lord privately to understand what He says?
J.T. It does. These scriptures bring out what adjusting power is necessary among the saints. Divine provision has been made for these weaknesses in us; but it is important to accept and own that the weaknesses exist; that I hear, but do not assimilate; and when the time comes for application, I do not know how to use the truth. It is well to bow to these facts, for the incidents in chapter 24 are not recorded to expose the failure of the disciples. If there were no more in it than that, the Holy Spirit would never have spread abroad the failure of those saints, but it is because *what marked them marks us*. They are not alone in this, and the Lord would use this chapter as a lesson for us; to bring us to own that these features are marking us, albeit we are conscious of loving the Lord and of valuing the Scriptures. Indeed, we also are prone to speak of things we have not yet assimilated.
{182}
"The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon", and then the two from Emmaus related what had happened on the way. It was "as they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst" (verse 36). They were saying that the Lord was risen indeed, when the Lord came in. At that very instant they were speaking of it -- nevertheless, when He was there in their midst they were upset, as if it could not be, whereas His presence *was* intended to confirm than, which it did eventually. "They, being confounded and being frightened, supposed they beheld a spirit".
B.H.T. The state of our spirit hinders the Lord having His way with us.
J.T. It does indeed. In reading these scriptures and seeing how remiss were these dear brethren, our thoughts should be to avoid such a situation being produced in our midst. This chapter is like a navigation chart, to which mariners do well to pay attention, in order to avoid the rocks that would damage the ship. If I read the Scriptures prayerfully I note the dangers they point out and that which the Holy Spirit is directing my attention to.
We are reading together at this time about the Lord, that He is risen indeed, and we are speaking of how He is made known to us in the breaking of bread. If the Lord were to appear now corporeally in our midst, what would be the general feeling? Would many be ready for it? I fancy there would not be so much difference in the effect on ourselves.
F.F.E. You mean, not much difference in our bearing from that which we read of in @Luke 24?
J.T. Exactly. Would we be any different from them? John has to say to Peter on another occasion, "It is the Lord". Peter had not discerned it. We want to be ready to discern the Lord's presence amongst us.
J.M.B. It says, "their eyes were holden so as not to know him" (verse 16).
J.T. That verse has to be kept in its setting. In that
{183}
case, God did it -- there is nothing like that here. This is consecutive and cumulative. The inference in the section we are considering at the moment is that God's intervention should not have been needed. The Lord expects us to discern His presence and not to feel affrighted and confounded. Would the Lord want to come in to affright anyone? Jesus would never do that to His own. If you read Canticles, you will find the bride is never frightened, she is ready. She is remiss sometimes, but notice how instantaneously she discerns her Beloved.
F.J.F. "He taught his disciples and said to them, The Son of man is delivered into men's hands, and they shall kill him; and having been killed, after three days he shall rise again. But they understood not the saying, and feared to ask him", @Mark 9: 31, 32. Do you think that was the fault?
J.T. I think so. Why should we be afraid to ask the Lord anything? He would answer if we ask, He took little children in His arms.
F.J.F. If, in gathering together, we were in a state of faith and affection, the effect of the Lord's presence would not be to confound.
J.T. No. Affection alone is insufficient, for their devotion was not in question here; but more than that is needed. One must carefully balance things. I see Him and conclude it is the Lord. There is every evidence that it is He. No one else, in just that way, can say, "Peace be unto you!" There is His voice, and His presence. It *is* Himself! A real Person there, and not, as on the way to Emmaus, in another form, but Himself. I am to discern Him thus. The Lord says, "behold my hands and my feet, that it is *I* myself. Handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me having" (verse 39). It was this same Person whom they came later to discern. He did not change His form.
J.H.H. The spiritual element in the assembly would always recognise when the Lord is present, would it not?
J.T. That is what we want to get at -- the spiritual
{184}
element. "The spiritual discerns all things", @1 Corinthians 2: 15. Discernment belongs peculiarly to the assembly.
H.W.R. We profess to look for the Lord's coming. If that is real with us, would we be affrighted at it?
J.T. We should not be. But suppose some one is at a picture show when He comes. What a state of things that would be!
J.S. Are we not tested as to the kind of hymns we give out in the assembly, and our thanksgivings after the breaking of bread? If we have the spirit of discernment, would we not move in relation to His movements?
J.T. It is a question of applying the truth. We are tested as to procedure. There is a time for everything, and we ought to know the times. We should be concerned to be spiritual, so that we do understand and are able to discern the Lord and what is suitable to the moment. "I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing also with the understanding", @1 Corinthians 14: 15. How has the Lord moved? That is to control *our* movements.
R.B. If we are to acknowledge our state before the Lord, it calls for deep humiliation.
J.T. That is what we begin with. We are to put ourselves into this, and acknowledge that we are capable of it. Out of this acknowledgment comes our deliverance.
R.B. My thought was that we might make an acknowledgment and not be in the good of it.
J.T. Acknowledgment goes a long way. I judge this thing to begin with, and the Lord comes in for me as I accept the application of this chapter to myself.
J.H.H. Is not this state due to our having allowed something in ourselves that should be judged? There has been a lack of self-judgment.
J.T. It is like cleaning a pair of spectacles. You must remove the thing that is blurring your vision. Something obviously is hindering, so that you do not see clearly. Why is it? Others can see. All this works out in self-judgment. As you accept it humbly, the Lord
{185}
helps you, but in disregarding it your marred vision continues.
J.R. Later it could be said, "which we have seen with our eyes ... concerning the word of life", @1 John 1: 1.
J.T. What eyesight they had!
J.M.B. The message that Mary of Magdala, Johanna and Mary the mother of James had brought to the eleven, should have prepared them for the presence of the Lord.
J.T. Yes, but also what they were saying themselves. It is "as they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst". It was not even yesterday that they had been talking of them, they were actually doing it.
N.D. Does the Lord raise this question with us each time we come together?
J.T. If there is anything like this state amongst us He would. He is blaming them, He has to reproach them "Why are ye troubled? and why are thoughts rising in your hearts?" (verse 38.) Why do we allow such thoughts? The doctrine we hold should forbid them. It must be the state we are in, that there is this palpable lack of appropriation.
F.J.F. The Lord coming in -- does that constitute a reading or an assembly meeting?
J.T. The question is of what follows and what precedes. An assembly meeting is properly when we come together "in assembly". It is our own action. "When ye come together in assembly", see @1 Corinthians 11: 18. The article is omitted. The Lord honours us in thus coming together, and He comes in; He comes in as we call Him to mind.
C.C.E. It is deliberate on our part.
J.T. "I speak as to intelligent persons", @1 Corinthians 10: 15. Here we read, "they found the eleven, and those with them, gathered together". That would admit many others -- the Marys and the disciples; and they say those things to them. But as they proceed, the principle of the assembly comes into view. The assembly is here,
{186}
but informally. The time for it had not really arrived. Nevertheless, we do have the thought contained in this gospel. They were gathered together in recognition of the apostles, and they were saying suitable things. Then the Lord comes in. It is the pattern of the assembly, but of its public or external character. The Lord is not stopping at the thought of the assembly, but He is going on to the gospel, and what ensues shows what is in His mind; "that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations beginning at Jerusalem", @Luke 24: 47. The assembly and the gospel must never be separated -- they go on to the present moment. The assembly in a sense is the home of the gospel.
H.J.R. In assembly on the Lord's day, would you say that light precedes experiences? "As they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst".
J.T. As they come together, and He comes in, it is the assembly in principle. The Lord graciously pays attention to what we are saying, even though it may not be characterising us. Their speaking of these things is honoured, but the passage is to bring before my soul that I may be exact doctrinally in my speaking, and yet the truth of it does not characterise me. These were speaking very appropriately, saying, "The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon". They had taken in the principle of grace, the gospel; "and how he was made known to them in the breaking of bread". That is the public position -- the breaking of bread and the gospel. In the gospel it is a question of grace, but though they were saying these things they were not equal to the coming in of the Lord.
L.W. "They yet did not believe for joy". Does this suggest that apart from the Spirit we cannot know or believe?
J.T. That may be so, but it also bears on this, that while having the Spirit, we might be unduly affected, or emotional, so that that very thing hinders the truth from
{187}
being made good in us. Joy is right, but think of joy hindering me from believing! What kind of joy is that? Romans teaches us to be analytical, and we never get on until we do analyse. There are, for instance, different kinds of love, different kinds of joy, and here is a joy that hinders faith. Over against this we have, "Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing", @Romans 15: 13. "I know that I shall remain and abide along with you all, for your progress and joy in faith", @Philippians 1: 25. There is joy *in faith*. The apostle says "the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, ...", @Galatians 5: 22. Yet see what alloy there may be in our joy! Joy should not hinder my faith. I must analyse and see if there is some alloy in my joy, some natural sentiment; let us be afraid of that.
C.C.E. In John's account of the Lord's coming in chapter 20 there was no natural sentiment or fear -- they were glad when they saw the Lord.
J.T. There the Lord says twice, "Peace be to you", @John 20: 19, 21. "The disciples rejoiced therefore, having seen the Lord. Jesus said therefore again to them, Peace be to you". There was nothing to rebuke there.
F.J.F. They were spiritually equal to the visitation.
J.T. The Spirit of God there presents the one side. The Holy Spirit is entitled to speak abstractly. Nothing is out of order in @John 20 save that "Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came".
Here Luke is presenting the actual facts; and there is admixture. But the Lord shows Himself as ready to adjust, and to remove the alloy. He would have them in a pure, holy, intelligent attitude before Him. "Then he opened their understanding to understand the scriptures" (verse 45). The Lord reminded them then of what He had already presented to them. In @John 20, it is what they are in the abstract, no scriptures are quoted, there is no alloy noted, though Peter had not yet been restored.
{188}
Ques. Why do those in Luke expressly state "and has appeared to Simon"?
J.T. Because he had been a great sinner; nevertheless, grace was reigning. If those gathered together had been hard of heart, they would have said they could not believe the Lord would have appeared to such as Simon, but they are equal to this grace. Yet they are not equal to the Lord coming in; they are affrighted and confounded when He comes to them. In Mark it was "in another form" that He appeared. Not so here, yet they were affrighted. It was the Lord Himself just as He ought to be understood; this was as though to emphasise that the difficulty is not with Him, but with themselves.
J.R. The Lord ate the Passover with His disciples before instituting the Supper. Do the two still go together to produce in us the right spirit? Is it not dangerous to neglect to keep the Passover? The Lord kept it.
J.T. Quite so. It is the means viewed in its typical significance that would help us to discern Him in the Supper; "For also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed", @1 Corinthians 5: 7. It is introduced there, and then much intervenes, chapters 5 to 11, before we get the Supper brought in. We need to keep the feast continually. It gives us good eyesight, not a blurred vision. It keeps us in self-judgment and thus in trim for the assembly; "the spiritual discerns all things", @1 Corinthians 2: 15. Those meeting at Corinth were not spiritually-minded. Our reading today is in order that we might be spiritual. We should see how ready the Lord is to make us spiritual, but we must judge what is in the way.
Rem. He is ever ready to adjust.
J.T. But He looks for our acceptance of the fact that we are all prone to this. In our acceptance of that He will come in. But we will never get rid of that which hinders without judging it before the Lord. It is then, and then only, that the Lord helps us further.
{189}
F.J.F. Self-judgment would counteract ebullitions of joy.
J.T. In @1 Corinthians 12 Paul indicates that an emulous spirit had been manifested. The Corinthians liked to have gifts in order to make a show with them, but Paul brings in the thought of manhood; "in your minds be grown men". The human mind is a wonderful faculty. It is treated of in Romans -- the renewing of the mind (chapter 12: 2), "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law" (chapter 7: 25). In 1 Corinthians it is brought in informally but forcibly. "I will pray with the spirit, but I will pray also with the understanding", @1 Corinthians 14: 15. "But *we* have the mind of Christ", @1 Corinthians 2: 16. This is in order to bring us into manhood. Mark's presentation of the man that had been possessed with the devil is that he was found sitting and clothed and sensible (@Mark 5: 15). In our minds we are to be mature, grown men.
W.S. To have minds according to God is what we need.
J.T. The mind according to God is a faculty. "*We* have the mind of Christ", able to think as He does. If we have not, we are unable to discern the Lord. How shall we know Christ in heaven? Shall we each be introduced? I think not. We shall be able there to pick out the Lord, to know Him as we see Him. As spiritual, our vision will be unclouded, and that is the point in Christianity. The blind man, in @Mark 8: 25, was constituted able by the second touch of the Lord, to see "all things clearly". And we are to see *all things* clearly, not only to apprehend the Lord in assembly, but all else too. The whole position is to be clear to us. Hence, if there are spiritual men, I observe them, I wait on them. They are to be taken account of.
H.W.R. There is to be a recognition of the Lord by what He *does*.
J.T. In the breaking of bread, the symbols suggest Him to us. Then a moment comes when it is "*I* myself".
{190}
The spiritual discern it, then it is a question of what He will do, what He has in mind to do.
Ques. Would that be the remedy for thoughts arising in our hearts?
J.T. Why should they arise? If I am acquainted with the Lord, if I am spiritual, I discern Him, I see at once He is there; then I defer to Him. He must take the lead, He must be Head.
H.W.R. It is a question of personal acquaintance.
J.T. As when John discerned the Lord on the lake. Peter did not, yet he was ready to move when John spoke. He accepted John's word and threw himself into the water. John represents the spiritual element there. Some brother may discern the Lord, and by what he says others discern Him also.
L.W. It is possible, is it not, for the Lord to be present at the Supper, and we individually not to realise it? To discern Him, we *must* be spiritual.
J.T. That is so. That is the point, and that is what we are seeking to make clear.
B.H.T. It is a question of state.
J.T. That is included in what is opened up to us in @Romans 8, particularly, what the Holy Spirit is to the believer. I have found my feet in chapter 7, then chapter 8 shows what the Spirit is to me, so I see all things clearly and am able to discern that it is the Lord Himself, as Man risen, "behold my hands and my feet, that it is *I* myself".
Ques. "Handle me and see" (verse 39). How does that apply to us?
J.T. It applies spiritually; there is a means of testing as to whether He is present or not. This incident where the Lord appeared is a pattern; they were to see the import of it. He would accustom them to the idea of a spiritual body. "God is a spirit", @John 4: 24. It is not that thought here, but that Christ was in a *body* that is spiritual. It was the condition in which He was during
{191}
the forty days; they are educational in order to teach us how to be spiritual.
Rem. "That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled", @1 John 1: 1.
J.T. That alludes to the Lord in the flesh; but it would run on into this thought. There was substance before them, not what was imaginary, but He was a real Man as risen.
B.H.T. They "supposed they beheld a spirit".
J.T. But He was a Man. This is christianity. It is incarnation, but in the final condition in heaven it is "his body of glory". First that which is natural, then that which is spiritual. The natural, of course, applies to us, not to Christ. "And as we have borne the image of the one made of dust, we shall bear also the image of the heavenly one", @1 Corinthians 15: 49. The spiritual body becomes in result a heavenly one.
F.J.F. They were not familiar with the Lord in this condition.
J.T. But they ought to have been expecting it. Though in new condition Christ is the same as in the old. The spiritual grasp the idea of a spiritual body, it indicates the kind of Man in the counsels of God. The position in @Luke 24: 37 was Christ risen. Now that we have the Spirit we should have a state suitable. We await Christ from heaven as Saviour, to change our bodies of humiliation and transform them into the image of His glorious body. How important then, to become conversant with Him now! Our bodies need to be saved, though now it is a time of soul salvation. The great lesson of the forty days was spirituality, to become accustomed to the Lord coming in through closed doors.
J.R. What is your thought as to the Lord having asked for food?
J.T. That was for educative purposes. The emphasis the Lord gave was on the word "here", for example,
{192}
Cape Town, "Have ye anything *here* to eat?" (verse 41). Arid they were able to provide exactly what was suitable. They gave Him part of a "broiled fish" -- symbolising the sovereignty of God -- and "of a honeycomb" -- expressing the mutual state of things existent, for a comb is the combined work of many bees. In grace, the Lord stoops to do things. It is not that in heaven He eats; but the incident is to show the lengths to which His love will go for our education. Fish are peculiarly in the divine knowledge, beyond human knowledge. They must have come through the deluge. There are three blessings in @Genesis 1 and as to the fifth day on which fish and fowl were created, "God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply on the earth". There must be something in the fish and fowl which peculiarly belongs to God, and so the Lord uses a fish in connection with the tribute money. In that He showed how He had control of the fish of the sea. But see how the Lord comes down to educate His disciples! "And he took it and ate before them", to show them how real a Man He was. The question is not how could He, in a spiritual body, eat it? This is a question that might stir in the natural mind, but that is leaving God out. What can God not do? The nearer we come to God, the more we learn to refuse the infidel suggestion that our puny minds can compass Him. In faith, we accept what is before us.
C.C.E. Jehovah appeared to Abraham by the oaks of Mamre (@Genesis 18: 1). There was no necessity for the three men to have eaten, but they did. It was God in grace coming into Abraham's circumstances.
J.T. It is beautiful to see God coming down and staying under the tree, giving Abraham *time* to get a meal ready. The preparation of the calf, the making of the cakes, must have occupied a considerable time. It is wonderful to see God coming down and remaining within our range that we may understand Him a little better.
N.D. We should be expectant of such a visitation as
{193}
Abraham had in @Genesis 18 on the part of God, should we not?
J.T. If the disciples had believed that He would rise again from the dead, they would have said, The Lord used to come to us before to Bethany. Surely, love would claim that He would come again. In @Luke 24: 44 we read that "he said to them, These are the words which I spoke to you while I was yet with you, that all that is written concerning me in the law of Moses and prophets and psalms must be fulfilled". He throws them back on what He said. The Lord had already spoken of these things to them. It seemed as though adjustment had been secured and that there would be no more difficulty. The Lord had descended to eat before them, so as to educate them further. What will He not do for us? The better we know Him, the more we expect Him to do.
L.W. What the Lord did for the disciples, the Holy Spirit would do for us.
J.T. He forces it on them that they had been remiss. He goes back with them over the ground. Why had they not understood? Why had they not believed? Why had they not made use of what they had heard? Then having accomplished His thought in their adjustment. He proceeds to something further -- that for which they were not responsible. He takes them on to higher ground, having "opened their understanding to understand the scriptures". Let us judge ourselves in relation to things that have blurred our sight. Up to that moment there had been a moral issue, but now He acts creationally, anticipating their arriving at the knowledge which is characteristic of the new man, as in @Colossians 3: 10. It is what every one of us who looks back on our history can witness to.
Ques. How does that work out today?
J.T. It is what the Lord can do, it involves His sovereign rights as Creator. The new man is created according to God (@Ephesians 4: 24), and renewed into full knowledge according to the image of the Creator (@Colossians 3: 10.)
{194}
It is the One who is the Creator who has to do with our understandings. The disciples had to judge themselves before they received the benefit of creational action, the time for which had now arrived. First, there has to be the moral question settled if you want Him to come in sovereignly. They had to judge the defect. The Lord will not do that for us, but then when that is settled, He comes in. We shall be in heaven as the product of God's sovereign work as Creator.
F.J.F. We shall be sadly hindered if there be not this self-judgment with us.
J.T. The Lord says, as it were, I am operating in you, but you are a moral being, you are responsible and your own moral state is at fault. This in you is not a creational defect, but your own state. As soon as I see and judge that, He comes in for us, and does exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think.
Rem. This leads to the truth of the body (@Colossians 3). Each of us has to look on the saints as one body.
J.T. You look around and see them all, not Christ alone. We need to look around and "see all things clearly", including the saints, in order to apprehend what they are as the result of God's work -- the new man.
This matter of what is creational is very fine, for what will the Lord not do for us? My side is the moral issue. That has to be taken up first.
N.D. From our side, our spiritual state or experience is subject to limitations. Is that any different from passing into the presence of the Lord when we depart this life?
J.T. There is correspondence, but the saint with the Lord has no body, so he is limited there also.
N.D. Then he is not subject to limitations in relation to the body.
J.T. If he has no body, that in itself is a limitation. The spirit is only part of a man, not the full man. Paul says, "whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows", @2 Corinthians 12: 2.
{195}
Nevertheless he had heard wonderful things, indicating that departed saints do know things and can hear things, but they are limited. Thus our bodies, even such as they are, are better than none. And the Lord cares for them and He also enables us to enter into the spiritual and heavenly order of things opened to us while in them.
H.W.R. In writing to the Corinthians Paul says, "For indeed we who are in the tabernacle groan, being burdened; while yet we do not wish to be unclothed, but clothed", @2 Corinthians 5: 4.
J.T. After their adjustment the Lord proceeded to the preaching (verse 45 - 49). "That all that is written concerning me in the law of Moses and prophets and psalms must be fulfilled". This is that which was written, the public side of things. He had spoken to the two going to Emmaus, of Moses and the prophets, and He says here, "*ye* are witnesses of these things", that is, they had seen them. In Acts, Luke records that the Lord told the disciples "ye shall be my witnesses". You cannot be a witness of Christ unless you are a witness of the things.
F.J.F. The Lord's reference to the Scriptures in Luke shows that He had the public position in view. They were recognised by the Lord, as also in the synagogue, @Luke 4.
J.T. Yes. The Scriptures are authoritative in this position. After saying that they are witnesses, He says, "And behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you; but do ye remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high". We should notice that it is all what the Lord is doing now. Their adjustment has taken place, and so the Lord brings in great things as regards the preaching. And it is to be remarked that they were to remain in the city till they were clothed *with* power. The Lord would say, You will get the message as you are on your feet. The Spirit will come in. Matthew would make it more testing in his presentation, but here the Lord is making it somewhat easier for the sake of the preaching. It is a question of what the Scriptures
{196}
require, that the preaching goes forth from Jerusalem, and so they are to be clothed with power from on high.
J.S. And they are to wait upon the Lord until they are clothed with such power.
J.T. They are "my witnesses" in Acts; here they are witnesses as seeing things.
F.J.F. What necessity there is for repentance! It involves a man's moral being. He is responsible to move in relation to what God is saying.
J.T. The moral point is most important. Every man must accept responsibility for his sins, but God says, I open a door of repentance. And then remission is added. What is the good of repentance if there be no remission? What a fortifying gospel it is! It begins in the very place where Christ was put to death, and it is to be spread amongst all the nations. "Preached in his name to all the nations beginning at Jerusalem" (verse 47). It was not that the *Lord* put that upon them, but the Scriptures required it. And they were witnesses, and were to remain there until clothed with power from on high.
Rem. Is the word "thus it behoved" also connected with the preaching?
J.T. Yes.
W.T. Are these the main features of the preaching of the gospel -- repentance and remission?
J.T. The gospel goes further. There is no mention of the word "gospel" here. This concerns the preaching; it meets man's *need*, but we have further thoughts in the gospel, in fact the mystery is included in it. It is called the gospel of the glory of the blessed God. In Luke the thought is that men might get relief and God would open a door for them to repent, and in doing so, would have forgiveness in view.
J.H.H. When you are preaching, do you get your message as you are on your feet?
J.T. How do you find it?
J.H.H. I like to have my scriptures before me.
J.T. So do I. I like to have an outline; for this I go
{197}
to Galilee. There has to be that exercise before the preaching; but what the Lord says here indicates that power comes in as you are preaching. Of course what He directly alludes to is the coming of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost. It is as you are preaching that power comes in. The whole person is affected. All should look to experience it. What the Lord will do for us as we are ministering!
B.H.T. And the message, might that also come as you are on your feet?
J.T. I never come to speak without having something, as watching at wisdom's gates and waiting at the posts of its doors. These things are worth getting, but in delivering them we need to be clothed with power from on high.
C.C.E. We often say a great deal more than ever we meant to say.
J.T. It is usually something distinctive that you get on your feet, when you receive this touch from the Holy Spirit as you are speaking.
B.S. His name is to be mentioned, I notice, as though it is that which is the effective power.
J.T. The preaching is to be in His name. That is the position in which the gospel is set. Peter makes much of it in his preaching as recorded in Acts. "And it shall be that whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved", @Acts 2: 21. "By faith in his name, his name has made this man strong", @Acts 3: 16. Everything is in that name, it gives authority to the gospel. The whole power of God is behind it; it involves His authority in heaven. "Wherefore also God highly exalted him, and granted him a name, that which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow", @Philippians 2: 9, 10. "And salvation is in none other, for neither is there another name under heaven which is given among men by which we must be saved", @Acts 4: 12.
{198}
D.S. Peter's preaching in @Acts 2 had reference to the Lord in resurrection.
J.T. And in heaven too. "Know assuredly that God has made him, this Jesus whom *ye* have crucified, both Lord and Christ". That applies personally and officially. The official side is stressed. "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which *ye* behold and hear", @Acts 2: 33. Thus the preaching went on in His name.
{199}
SPIRITUAL INSTRUCTION FOR PART IN THE ASSEMBLY (3)
@Acts 1: 1 - 26
J.T. It should be noted that the ascension is recorded in the end of Luke and also here in @Acts 1, and what is also to be observed is that in @Luke 24 we have leadership. It is said that the Lord *led* the disciples out as far as to Bethany, that is, we have the principle that the Lord may lead with a view to public testimony, but as Minister of the sanctuary He leads inwardly. He leads towards God, but His leadership has also to do with the dispensational dealings of God, and the saints are to be subject and amenable to His direction in this sense. Bethany is not Olivet, it does not say He led them to Olivet, it is said that they returned to Jerusalem from the mount of Olives; but in Luke it is definitely stated that He led them as far as Bethany, that is to a limited point. It has reference evidently to the place of love, but in relation to the remnant of Israel. It is seen there with the idea of the dispensations in view, but in Acts the disciples are told, "It is not yours to know times or seasons". The book of Acts looks towards the assembly in its heavenly position, whereas Luke would concern us with the dispensations, and how the love of God for His ancient people has to be regarded, how the Lord would lead in that way for the moment, but ultimately having His eternal purpose in mind.
W.S. Having been led out as far as Bethany they returned to Jerusalem with great joy.
J.T. They returned to Jerusalem and they did not go to the upper room, but to the temple, meaning that they are in accord with the leading so far as it went, but still taking Jewish ground. Intelligence is contemplated; the Lord had opened their understanding to understand the Scriptures, and the Scriptures give great consideration for God's ancient people. So that in going to Jerusalem
{200}
they are in keeping with that, they go into the temple and are continually praising and blessing God. Under these circumstances they are a testimony to others, they were a contribution to Israel at this time, showing what God was willing to do for them.
F.J.F. They are not as yet distinct from the nation.
J.T. The Lord did not wish them to be separate; leading them to Bethany meant they were to take up a remnant character in the place of love, in the exercise of great forbearance towards Israel; that was the point at the moment. We have to learn how God thinks of persons who are not affected by the truth as we are. He has them in His mind that they should be affected, and exercises great patience towards them. What would be a greater testimony to God at this time than that there should be *such* a company, praising and blessing Him continually? Anyone that went to the temple would have observed this. What a testimony it was! The idea of "as far as" to Bethany is that it is not beyond. The Lord had been accustomed to go to the mount of Olives, and when the Supper was instituted they sang a hymn and went there; but now they go to Bethany. The mount of Olives looks towards heaven and the assembly, it was the place to which the Lord had recourse at night. While He was in Jerusalem ministering He went to the mount of Olives at night, indicating that that was His retreat with His Father alone. But now He leads them, not there, but to Bethany. The point in the beginning of the Acts is to bring out the link with the upper room rather than the temple. While we are to be with God in bearing testimony to our brethren or to others whom He would bring into what we enjoy, we should never give up our own retreat, our own special place with Himself.
F.J.F. It is striking that it says the mount of Olives was a sabbath day's journey from Jerusalem. Does that suggest anything?
J.T. I suppose it is the distance between the camps in the wilderness and the tabernacle, where they could
{201}
go and worship. They could go that length. There is the idea of restriction on the sabbath, but they could go into Jerusalem from Olivet even on the sabbath. I think it conveys a spiritual thought -- that the old system allowed such a journey. The women (as we had yesterday) observed the sabbath, they were restful on the sabbath, according to the commandment; but there is nothing about the sabbath day's journey in Luke, it is in the Acts.
J.S. Have you any thought as to why they were at the mount of Olives?
J.T. We are seeking to arrive at the distinction between Bethany and the mount of Olives. As already said, the Lord led them as far as Bethany; it is a remnant position, it is the place of love. According to Luke He was received up from Bethany. "And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them. And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven". He is separated from them. Their position is as the remnant of Israel. In the opening of the Acts the link with heaven is in view.
R.B. Is it the assembly position in Acts?
J.T. That is the idea. Although they continued on the principle of @Luke 24 in going to the temple, they broke bread in the *house*, and were in the upper room; they maintained the assembly position right through.
N.D. Does the upper room link on with the assembly?
J.T. It does in the Acts. In Luke we have the priestly side. It is God patiently waiting on Israel, and waiting on them with such a contribution as the disciples of Jesus were in the temple. How joyful they were! If you had been there you would have seen that, and enquired, What does this mean? It was what God had in His mind for all, a palpable thing, not mere doctrine. The rabbis were occupied with the law and tradition, but this is a palpable testimony. There had not been such a company seen in the temple before -- not even in the days of Solomon. It was a contribution
{202}
from God to His ancient people in His dispensational ways.
R.B. He did not lead them that way in Acts.
J.T. He did not lead them at all in Acts. Acts is an assembly book. He assembled with them. You learn from Him in the assembly what you are to do. It is headship.
L.W. The position of the disciples in the temple is similar to the cloud lingering.
J.T. That is what it was. You can see what a contribution it was from Jehovah to His ancient people. Any one could see them; it was in the court, it would not be in the holiest. If one enquired, What is the occasion of all this joy? the answer would be, It is God's mind for you. It is the same thing today; as the saints are happily in the enjoyment of the things of God, they are a testimony to all who see them. In @John 1: 39 the Lord says, "Come and see". It is important to have something of God that people can see.
F.J.F. Was it a spiritual witness? "*Ye* are witnesses of these things".
J.T. It was in a spiritual way; think of what they were. If you had been there as a Jew, and had come into the court of the temple and looked at these people, you would have noted their joy; they were jubilant, victorious, obviously enjoying blessing. Not from Abraham down had there been such a testimony in Israel as this. The Lord Jesus had been brought in as a Babe, and Simeon's word was a prophetic testimony to Israel, but there is no need of calling attention to these men, they show they are full of holy joy.
F.J.F. Glory was there when the Lord Jesus was brought in as a Babe, and also here.
J.T. What Haggai spoke of was realised, in a sense, the "latter glory" of the house. It was only provisional however. For the moment these men, like Christ, are there and full of joy; and they were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. It was a further
{203}
testimony to them. When Stephen spoke to them, his face shone; it was a continuation of this in that sense; but his address was an indictment.
R.D. It says, "were continually". Is that today?
J.T. The point is that it was there every day, as it were, any one could see it. Of course it came to an end, but there was a constant testimony to Christ as the result of His death and resurrection.
J.B. Do you think the assembly in that way is a testimony to christendom?
J.T. That is the idea. John comes in at the end. "Come and see". That is one of his characteristic phrases. Luke would say, Go and carry the testimony in grace to people wherever they are, like the Samaritan, but "Come and see", means there is something to see.
F.J.F. Was all this involved in what Paul brought to light?
J.T. It was ultimately merged in the assembly.
T.R. Before the Lord died, He went into the temple and looked round on everything, then He left it and went out to Bethany.
J.T. He came back from Bethany in the morning, but as He came back He cursed the fig-tree. That is not here, they came back from Bethany full of joy and blessing, not cursing.
Rem. The joy was consequent upon the Lord leading them to Bethany, the place of love.
J.T. It would be, but there was more than that. He lifted up His hands and blessed them, and as He blessed them He was parted from them and went up into heaven. When He had gone they went back into Jerusalem with the sense of being blessed.
C.C.E. There is no testimony so strong as joy, it is the strongest form of testimony.
J.T. Yes, when you have it every day. We experience a good day on Lord's day as a rule, thank God, but what are we on Mondays?
{204}
C.C.E. Here it is not just a burst of joy, subsiding then into depression.
J.T. It is "continually". "Joy unspeakable and filled with the glory". What a testimony it is!
F.J.F. Do you think this was a triumph for God?
J.T. Certainly. It is what He had effected through Christ. The true Aaron had blessed them. The true Aaron is here, and He lifts up His hands and blesses them, and is parted from them. They have the sense of being blessed, as Isaac said, "blessed he shall be". There is no doubt about it, these people *are* blessed; it is a permanent thing.
J.H.H. This was the transitional period between the old and the new dispensations.
J.T. Transitional in its bright side. Judgment is not in view here, it is all blessing.
J.H.H. The old dispensation closing up in glory.
J.T. It is closed up judicially later, because Stephen's address is the indictment, as remarked already. You have no indictment here, nothing but praise to God; not teaching and preaching, but joy visibly in the centre of everything, the temple.
L.W. The glory departed from Israel. Is this the return?
J.T. In a way it is there. It will come back to Israel presently, and will enter from the east, we are told in Ezekiel, and this is a foreshadowing of what is coming in by and by. It is God saying to every Jew, This is what My mind is for you, and so it is with every christian. The preacher should be the expression of what he is preaching. It is like the two pillars in front of the temple -- they were intended to illustrate what was in God's mind. Christianity is not a theoretical thing, it is a substantial thing. John's epistle brings in the substantial side of things. "And these things write we to you that your joy may be full", @1 John 1: 4.
{205}
F.J.F. These men would form very good material with which to build the assembly, when they received further light.
J.T. You can understand how the Spirit of God would take up Luke and prepare him to write the gospel, and instruct him that the gospel only went so far but did not go all the way. The Lord would undoubtedly give Luke to understand that there was something more in mind. Luke would have to look in another direction now before writing the Acts, and he *is* looking in another direction; he is not looking at the temple in Jerusalem any more, that is no longer his objective. The thought was that the Lord was about to send the Spirit "whom I will send to you from the Father". He says, "*he* shall bear witness concerning me". He "goes forth from with the Father", and is thus perfectly conversant with all that is in the Father's mind, all His counsels; and He also bears witness. There is thus a further witness by One perfectly competent to bring out the thoughts of God, going forth from with the Father; "And ye too bear witness", this involves Paul's teaching, which is an additional testimony. Luke in Acts has all this in view. He opens his second treatise to Theophilus by referring to all the things which Jesus began both to do and to teach. He speaks of how He "presented himself living". He *presented* Himself a living Person from among the dead. He is now to be seen thus. It is not simply that He was seen, but He showed Himself, so that He should be seen as He intended Himself to be seen. Then He assembled with them, this is the idea now. It is a question of learning how to assemble, and He is with them to teach them; you do not get this earlier. It is now the question of assembling and knowing how to assemble, which far transcends the temple. It is a question of the spiritual temple formed of persons, the Lord of glory, the true Solomon, assembling with them. Peter would say, as it were, I remember the Lord -- how He sat, how He moved (it is not now the question of the breaking of
{206}
bread). I remember how He acted in the assembly. So that you are introduced at once to this great idea (verse 4).
F.J.F. That has eternity in view.
J.T. I think so. We are now looking towards the Pentecostal assembly which will be seen coming down out of heaven from God (@Revelation 21), but not *only* the Pentecostal assembly, for the city in @Revelation 21 includes Paul's ministry, which connects what happened here, and subsequently under the twelve, with the eternal position.
J.S. The disciples are now quite free with the Lord to ask questions. "Is it at this time that thou restorest the kingdom to Israel?"
J.T. He is always ready to answer questions in the assembly. Questions had been asked Him in the temple, but now it is in the assembly. It is as having come together they asked Him questions.
F.J.F. Intelligent persons are in view.
J.T. Yes, persons who know how to be in the assembly.
J.H.H. Does the assembly now displace the material temple as a place to be inquired in?
J.T. It does. You can see how things are overlapping here. But the material thing is about to disappear; you can see how it is displaced here. The *better* thing has come in, the better thing of @Hebrews 11: 40. God sets things aside by bringing in what is better; it is not arbitrary.
J.H.H. Is temple light a feature of the assembly today?
J.T. Yes. The Lord begins by assembling with them, and another thing is that He charged them by the Spirit. It is the day of the Spirit, things are to be done by the Spirit.
F.J.F. They would learn from Him how to comport themselves as He assembled with them.
J.T. You can see they would be set free. "Being assembled with them", it says, He "commanded them
{207}
not to depart from Jerusalem" (verses 4, 5); telling them further that they would be baptised with the Holy Spirit, and implying that they were to be merged together in power.
B.H.T. Does baptism with the Holy Spirit involve the ascension of Christ?
J.T. Yes; "Having therefore been exalted ... he has poured out this". "In the power of one Spirit *we* have all been baptised into one body", @1 Corinthians 12: 13. Baptised here would imply merging. It is not being clothed with power from on high, but being *baptised*.
R.D. He was speaking of the things which concerned the kingdom of God. Does that involve the whole of christianity?
J.T. It is a great general thought. The kingdom of God is a moral thought, the kingdom in which God is seen and felt. That was about to be inaugurated as the Spirit came down. The next thing that comes out is that the disciples wanted to know certain things, and He does not answer in the negative or the positive. He said, "It is not yours to know times or seasons, which the Father has placed in his own authority; but ye will receive power". They would get the Spirit; they would be abundantly supplied for testimony. So that it is not wise to make too much of current happenings among the nations. When God acts, things will take form very quickly, we must wait for that. It says in Mark that even the Son does not know; here it says "which the Father has placed in his own authority". We may as well accept that; our point is testimony in connection with the assembly. Sometimes we assume to know too much! The point for us is the *present* testimony of God. He will not be diverted from it.
C.C.E. If the Son does not know, how can we expect to be told? We cannot expect to have a superior position to Him.
J.T. The Father has placed it in His own authority. All things are given into the Son's hands. In inscrutable
{208}
wisdom *the* Father reserves certain things for Himself. We have to leave that. The book of Revelation is really the opening up of the Lord's remark, "nor the Son": "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him" -- which *God* gave to Him. That is how it opens up to us, but as to the application of times and seasons, it is very precarious to attempt to fix anything, for properly they do not belong to our dispensation. We are living in the day of the Spirit, and it is a remarkable thing that the feast of Pentecost is not said to end. It is not limited by time. It is not like the other feasts, it has an outlet into eternity; that is an important thing for us.
N.G. Is the assembly to be a witness to Christ? "Ye shall be my witnesses".
J.T. That alludes to the twelve. The assembly is contemplated there in principle, but the disciples were to return again to Jerusalem as witnesses, not now simply that they saw things, but the Lord constituted them His witnesses of these things. "Ye will receive power", He says. The power they received would really work out in the assembly, and they would be there as witnesses. Spiritual power would mark them. Not here as sent out as the Jewish remnant, but in relation to the assembly.
J.R. As of the assembly, does that give us courage to testify? Peter before the Lord's crucifixion failed miserably, but after the Spirit comes down he stands up boldly -- he is not afraid now.
J.T. Yes. Peter exemplifies what the Lord says here -- "ye shall be my witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea". Peter exemplifies this.
N.D. How does this work out in regard to the twelve -- "to the end of the earth" (@Acts 1: 8)?
J.T. It does not seem as if they carried that out, but that it fell into the hands of Paul eventually; according to the counsel of James it was decided they should minister to the circumcision, but Paul to the nations. And so it fell within the range of Paul's services. This is just a general thought -- the end of the earth. In
{209}
whomsoever it was carried out they were to be His witnesses. We have hardly anything in detail about the twelve in the Acts, except Peter and John; although of course the others are included in general references to "the apostles" and were active in service and used of God.
H.W.R. The fact that James is the first to suffer death shows he must have been prominent as a witness.
J.T. We may be sure all were prominent in service in general and did the work assigned to them.
F.J.F. Would it be right to say that the full truth concerning the assembly could not come to light in this chapter as the Lord was not in the right position yet? He was not ascended.
J.T. Quite so, nor was the Spirit here, but you can see how the thing was being worked out in principle. While He was amongst them, He showed them how to assemble.
F.J.F. It was a very great day.
J.T. Yes. You will notice how stress is laid on the *manner* of His going up -- which you do not get in Luke -- and they beholding him. That should enter into the assembly. *They behold* Him; they kept looking up too long, however, because the cloud had received Him out of their sight. If God takes something out of your sight, it is no use looking at it, you will not see it. It showed that a new dispensation was being inaugurated, a dispensation of *faith*, not of sight now.
C.C.E. What do the two men represent here in verse 10?
J.T. They represent characteristics that should mark the testimony. Their clothing would suggest that the interval between the Lord's going up and His return is to be marked by purity. We need to keep our garments clean. "They shall walk with me in white". If you are going back into the city you must keep clear of what is in it. They would suggest that to the disciples. There are three sets of two persons -- there were two at the sepulchre in shining raiment; two here and they are
{210}
in white; also two men on the mount and they are glorious, they appear "in glory". They contain the brightest suggestion, as coming out of heaven -- Moses and Elias, two known persons. In each case there is some testimony, the numeral two being a suggestion of testimony. Here it is the question of purity in the interval between the Lord's ascension and His return. One of the most difficult things is to keep our clothing white, to keep our spirits clear. "Blessed are they that wash their robes" (@Revelation 22); you keep doing it. The thought is always to be present with me.
C.F. Do you think we may be too much occupied with the return of the Lord as a prophetic thought? We must not be diverted from function as witnesses here.
J.T. The thought is *Jesus*. "This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner ..." (verse 11). That is what the men tell the disciples. It is not a question of times and seasons, but the fact that *He* is coming back, and He will come back as they had seen Him go. They were now to take on something of His way of assembling; His movements were to determine theirs.
J.R. The Lord breathed into His disciples in @John 20. What is the difference between breathing into the disciples, and the power about to come in here?
J.T. They are two views of the same thing, which synchronise. Luke is concerned about the public side, the Spirit coming upon them. He sat upon each of them, it is a public thing. But the breathing into the disciples is inward and relates to eternity, though it has its bearing also in testimony, and works out in the way of forgiveness and retention of sins. What is stressed is the *manner*, "as ye have seen him go into heaven". What is suggested is important to distinguish. John deals with the inward side. David built inward. Luke is concerned more with the public side, but both bear on the testimony.
C.C.E. The fact that they are distinguished is important; on the other hand, they bear on each other.
{211}
J.T. I suppose @John 20 is a sort of pattern of what took place when the Spirit came. It is a very affecting thing -- the breathing of Christ into His disciples. It constitutes us trustworthy. He thus commits Himself to us.
L.W. "As the Father sent me forth, *I* also send you".
J.T. Thus we correspond with His position as here. "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted".
F.J.F. God breathing into Adam's nostrils was that he might be in the image and likeness of God. Is that so? The breathing of @John 20 fitted them to be here representative of Him.
J.T. I think that is the idea. How could Adam represent God otherwise? There is image *and* likeness. The moral qualities of God are seen in the man, but he is also representative of God. Authoritative representation of God is there.
B.H.T. Referring to the Lord's own movements, you suggest that we should learn from them. I was wondering if that is why they were found at mount Olivet.
J.T. Yes. He returned to Jerusalem during the day, and in the nights He went to mount Olivet. It is an out-of-the-world condition. Bethany was not an out-of-the-world condition, the Jews came there to sympathise with Mary. Bethany was a town, Olivet a mount. They went there after the Supper, and I think that is why it is mentioned here. They returned from the mount, which is called Olivet, which is near to Jerusalem -- a sabbath day's journey. He did not lead them to any point, it is now a question of spiritual understanding. What ought we to do next? The Lord has gone up and He has not led me anywhere, but He has conveyed certain things to me. He has assembled with us, and we have impressions. Where will these impressions lead -- to the temple or to the upper room? To the latter, that is the point today: Whither do the spiritual impressions that you get lead you -- to the cathedral or some other such religious building? No. They will lead elsewhere, to the upper
{212}
room, where certain persons are. Believers must find this upper room and these persons. If Paul went to London, what do you suppose he would think of St. Paul's cathedral? What would Peter think of St. Peter's at Rome? We ought to have feelings as to these things. These impressions of Jesus received when He was with His own, where do they direct me? In what will they culminate? He does not tell them to go to the upper room, but *they went there*.
Ques. What is the thought of their staying?
J.T. It is a permanent position, leading towards the assembly. The upper room signifies moral elevation. It is something entirely different, for it does not comport with current religious feeling.
L.W. We are to feel the greatness of it and what is to be enjoyed now.
J.T. As regards enjoyment, Paul said, that to depart and to be with Christ is far better, but for the sake of the testimony he knew that he would remain. I should not like to miss what is going on now. Peter was to glorify God in death, so he would not expect the Lord to come in his lifetime. There were certain things the apostles understood, and one was that the testimony would go on.
J.R. You mentioned that John's gospel rules out Iscariote every time. Is that the reason why the Spirit gives so much detail as to what happened to him?
J.T. It gives you a full account of what the feelings of the assembly were as to that man. Peter calls attention to Judas here; "for he was numbered amongst us, and had received a part in this service". This upper room was a most interesting place. In the temple would be the chief priests, the old system carried on, sacrifices offered, etc., but we have the names of the persons given that were staying in that upper room, and we are told that they gave "themselves all with one accord to continual prayer, with several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren".
The results of our Lord's testimony are here, and
{213}
what results as we analyse these people! Taken one by one, what potentialities were there in these persons! Think of what each of them could say to you about Jesus! What treasure there was! It was all assembly property. It is an enrichment greater than what David spoke about in 1 Chronicles, whether actual or potential.
C.P. The special claims of the mother and brethren of Jesus are no more asserted, they merge together now in the upper room.
J.T. It shows the result of our Lord's service. He had suffered much from His relatives, so everyone who is spiritual will likewise suffer from natural-minded relatives.
The Lord had experienced it peculiarly, but He exercised great patience with them. Nevertheless He had on one occasion to rebuke His mother, saying, "What have I to do with thee, woman?" We see here that He had secured His mother and brethren for the truth. Mary is here representative of a treasury in the temple. By the Spirit David had a pattern of the treasuries. Mary had much that no one else had. No one could tell you so much about Christ's infancy and boyhood and early manhood as His mother.
C.C.E. It is possible that she was the vessel used to convey to Luke the details that he brings into his gospel.
J.T. Luke would inquire from her. If I were thinking of writing about the humanity of Jesus, I would if possible certainly inquire of His mother.
F.J.F. She did treasure them too; she pondered all the things concerning Him in her heart. She was a real living treasury.
Rem. Would these persons be the first living contribution to His assembly?
J.T. They are the result of our Lord's testimony. He is the true David, the material for the house is here. The building is formed after He goes up to heaven.
The next thing we see is the idea of leadership (verse 15).
{214}
God's way in the administration of the assembly is to have leaders. Peter stands up in the midst of the brethren. There were a hundred and twenty of them, not just the apostles, but "the brethren"; and Mary is there; sisters are there, so that it is characteristically an assembly matter. Having so recently sinned, what a man of moral power Peter must have been to stand up in the midst of the brethren. He is quite free of his sin now. It is the true idea of forgiveness.
C.C.E. It shows how you get free of your past -- put under your feet through faith.
J.T. The Lord intended that the brethren should not retain anything in their minds against him. The brethren in @Luke 24 were talking about how the Lord appeared to Simon. Evidently He appeared to him early, and the word to the women was, "go, tell his disciples and Peter". Peter did not lose his place because of his denial of the Lord. "First, Peter" -- he is still "first". He is able to stand up in the midst of the brethren, and what he says is right.
L.W. His name is mentioned first in connection with the list of those in the upper room.
J.T. It is always first Peter, that is the Lord's way. Even his great sin did not deprive him of that. It is very encouraging, but it affords no licence; he had bitter experience -- much more, we may be sure, than is recorded. Paul writes to Timothy, "At my first defence no man stood with me, but all deserted me ... But the Lord stood with me, and gave me power, that through me the proclamation might be fully made". I have no doubt there were those who thought Paul should not be leading, and who rather resented it. Why should Paul be leading when he was in prison? The Lord said, Paul is to lead to the last. "Through me the proclamation might be fully made". We are to be subject to those who lead, and to pray for them; it is a very important thing. The democratic spirit is creeping in so much among the brethren; the principle of levelling down is working
{215}
insidiously amongst us, but God will never give up leadership. If He puts a man forward He will keep him and support him, and woe be to him who stands in his way!
F.J.F. The message to the women was, "go, tell his disciples and *Peter*", whereas the disciples speak of the Lord having appeared to *Simon*. Is there any significance in that?
J.T. I think the Lord intended that they should all know that Peter had retained his place in His mind; He had not given him up at all. Having repented of it, his denial of the Lord did not impair his position as an apostle.
B.H.T. The Lord said "Satan has demanded to have you, to sift you as wheat".
J.T. That referred to them all: it is in the plural. This is the message in @Mark 16, specially sent to Peter; the Lord is specially concerned about Peter.
J.S. Do you think there is a moral thought in his being referred to as Peter?
J.T. The Lord appeared to *Simon*. He is viewed as a responsible man. He is a responsible man as having sinned, and yet the Lord appears to him first to encourage him and evidently to get the brethren to understand that he had not lost his place among the apostles.
J.S. How quickly he knew how to apply the Scriptures!
J.T. And that before the Spirit came down. What exercises Peter must have had in those days, and what thorough self-judgment must have gone on in him. He stood up. He sets out what the Lord can do for everyone who is in like state -- what the Lord can graciously do for us in reinstating us among our brethren.
R.B. Peter stood up in the *midst* of the brethren, not above them.
J.T. That is very suggestive -- a word for all who serve in an outstanding way. How different from him who *assumes* to be the successor of Peter!
{216}
SPIRITUAL INSTRUCTION FOR PART IN THE ASSEMBLY (4)
@Acts 2: 1 - 4, 42 - 47; @Acts 4: 23 - 37
J.T. The subject in view is discernment of the features of the assembly. It began with certain of those who loved the Lord, as seen in the end of @Luke 23 and the beginning of chapter 24. They were regulated by the commandments; but were wanting in faith and intelligence as to actual facts existent -- that is to say, that the Lord was risen. We are seeing how the Lord brings them, step by step, into the assembly, that they might discern Him there opening their understandings; how He leads them to a point, as far as to Bethany, and how they are in the temple as a testimony on God's part to the Jews. Then in view of the assembly formally presented in Acts, it is stated that the Lord assembled with them; and further we get how He was taken up from them. They returned to Jerusalem, but "to the upper chamber where were staying both Peter, and John", and the rest, with the women (@Acts 1: 13). Then Peter stood up in their midst and conveyed the light governing the position.
All these facts have to do with *the Lord's own handiwork* while here, including the "forty days", always having the assembly in mind. What is before us now, in these passages, is the thought of the assembly actually formed by the descent of the Spirit; and what marked it at the outset, so that we might have a right conception of the Pentecostal assembly. If the Lord permit, we might later consider the assembly as formed under the ministry of Paul, and how it became the vessel of divine service and praise. The intent throughout is that we might learn to be spiritual, and to apprehend the assembly in its spiritual features so as to be in accord with it, and have part in it intelligently.
{217}
The finishing touches of the Lord's handiwork are seen in the end of chapter 1, and His gracious care as risen, during the forty days of His sojourn before the Spirit came down, leading on to the spiritual side of the truth. There is the thought first of His assembling with them, and then what marked them in the upper room. In connection with the appointment of another apostle it was thought necessary that he should be one who had assembled with them during the time the Lord came in and out among them from the outset, until He was received up. The assembly was thus in mind even before the Spirit came down.
F.J.F. It was essential that the one chosen should have initial assembly experience.
J.T. Yes, that seems to have been in mind, showing how assembly features had taken form before the Spirit came down. The two appointed had had experience of assembling, and had missed nothing of the spiritual touch in the Lord's example in coming and going, from the baptism of John. There Jesus appeared publicly and heaven owned Him. What a wonderful day when the Spirit came down in bodily form upon Him at the Jordan! From that time onwards there was the idea of the Lord's assembling with them, and of His coming in and going out, so it was a learning time. The allusion here to the baptism of John is to the *beginning* of Christ's ministry. When His way among the Jews was shut up He "departed again beyond the Jordan to the place where John was baptising at the first ... And many believed on him there", @John 10: 40 - 42. These would come into the assembly.
D.S. What is conveyed in the fact that the Lord's age is given at His baptism?
J.T. Luke says, "Jesus himself was beginning to be about thirty years old", @Luke 3: 23. "Beginning to be" would indicate the real levitical start.
F.J.F. Does the coming in and going out of the Lord suggest what was in John's mind when he spoke of what
{218}
would take place after the Lord's departure -- "I am coming to you", @John 14: 18?
J.T. I think that is in mind, the apostles had already experienced it. After the Lord was in heaven, they would only experience it in a spiritual sense. John contemplates an era of the Spirit when he records the Lord's words, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you". That is what is to be experienced throughout the whole dispensation while the Spirit is here. They were already coming into the spiritual side of things, even before the coming of the Spirit. It is necessary for brethren to see the spiritual side of the assembly. It can be treated of as brothers or sisters at any given time or in any place, but that is only the persons; we have to think of the spiritual features in these persons and the presence of the Holy Spirit amongst them, and the effect of divine visitations.
C.C.E. The three and a half years¬ experience of assembling was an extensive education.
J.T. I thought we might see in chapter 1, before leaving it, how the full result of that education is presented. I had particularly in mind how they came into the experimental side of things during the forty days, they learned to apprehend the truth in a spiritual way; they experienced how He came in and went out through closed doors. They learned *from* Him, on the principle of having a model. "The crowd of names who were together" (@Acts 1: 15) does not suggest irregularity but that each was distinguishable. Every saint is distinguishable by his characteristics; no one is worth much unless he has some distinguishable features. Life is known by its features.
F.J.F. Does this present the people in their spiritual setting?
J.T. The word "crowd" is somewhat singular here, in that it was of those who had *names*, and their number is given. It might have suggested disorder, but a "crowd of names" brings out that they are persons distinguishable, although they are not set in any *regular*
{219}
order. Life is always distinguishable in its fruits. In selecting Matthias they were desirous that all should be according to the counsels of God, but what happens is to bring out the wisdom that was there. Peter quoting the Scripture shows how careful they were. They were not appointing another apostle as they later appointed deacons, but they selected two, as qualified by their histories. The whole disposition was in the Lord's hands, the lot signifying this.
L.W. Each saint has a name in that sense.
J.T. Each has a distinguishing feature. The more we have to do with the saints, the more we should be able to think of them as the subjects of the work of God. If we have to think of some brother as well off, prospering in business, or as merely educated, belonging to a good family in the world, we are not doing him much credit. If he is a subject of the work of God, that is the feature that counts.
J.A.H. What they looked for meant that there would be the ability to discern the Lord when He was in the midst, when He came in and went out.
J.T. What is any office or gift aside from the ability to discern the Lord? We must learn His movements in the assembly, and all gift and ministry ought to take character from these. That is what gives it its touch, so in the assembly on the Lord's day one gets suggestions as to one's movements and service. The more spiritual we are, the more we shall find our beginnings in the assembly, because we get touches there that we get nowhere else.
F.J.F. Even what is presented in the service of the gospel might flow from that.
J.T. Yes, I find that. It tests us, as there is not much time after Lord's Day morning to get something, but one touch is enough to give us what the Lord intends to characterise what we say in the preaching.
C.C.E. Personally I feel I should wait -- and I do -- till I have that touch from the Lord at the morning
{220}
meeting, before deciding what to say at the preaching.
J.T. The Lord honours that. The Lord Jesus coming in and going out: the apostles were made conversant with this. It was part of His service to them.
F.J.F. All service flows from what is spiritual.
J.T. One may have light, but a spiritual thought conveyed is what is intended to make up the assembly practically. The touch the Lord gives is intended to be formative of the assembly. "And Jesus said, Somebody hath touched me: for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me", @Luke 8: 46. The woman approached silently and, as she thought, unobserved, but the virtue went out of Him; that is the principle of the formation of the body. It is what goes out of Christ. An impression of Christ conveyed in preaching may be that. The body is of Christ characteristically; it is all of Christ.
Rem. Virtue flows from Christ as we realise His presence.
J.T. The more alert we are, the more we shall realise it. The Lord honours the recognition of right principles. If we wait on Him, we shall get something in the assembly for our service. Virtue goes out from Him and it is that which forms those to whom He ministers.
John had a great sense of the personal touch of Christ. No other apostle brings out what he does in chapter 14. Going in and out is according to that, and John was conversant with it all because he was so intimate and free with the Lord, being in His bosom. When the Lord said, "one of you shall deliver me up", without mentioning whom, Peter beckoned to John to inquire, because he recognised that John was so near the Lord. Though John was second to him, Peter seemed to recognise the spiritual superiority of John, and John's ready understanding of Peter's hints shows the familiarity they enjoyed at the beginning.
F.J.F. Peter would have confidence in John's judgment.
J.T. "I will not leave you orphans". John mentions
{221}
that, alluding to the state of things in apostolic times after the Spirit came, when the Lord would come to them.
N.G. Would spiritual discernment be in accord with individual knowledge of the Lord?
J.T. It supposes knowledge of Him. "Am I so long a time with you, and thou hast not known me, Philip?" Philip was upbraided for it, for the Lord feels it when we do not know Him and recognise Him. Then, "He that has seen me has seen the Father", @John 14: 9. The Father is there to be recognised in Him.
W.S. Are you suggesting that each Lord's day marks a fresh beginning in our assembly history?
J.T. John makes it a weekly matter, that we might be kept in freshness. Luke also refers in @Acts 20: 7 to "the first day of the week", saying, "we being assembled to break bread".
Ques. "I am coming to you". Is this a collective thought, having direct reference to apostolic times, before the breakdown?
J.T. I thought so; verses 21 - 23, however, refer to a later time. "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him", @John 14: 23. Individuals keeping His commandments -- that is what is in view in this latter scripture, it contemplates remnant times when others are not loving Him.
F.J.F. Would those weekly impressions refer to a fresh movement, so to speak, in relation to the tabernacle?
J.T. Assembly history is a question of weeks, according to John. It is not formally stated, but is to be spiritually apprehended. @John 20 is intensely spiritual. The more we are with the Lord, the more it will work out. As we approach this matter spiritually, we shall wait on Him in the assembly to get the impressions which are to govern us during the week.
W.S. These things being spiritually apprehended, maintain us in godly fear.
{222}
J.T. We maintain public order and go through the meetings that we have arranged during the week, but we receive a spiritual touch so that it is not the same routine, there is freshness in them always.
Rem. We have to discern the Lord's movements on each occasion.
J.T. "This same Jesus ... shall so come in like manner", @Acts 1: 11. All that will fill in the interval follows on His movements recorded in chapter 1, which were intended as the final education by the Lord during the forty days. He had accomplished spiritual results in the brethren. Now the same people in chapter 2 "were all together in one place". This is a new feature. Now they are on the ground of the assembly formed by the descent of the Spirit, but the material for it is described in chapter 1, and this is seen plainly here in that they are "all together in one place". Not one is absent. This is of present bearing, no one should be absent from the assembly at any time. It is a disadvantage and it deprives the Lord of what He intends to work out in us.
Rem. "Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together", @Hebrews 10: 25.
J.S. "Three times in the year shall all thy males appear before Jehovah thy God in the place which he will choose, at the feast of unleavened bread, and at the feast of weeks, and at the feast of tabernacles", @Deuteronomy 16: 16. They were times of joy and they must come.
J.T. @Deuteronomy 16: 9 - 12 is the passage that properly governs the assembly position. Notice that there is no limitation to this feast as with the others, and it was running its course here. Historically it was only carried on at a certain time, but in @Deuteronomy 16 it is not limited by days. The weeks are counted up to it, but there is no end to it. It is a spiritual matter because it suggests the beginning of an eternal state of things in principle in the assembly. The assembly is linked with the eternal state by the Spirit.
{223}
L.W. "And when the day of Pentecost was now accomplishing", @Acts 2: 1. It was going on.
J.T. Yes, we get the real thing in the gift of the Spirit. In the types, the assembly is brought in at this feast. The Lord is seen as risen in the sheaf of barley, and fifty days after He brings in the assembly. Therefore the types help here. @Deuteronomy 16 indicates a spiritual state of things which cannot be limited by time. You cannot limit the Spirit; there are, in Him, infinite possibilities.
H.W.R. The place that "God will choose, to cause his name to dwell in" brings in the assembly (@Deuteronomy 16: 6).
J.T. That is the idea. The Lord comes to you, there He blesses you.
R.D. In verse 14, is the family thought suggested in the sons and daughters? How would you place that in the assembly?
J.T. You have the Levite and the stranger too. It is to bring out the state of things in the assembly as marked by the Spirit. What marked the assembly in @Acts 2, was the state of love. Under the twelve, it is not the intelligent side of the assembly that is developed; for that we have to wait for Paul, he gives the law of the house. Here, under the twelve, it is great unselfishness and love that is expressed. What a great volume of love there was in the early assembly! Surely this is of present bearing! We have more light, but have we more love?
C.C.E. "Thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy bondman, and thy handmaid, and the Levite, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are in thy gates", @Deuteronomy 16: 14. Rejoicing together in one beautiful assembly!
J.T. What a time they had! What a volume of love was operating! We get in the closing verses, "all that believed were together", @Acts 2: 44. This is not that they were always literally together, but it alludes to the principle of unity that bound them together in affection.
{224}
"And had all things common, and sold their possessions and substance, and distributed them to all, according as anyone might have need" (verse 45). What a state of love! We have to look this in the face and admit we can hardly see it anywhere, except in this chapter and @Acts 4: 32 - 35. We have to accept its bearing on ourselves.
H.W.R. There is no reason, is there, why we should not hold things in this way now.
J.T. But *do* we? Where is the unselfishness? Is it so? The Spirit of God portrays here the early assembly. It is not yet seen as the vessel of divine service, but these are the initial conditions. How unselfish these believers were in giving up all that they had! How subject to the apostles! And they carried on the breaking of bread and prayer.
J.S. Something worth persevering in!
J.T. Persevering is the word: "they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles". There was a new order of things; they were not in relation to the old system -- to the teaching of the high priest -- but to that of the apostles. Authority is there, and they "persevered", in that they kept at it all the time.
D.S. Would it be right to think that here we have the answer to the Man gone into heaven?
J.T. That is the thought. What is described -- subjection and that volume of love -- was effected by the presence of the Spirit. It enhances the idea of the Spirit. What a state of unselfishness! What a volume of love! I look at it all and compare myself with it, and am humbled.
L.W. The Lord gave all that He had.
J.T. The Lord gave *Himself* in utter unselfishness.
F.J.F. It is our privilege to hold all that we have at His disposal.
J.T. Paul regulated this somewhat. We have to wait for Paul for regulation, and for the full spirit of intelligence that governs the assembly. Both 1 and 2 Corinthians deal with financial matters. Paul does not impose the
{225}
conditions of @Acts 2, he brings in intelligence, to be seen in the equity and seemliness generally that should govern giving. "On the first of the week let each of you put by at home", @1 Corinthians 16: 2. It is put on us to do it, and that under the most favourable circumstances, not when the thought of paying the rent is pressing, but on Lord's day, when that does not enter into ones¬ thoughts, and our hearts are open to be affected by spiritual circumstances. Then in Paul's second letter he enlarges on giving, two chapters are devoted to it. Wisdom is recognised. A brother has means, he holds them in love, and uses them with discretion.
H.W.R. The widow gave both mites. We are ready with what we have if the Lord wants it.
J.T. You exercise wisdom in what you do.
C.C.E. "They gave themselves first to the Lord, and to us by God's will", @2 Corinthians 8: 5. The other way round would not be right.
F.J.F. If we give *ourselves* that would regulate all our giving.
J.T. All else is subservient to that, all to be in wisdom.
H.W.R. In Colossians it is love in the Spirit; love is regulated in that way.
F.J.F. Does stewardship enter into this? "*I* say to you, Make to yourselves friends with the mammon of unrighteousness", @Luke 16: 9.
J.T. That is good, but somewhat low ground to take. There is the thought of self in that, but yet the using of means in view of the future is honoured; but Paul's letters to the Corinthians make a great point of the present. The brethren who carried the bounty of saints in 2 Corinthians are said to be "deputed messengers of assemblies, Christ's glory", @2 Corinthians 8: 23. A great deal is made of the individuals used. The point is that the very act of giving becomes the means of the glory shining. In the carrying of money to Jerusalem, every step taken would radiate glory. Paul was used more than once in the actual carrying of money. What exercise and feelings
{226}
would be occasioned by carrying the bounty of the saints to Jerusalem!
L.W. This puts giving on a high plane.
J.T. In @Acts 4: 35 the price was laid "at the feet of the apostles". In 2 Corinthians the whole company is seen as permeated by love. Paul regulates it in view of public order, so that the mind is brought in, and we know what we are doing, and are doing it properly. Our giving is according to the need, and the need is to be determined, according to Paul, before the giving takes place.
S.G. Love was in them, and it was divine love. This is not giving on natural lines.
J.T. It is on a very high plane. "That the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and *I* in them", @John 17: 26. It is not what men call charity, but a more exalted thought that is to be in us; the "love with which thou hast loved me", is the character of the love in us. The idea conveyed by bowels of compassion (@Colossians 3: 12) is that the lower affections are involved and stirred. Our giving is aroused by need; need ought to move us. We do not give aimlessly, but to meet need. We give as God gives.
F.J.F. The assembly must be a wonderful sphere for the residence of glory, where even what is material radiates glory.
J.T. Everything is made to fit in with spiritual intelligence. It is a question of administration, and divine administration means the radiation of glory.
H.W.R. We need wisdom in the care meeting, in connection with giving.
J.T. Circumstances have to be considered. Love calculates on the principle of equality. The widow gave all, showing what love will do. Her affections were bound up with the house of God. That is one thing, but in giving now, you consider your family's needs and your own needs. Paul shows how intelligence calculates. Everything is distributed by God, not only in love but in
{227}
wisdom. "I was daily his delight, ... rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, and my delights were with the sons of men", @Proverbs 8: 30, 31. It is to be noted here that it is *wisdom* that is speaking. Things are calculated in wisdom. In persevering in the apostles¬ teaching these things would work out, and teaching would help us to work them out. When we come to Paul we have a higher level, because it is a question of the assembly with him, assembly giving, involving the radiation of glory. Paul makes much of this.
Rem. The Lord had a bag. What was the difference between that and assembly -- giving?
J.T. Judas had the bag, it was in wrong hands. There was not much glory attached to his having the bag -- but he was doing the work of a deacon. No doubt the Lord taught them, in measure, the divine principle of giving. "Some supposed ... that he should give something to the poor", @John 13: 29. Caring for those in need evidently marked the Lord's service here. Ananias ostensibly sought to act as Barnabas had done. Peter expressed the right thought as to it. "While it remained did it not remain to *thee*? and sold, was it not in thine own power?", @Acts 5: 4.
H.J.R. Should the conveyance of bounty to an individual be equally radiant?
J.T. Quite so. Paul links the glory with the assemblies; "deputed messengers of assemblies, Christ's glory", @2 Corinthians 8: 23. Those assemblies had part in this service. The messengers were Christ's glory, but they were messengers of *assemblies*. The thought of glory includes the assemblies. The messengers were the fulness of that glory in carrying the bounty. The assembly is the residence of divine glory.
W.S. It is beautiful to see the Lord supporting spiritual conditions, and adding to the assembly as the result of it.
J.T. Another thing here is they were constantly in the temple. That was in keeping with the provisional
{228}
state of things, but they were breaking bread in the house, not in the temple. They had already seized the thought of breaking of bread, and to some extent they had instinct enough to separate it from the temple. Seemingly they broke bread more frequently than on the first day of the week. And the Lord added to the assembly, as if to honour that state: it was worthy to be added to. There was a place of salvation there in those conditions. What a realm for young people to come into, with all the unselfishness, love, and unity that marked it!
H.W.R. The Jewish remnant is absorbed in this here.
J.T. Yes, "those that were to be saved". The assembly was the place of their salvation.
F.J.F. The body was here without the doctrine of it being known.
J.T. Yes, the time for naming it had not yet come. The temple was still in mind. It awaited Paul to bring out the thought of the body and the heavenly side of the truth.
W.S. The three thousand added shows the greatness of what was coming in.
J.T. What Paul brings in is not so much increase of spiritual power, but an increase in spiritual intelligence. They had love here, and they had substance, and regulation came in in due course. There was in these converts complete unselfishness. They "sold their possessions and substance, and distributed them to all ... and breaking bread in the house, they received their food with gladness and simplicity of heart, praising God, and having favour with all the people", @Acts 2: 45 - 47. The breaking of bread may have been attached to ordinary meals, but it had its own place, that is, apart from the temple. These people were free and simple, taking all from God. The gladness flowed not from mere sociability, but from obedience of faith in Christ, energised by the Spirit.
H.W.R. The breaking of bread was in a household setting.
{229}
J.T. It has a family setting. Paul detaches it from houses altogether, and attaches it to the assembly.
F.J.F. Heavenly light had not yet come in regard to the assembly.
C.C.E. The accuracy of Scripture is remarkable. We can trace exactly in the Scripture the stage of development in the assembly at any given moment.
J.T. We see the spiritual bearing of the outward facts recorded.
R.D. The giving of thanks for food is testing. It is inclined to become formal because we do it so often.
J.T. Some brothers are very brief and formal, but it is a *heart* matter. "Every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected, being received with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by God's word and freely addressing him", @1 Timothy 4: 4, 5. The word of God enlarges the thought.
Rem. We eat to the glory of God.
J.T. Thanksgiving for food is very important; it partakes of the character of the service of God.
F.J.F. Would you enlarge a little on the thought of sanctification?
J.T. The creature takes on a new character when you attach the word of God to it. "By faith we apprehend that the worlds were framed by the word of God", @Hebrews 11: 3. All our relations with the creature are on that principle. The mind of God enters into it. God provided flesh, fish, fowl, and vegetables. He thought these things out, having man in mind, and they are sanctified by the word of God. The fresh light of christianity only enhances the place of the creature, as everything becomes an occasion for thanksgiving and glory to God. There is glory to God in all creation. @Psalm 148 - 150 are beautiful in this respect. The word of God simplifies all. The serpent deceived, but Christ brings everything back to the simplicity of the divine thought, "simplicity as to the Christ", @2 Corinthians 11: 3.
{230}
There is complete recovery in Christ as to everything. Creation is never rightly understood till we bring in the word of God.
C.C.E. Food not received with gladness is, in principle, gluttony.
J.T. "Whose god is the belly", @Philippians 3: 19.
S.S. "Man doth not live by bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord", @Deuteronomy 8: 3.
F.J.F. Is all this, in principle, how the city was being surrounded in order to take it? laying siege to Jerusalem (@Deuteronomy 20: 19). Here Jerusalem was being encircled with the bounty of God. "Ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine", @Acts 5: 28.
J.T. I do not know what the population of Jerusalem was, it could not at that time have been great; yet there were a great number of saints as time went on, over three thousand here, a good quota and all adults, I take it. With their children they would make a goodly number. Jerusalem was encircled with all this -- a wonderful testimony rendered. Presently, it was to be encircled by something dreadfully different -- Roman soldiers, who ruthlessly razed it to the ground; but now, as you say, it is surrounded by divine goodness in the most palpable way. "Ye shall be my witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea and Samaria", @Acts 1: 8.
{231}
SPIRITUAL INSTRUCTION FOR PART IN THE ASSEMBLY (5)
@Acts 11: 25, 26; @Acts 13: 1 - 3; @Acts 20: 7, 8
J.T. It is not intended to dwell upon these scriptures in detail, but to follow up the idea contained in them, in relation to the assembly. It is the assembly we have in mind, and how we are to be in it spiritually. These scriptures bring before us Paul's ministry. He is the minister of the assembly. It was given to him, and from him we get the full thought worked out in its local bearing in the epistles to the Corinthians, and in Colossians and Ephesians in its spiritual and universal bearing. It is in these we find the full truth of the assembly.
In Acts we have presented the historical facts of how it came into evidence in the course of the testimony; first, in the Lord's ministry during the forty days, and secondly in the ministry of the twelve, particularly of Peter during the ten days between the Lord's ascension and the coming of the Holy Spirit; and then what came out after the gift of the Spirit. In the three passages now read we have what is seen in Paul's ministry. These passages bring out the most salient points.
We should refer to chapter 4, which gives us the last view as to the positive state of things developed under the twelve -- the last view of the Pentecostal assembly. It contains features of @Acts 2, but here the saints are viewed as "their own". "And having been let go, they came to their own company", @Acts 4: 23. And we have the form of their prayer, how they prayed. The saints are still intact, and in view of their continuance they are governed by the principle of prayer and dependence. A deep sense of need arose as the testimony proceeded. The saints had need. It is said, "they came to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said to them. And they, having heard it, lifted up their voice with one accord to God", @Acts 4: 23, 24.
{232}
This prayer is akin to Old Testament prayer, but entirely free from a spirit of revenge, of invoking punishment or judgment. The prayer invokes grace toward man. The saints continue to speak the word of God. "And now, Lord, look upon their threatenings, and give to thy bondmen with all boldness to speak thy word, in that thou stretchest out thy hand to heal", @Acts 4: 29, 30. That is the state of things. The assembly under the twelve retains its character as a new thing replacing Israel, not only arbitrarily, but *morally*, because it is the greater thing. Paul writes to the Hebrews of this better thing, better than anything they had, better than what was current. This is recorded to show us that what God introduces continues. The ark in Noah's time went through God's governmental dealings; so the assembly survives them in regard of Israel. It is due to the assembly as set up by the twelve, to dwell on this, and see how it served; it was equal to the functions that were assigned to it. They were continually in prayer and dependence.
C.C.E. It is not as in a known fixed relationship to God that they pray in @Acts 4.
J.T. No; they address God as Despot, or Master, somewhat on Old Testament lines; but their prayer is replete with grace, judgment is not sought. The saints here are the residence of grace and patience. The assembly is not yet setting out the heavenly thought, but it is fulfilling its office as in these circumstances. There is a word for us in it. If God has instituted anything, it goes through, and can do so only by the maintaining of God's thought in it, and by being in dependence upon Him. We cannot do it in our own strength. We are powerless, we must have God always with us in it.
In chapter 5 we read of a terrible attack of the devil; but the assembly, Peter being of it, was equal to it, and Ananias and Sapphira are dealt with. In chapter 6 comes murmuring; there was provision for that also. That is how the pristine assembly stands, and it is of the
{233}
greatest interest and instruction to us to see what is presented in the assembly of the twelve. The thing was complete in itself, it lacked nothing. "The wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb", @Revelation 21: 14. The thought went through. It was real formation, and hence went through, appearing in the heavenly city.
F.J.F. The twelve gates are here visible. There is wisdom to meet any contingency.
J.T. Heaven is seen here answering the prayer. "And when they had prayed, the place in which they were assembled shook, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit", @Acts 4: 31. Heaven honours the *place* where they were assembled; it was not overthrown. It was a *felt* evidence of God's answer to the prayer.
L.W. What is the distinction between the descent of the Spirit in @Acts 2, and here where they are filled with the Holy Spirit, the place being shaken? There was no shaking in chapter 2.
J.T. It is a similar thought. "And there came suddenly a sound out of heaven as of a violent impetuous blowing, and filled all the house where they were sitting", @Acts 2: 2. There was power there, but things were right and thus no need for discipline or reproof of any kind. What was heard was symbolic of power, what was visible symbolises the spread of the truth. "And there appeared to them parted tongues, as of fire". Fire gives the means of dealing with the flesh which is always present. It was not active, nevertheless fire appeared, for the leaven is latent. It can only be rendered inactive by fire, by the presence of the Holy Spirit. The shaking in @Acts 4 was to remind them that power was available, but it was a power that was entirely in their favour, whatever their need. It was a friendly shaking. If things are against us and have to be dealt with, the power for that is there.
F.J.F. Is there a connection in this with the overthrow of Jericho? We see here a power available to bring
{234}
all down, all outside evil, as Herod, who was brought down later.
J.T. In Acts we learn the power that is available to us for dealing with what is amongst us contrary to God, and also with what is against us externally. This is exemplified in chapter 12, and all through Acts. Saul of Tarsus is brought down. Herod, as you have said, and also the jailer, are brought down. The shake signifies that you are to feel it; it is there, but on your behalf. When they had prayed, they were all filled with the Holy Spirit. There is nothing alien there. The space is all open for the Spirit to take control.
N.R. Why do they address God here in an almighty, creatorial character?
J.T. It belonged to the testimony to bring in the creatorial side, "Lord, *thou* art the God who made the heaven and the earth and the sea, and all that is in them" (@Acts 4: 24), and then they refer to @Psalm 2 and are able to apply it. "For in truth against thy holy servant Jesus, whom thou hadst anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the nations, and peoples of Israel, have been gathered together in this city to do whatever thy hand and thy counsel had determined before should come to pass". They state the whole position. They pray "And now, Lord, look upon their threatenings", but they do not add, "Thou shalt break them with a sceptre of iron, as a potter's vessel thou shalt dash them in pieces", @Psalm 2: 9. The assembly is the residence of grace. "In that thou stretchest out thy hand to heal", (verse 30), is what they continue to say. It is a great thing to maintain what God has ordained -- to keep that going on, intact, and by prayer bring God into it.
L.W. They address God as Lord. We do not do that.
J.T. J.N.D. adds a footnote in his translation in regard to this verse in chapter 4. The word "Lord" here means "master" as of a slave. It is One having absolute power. Jude and Peter use it thus. Addressing
{235}
God as Lord in this way shows their subservience to Him. We too retain that attitude.
H.J.R. When the Lord prayed in @John 12, it thundered. Here the place was shaken. Is this more local?
J.T. The voice seemed like thunder to honour the prayer and agonising of Christ. His soul was troubled. It was not that there was not power in heaven to release Him from what was before Him, but He was here to do God's will; in Acts, in the shaking, there was practical testimony to the fact that heavenly power was in their favour.
C.C.E. It is interesting to see how they have wisdom to know where to stop in referring to @Psalm 2. It reminds us of the Lord in the synagogue reading from the book of Esaias, and stopping short of the words, "and the day of vengeance of our God", @Isaiah 61: 2. How significant of the dispensation of grace! "And he closed the book", @Luke 4: 20.
J.T. They were rightly dividing the word of truth.
G.G. How does it apply to us today -- being "filled with the Holy Spirit"?
J.T. Just the same as then. The question is whether we make room for Him. It is a remarkable feature in Acts and in Luke, the thought of being *filled* by the Spirit, and the allusion is to the fact that there was room made. The way to it, doctrinally, is found in @Romans 7, where the analysis is made as to what is in each of us; we are enabled to name the things there and see how God has dealt with them; then they are not allowed a place in us. God has judicially dealt with them, so we righteously disallow them, and in proportion as that is done, the Spirit has place in the christian. His presence ceases to be mere theory, and becomes real power in the soul. "These are not full of wine, as *ye* suppose", @Acts 2: 15. They were rejoicing in the power of the Holy Spirit.
G.G. I was wondering whether the tone of their prayer made way for the Spirit to come in.
J.T. They are very abject in their prayer. They feel
{236}
they are surrounded by powerful enemies. They refer to this. "The kings of the earth were there, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord and against his Christ", @Acts 4: 26, and that is in Jerusalem, where these have to be met. All are conscious that it is "in this city" where the enemy is, and they in outward weakness, and so they are abjectly casting themselves upon God. How God loves to come in, and fill every bit of room given to Him!
W.S. Are the principles of @Psalm 24 evidenced in the lifting up of their heads? They are not discouraged nor dismayed, but they come in, in testimony, in view of the system of glory that shall come in.
J.T. "Lift up your heads" indicates a military position, the helmet of salvation is for the head in defence. They were to make way for the King of glory.
J.R. The apostles gave witness of His resurrection. Why do they not speak of His ascension here?
J.T. The full testimony as to that awaits Paul's ministry. It is the heavenly aspect of the truth. Peter does indeed say of Jesus that He has "been exalted by the right hand of God". The sending of the Spirit depended on it. But it awaits Paul to bring out the heavenly side. It is Lord and Christ officially from Peter's standpoint. In writing to the Colossians Paul says "the Christ is, sitting at the right hand of God", @Colossians 3: 1. "Your life is hid with the Christ in God", and again "have your mind on the things that are above". Paul shows them how everything for the believer comes out of heaven and stands related to heaven. In @Acts 10 Peter was being prepared for this. "He beholds the heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending", but here, it is yet the assembly as the vessel of grace, God waiting on the Jews. They are there in prayer, asking for power in blessing, not judgment.
Ques. Was it right in a sense to say that they were filled with new wine? It is a figure of joy.
J.T. Peter does not treat it in that sense. He is very
{237}
forceful in repudiating it. "These are not full of wine, as ye suppose, for it is the third hour of the day", @Acts 2: 15. It is not a parallel thought Peter puts forward, but a great contrast, such as Paul refers to in writing to the Ephesians, "And be not drunk with wine, in which is debauchery; but be filled with the Spirit", @Ephesians 5: 18. Peter was using speech that they could understand.
D.S. In regard of what you were saying as to the state and position of the assembly here, it seems remarkable that the Holy Spirit did not put out all the truth at once.
J.T. Quite so. The Lord did not either. He dealt it out as conditions required and as His hearers were able to bear it. Paul told the Corinthians, "I have given you milk to drink, not meat, for ye have not yet been able, nor indeed are ye yet able", @1 Corinthians 3: 2. We need to discern what people are able to take in. The truth of the assembly came out very gradually. Yet in the earlier chapters we have seen how the assembly answered so far to that for which it had been designed.
H.J.R. Barnabas showed a spirit of discernment as to the time, when "he went away to Tarsus to seek out Saul", @Acts 11: 25.
J.T. What comes out here is that the spirit of giving continued amongst them. In heart and soul they were one. "And the heart and soul of the multitude of those that had believed were one, and not one said that anything of what he possessed was his own, but all things were common to them; and with great power did the apostles give witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great grace was upon them all. For neither was there any one in want among them", @Acts 4: 32 - 34. So that there continued an answer to the mind of God in this great vessel. Except the very doubtful use of the word in chapter 2, the saints are not so far called the assembly, but in chapter 5 we have it so. Whatever one may call it however, in chapter 4 there it is, answering to the mind of God in its service. And there is instruction
{238}
for us in it, that whatever term may be used to designate us, we should answer to the mind of God. Nobody was in any want among them. There was full recognition of apostolic authority, and of the wisdom vested in them; for those who gave laid the money "at the feet of the apostles; and distribution was made to each according as any one might have need".
F.J.F. This prayer must be a great comfort to the saints in Russia today, assuring them that the power is still available.
J.T. And in their favour. God has allowed these conditions. We have to bow to this. If such circumstances are allowed, we must recognise the government of God in them. But our sympathies must be active, counting on God for the needed grace and support for our brethren in the sufferings they are enduring.
W.S. Is there a comparison to be made in that way between the beginning of Christianity and the end, in relation to the circumstances which had come in?
J.T. The circumstances are different. Perhaps brethren today do not recognise sufficiently the government of God in Russia and elsewhere. What exists is judicial and we have to accept that. We cannot look for pristine conditions where God is working judicially, but as we bow to it, God will come into these circumstances.
C.C.E. Do you think the government of God has been brought on them on account, partly, of the terribly dead state of the Greek orthodox church in Russia?
J.T. It is what is seen in Thyatira. "Unless they repent of her works, and her children will I kill with death", @Revelation 2: 22, 23. The orthodox church has come into that. They are of a piece with Rome. In the Mohammedan conquest of Western Asia, North Africa, and part of Eastern Europe the same thing applies. They are under the judicial dealings of God. Because of the state of modern christendom strong delusion will come upon it,
{239}
so that a lie will be believed. This, in a sense, has set in already. It is *most* solemn.
C.C.E. We cannot disregard the hand of God thus seen.
J.T. Our wisdom, nay, our salvation, is to bow to it. Then God comes in for us.
N.R. It fills us with deep thankfulness that we are in another country, rather than any of those; where no hindrance is placed upon us.
J.T. I hope we do all pray for the powers that be, that such favourable conditions may continue. The British system of government, and indeed those of most nations, is favourable to the saints. That is in the government of God, it is a matter of His ordering. God is pleased to work sovereignly in this way in favour of His people and the testimony, and it is of great importance that we should pray that He may continue so to work.
C.C.E. At the time of the fall of the Roman Empire, christians prayed for the Emperor. The alternative was anarchy. So now similarly, we can pray for the powers that be.
J.T. The saints ought to be alive to current events, seeing how God operates, and pray accordingly. The prayer of the saints here is most intelligent and seemly -- asking in the spirit of the dispensation for what was needed to maintain it. And the answer they receive is in full accord with it. We may always look for this if we pray according to His will. Barnabas was a true son of consolation, a great accession, as meeting a great need.
H.J.R. When a name is given, as to Barnabas here, does it suggest the securing of the divine end? Later we read that "the disciples were called Christians first in Antioch", @Acts 11: 26.
J.T. Yes. "Joses, who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas, (which is, being interpreted, The son of consolation)", @Acts 4: 36. It is the thought of ennoblement. Names are significant as adding distinction
{240}
to the person, and this ennoblement is by the representatives of Christ. Now one looks for the place Barnabas is to fill. What is the use of knighting a man if he is not to shine in his dignity and to be supported with suitable capital to dignify that ennobled position? We read of Barnabas that "he was a good man and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith", @Acts 11: 24. "Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus, for to seek Saul". He was giving way to the better man -- who, he recognised, was more suited for that particular service. It shows great grace to be able to do that.
J.S. We see this feature in him in @Acts 9: 27. It was Barnabas who took Saul and brought him to the apostles, and declared unto them how he had seen the Lord in the way.
J.T. He acted nobly, seeing something in that young man. And the apostles evidently valued Barnabas for they sent him forth -- that he should go as far as Antioch, where he "exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord", @Acts 11: 23. The Spirit of God would occupy us with Barnabas, as fully equal to his new name, and qualified for the service opened up to him, being full of the Holy Spirit and of faith.
F.J.F. Supplying the link between the pristine condition of things and that which was going to come in.
J.T. Yes. Here we have the apostles yet in their place, chapters 5 and 6, first dealing with evil within, then after that it is said, "by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders wrought among the people". The sin of Ananias and Sapphira was effectively met by Peter. And then the apostles are in prison, and before the council; in chapter 6 the apostles lay their hands on the deacons; in chapter 8: 14 they send Peter and John to Samaria; and Peter answers nobly to the movement of the testimony in chapters 10 and 11, he is amenable to heaven. He says, "Who indeed was *I* to be
{241}
able to forbid God?" "Can any one forbid water ... ?" He moves to open the kingdom to the gentiles. "Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life". In chapter 9 he goes "through all quarters", and in chapter 11 you have this beautiful link, Barnabas, like a golden tache of the tabernacle. He comes in at the corner, as it were, when this great change was coming about, with its consequent pressure. He feels it and becomes the binding influence, linking on with the gentile movement which had already been owned by the apostles and the assembly at Jerusalem.
W.S. Paul is brought in at the close of the transitional period, to open up the universal bearing of the testimony of God.
J.T. Barnabas is the link between the Pentecostal assembly and what developed under Paul, and so the corner did not break -- the point where the greatest pressure was. The whole position in Acts corresponds to the tabernacle, showing how things are to be held together.
W.S. In chapter 10 we see how God is no respecter of persons.
J.T. And Peter is brought into accord with this: "Who indeed was *I* to be able to forbid God?" If God is working, let God act. Peter had taken six brethren with him to give additional testimony, lest the enemy should attack at that corner. Barnabas links Jerusalem with Antioch. It is one tabernacle.
H.W.R. The breaking point might have come between Jew and gentile.
J.T. It is there at that point that the enemy would make his attack; he works on those lines. The Jews would be prejudiced against this movement, and Peter foresaw that, so he took six men with him.
C.C.E. It applies very much today in the extension of divine movements.
{242}
J.T. Yes. There are so many currents in which the enemy can work, national feeling, for instance -- the enemy is always watching to take advantage of us in that. In any movement of God we need to be wise and to take precautions. Peter's course in chapter 10 is an excellent example for us. He says in effect, I did not give the Holy Spirit to the gentiles, I did not even lay hands upon them. God gave His Holy Spirit to them. The brethren had to be brought into line with this. The great point is to see that God is working. "If then God has given them the same gift as also to us ... who indeed was *I* to be able to forbid God?" @Acts 11: 17. Woe to any one who interrupts that!
W.S. Peter acknowledged how God had come in. In the light of that he throws out the challenge to the brethren in Judaea.
J.T. And thus he uses the keys of the kingdom, saying, "Can any one forbid water that these should not be baptised, who have received the Holy Spirit as *we* also did?" @Acts 10: 47. They were already in the body. Peter was here making use of the keys given to him of the kingdom of heaven; making use of them because of what God had already brought in. Paul's teaching was to come later, the Spirit being upon them to that end.
F.J.F. The twelve gates were present in administrative wisdom.
J.T. Each gate a pearl. That is suggestive of a very refined thought of administrative unity. It agrees with Paul's ministry. It is one idea, permeating all. The city with its twelve gates is the universal thought.
D.S. We have difficulty in this country with two, or even more, languages.
J.T. And two or more national feelings. You have several nations in the union, each with its peculiar prejudices. Thus what we are saying is apropos to the position. The assembly is formed in a refined way altogether above such feeling. The vessel came down
{243}
from heaven -- no two nations there. It was "a certain vessel descending like a great sheet, let down by four corners out of heaven, and it came even to me" (@Acts 11: 5), says Peter. God had Peter in mind, that He might fill him with the thought of it and Peter grasped the divine intent. God made Peter what he should be at this particular juncture.
B.O'E. What is the difference between chapter 5: 14, where "believers were the more added to the Lord", and chapter 2, where it is the Lord who added?
J.T. In @Acts 2 it is the Lord taking care of the Jewish remnant, "those that were to be saved". They were added to the christian company, these answering to the mind of God as a *place* of salvation, "I will give salvation in Zion, and unto Israel my glory", @Isaiah 46: 13. The saved ones were to be there where they would experience practical salvation. Ananias and Sapphira sin in the meantime, and bring terrible discipline upon themselves. Will that hinder *addition*? "Great fear came upon all the assembly, and upon all who heard these things". But immediately after that we read that "they were all with one accord in Solomon's porch, but of the rest durst no man join them". The test is greater; the discipline did not hinder addition, but made it more valuable. There is danger of absorbing extraneous matter, but where the authority of the Lord is exercised, this will not come in. The natural man does not want discipline, but spiritual men do. Thus we find that "believers were more than ever added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women", @Acts 5: 14.
C.C.E. We had a remarkable instance here. A brother had to be dealt with, there was confusion in his house and just at that time the eldest girl wanted to break bread; she recognised the assembly was right and not her father, and she came into fellowship.
J.T. "And the Lord's hand was with them, and a great number believed and turned to the Lord", @Acts 11: 21. Barnabas "rejoiced, and exhorted all with
{244}
purpose of heart to abide with the Lord" (verse 23). The Lord's authority was here, and a large crowd were added to *the Lord*. A "crowd" is an inadequate thought, especially in view of what was coming in -- the assembly as answering to the mind of heaven, and Barnabas recognises that these are ready for such ministry as Saul could give. There was a man God had appointed for this ministry and he was needed now. Barnabas sought out Saul, "And so it was with them that for a whole year they were gathered together in the assembly and taught a large crowd" (verse 26). We get those that were added to the Lord, and Barnabas ministering alone, but now Barnabas and Saul. It is at this point that the thought of being gathered together *in the assembly* is added.
C.C.E. It was quite clear what would happen; what the Spirit of God had been aiming at.
J.T. It was a great heavenly thought. The *assembly* was indeed there, but the truth relative to it had to be taught and learnt; and for a whole year Barnabas and Saul with the saints in Antioch were gathered together in the assembly to this end. *Each season* would bring its own lesson.
J.R. Will you say a little more about the different seasons?
J.T. Seasons affect us, do they not? They have a great deal to do with us. They are first mentioned in their order, in @Genesis 8: 22. "Henceforth, all the days of the earth, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease". In each there is a lesson. First, seed time, that is a great lesson to learn, then harvest, then cold coming in; there are chilling things to go through in the assembly. Heat follows. In the realisation of these thoughts, the two names are given -- "summer and winter". Summer and winter are names of heat and cold. Here "a whole year" is mentioned. The teaching suited to each season would have been impressed upon them. How has it been in our own histories? Do we all go through the
{245}
seasons with God? Paul says, "But perhaps I will stay with you, or even winter with you", @1 Corinthians 16: 6.
W.S. The believer is to be instant in season and out of season. We should not allow anything to deter or hinder us.
J.T. We need to keep up the temperature of the meeting to avoid too much winter!
F.J.F. Seeds germinate in heat.
J.T. Chapter 13 brings out what there is now in *this* local assembly -- the quality of it. God shows us what is maturing under Paul's ministry, its principles, and the kind of people resulting from it. The effect of his work is seen in that the assembly is functioning in its true character, ministering to the Lord. Great spiritual power was evident, and results have accrued from the teaching of Barnabas and Saul. In chapter 13: 1 five persons are mentioned, "Barnabas, and Simeon who was called Niger, and Lucius the Cyrenian, and Manaen, foster-brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul", last mentioned, but his work manifest all the same.
H.R. Is this the heavenly position? It was in Antioch that they were first called christians. Internally, variety marks them.
J.T. It was not a name of reproach. It is a dignified word as used here. It indicates that the disciples were seen as taking character from Christ, and not now regarded as a sect of the Jews. It is significant that such a name comes out here in connection with Paul. They are ministering to the Lord; this is the first formal mention of the service of God in the assembly. It was a great point reached, looking on to the great function of the assembly eternally (@Ephesians 3).
F.J.F. Do you think this is parallel to the tabernacle as set up in @Exodus 40, where everything is in perfect order?
J.T. Yes, as each part was set in its place it was functioning.
J.H.H. Do you think Paul, in a sense, is the continuation
{246}
of James, who was beheaded (chapter 12)? The Lord selected three -- Peter and James and John -- to go with Him on the mount; each of these seems to represent something that would be continued.
J.T. I should not put Paul in the list of the twelve. In the first epistle to Corinthians, chapter 15, the twelve are mentioned, then "all the apostles", and then it goes on "and last of all, as to an abortion, he appeared to *me* also". Paul took a lowly place, as one born out of due time. He does not associate himself with them. Galatians shows, however, that he maintained unity and sympathy with them.
The first two verses of @Acts 13 allude to assembly service. What the assembly is to be, is formally owned. There is ministering *to* the Lord. Prophecy and teaching is not "to the Lord", but the "ministering" was God-ward. That is what they were engaged in, and as they were fasting, the Spirit of God owns them, and says, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul".
W.S. Is this a definite point reached when the Holy Spirit takes control of the servants: "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them", @Acts 13: 2?
J.T. Everything God-ward and man-ward issues from this great vessel. It is the bosom of everything, what goes up to God and what goes out to men.
F.J.F. Do they now, as gathered in assembly, come into the fulness of what the Lord had said to Saul at the time of his conversion, "*I* am Jesus, whom *thou* persecutest"?
J.T. You mean the idea of the "*I*" being His body? The whole mystery is wrapped up in that word "*I* am Jesus".
F.J.F. These at Antioch represented the features which Saul had been persecuting in the saints when the Lord referred to them as "me".
J.T. Yes. They were His body. The thing is taking form. You can see the bearing of the Lord's words.
{247}
"Saul ravaged the assembly, entering into the houses one after another, and dragging off both men and women delivered them up to prison", @Acts 8: 3. In those houses Saul met Jesus as in His body.
F.J.F. And Saul is now coming into the reality of what was there.
W.T. Saul is mentioned last in the lists in @Acts 13: 1, but in verse 13 it is Paul first, "Paul and his company".
J.T. God is promoting him, a lowly man whose name is changed to Paul. This is not done formally, but it is mentioned; "who also is Paul" (verse 9). The name is said to mean "little", and that is what Saul had become in his own estimation.
W.S. It shows what the Spirit can make of a man.
J.T. Yes, if one takes a lowly place: "he that abases himself shall be exalted", @Luke 14: 11.
It is in @Acts 20 that we reach the final thought. The brethren were assembled at Troas for a specific purpose; the facts are stated in a casual way. They were breaking bread, but not said to be here "in the house" as in chapter 2. It is significantly stated that they were *assembled* to break bread -- "And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread". Immediately upon this we are told "Paul discoursed to them, about to depart on the morrow. And he prolonged the discourse till midnight", @Acts 20: 7. Here the formal link between the first day of the week and the breaking of bread is established, and it is a mutual matter -- "*we* being assembled". It is not an official person dispensing the elements. There is no such thought in the institution of the Lord's supper. "There were many lights in the upper room where we were assembled". Other distinguished persons were there, but all were included in that "we". The Holy Spirit would maintain us on this line. And then, before the breaking of bread we must listen to Paul. What he teaches about the Supper is to govern us. This has to be understood in its full setting in the assembly.
{248}
This is a chapter marked by love. The assembly is the residence down here of divine love. It needed Paul to put the breaking of bread into its assembly setting, "For *I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you", @1 Corinthians 11: 23. The institution of the Supper as seen in his ministry is a heavenly thought; its setting is the assembly as he unfolds it, and it was received from the Lord by Paul.
F.J.F. In this setting the crowd of names are regarded as "many lights", all reflections of Christ.
J.T. Yes. Paul was not the only light. The thought is a mutual one, there were many others. He would make much of them in his ministry. Such a brother would make room for others.
A.G. The great length of his discourse suggests how much ministry is needed on this line, does it not?
J.T. See how much we have had! The refusal of Paul's ministry led to 'open brethrenism'.
J.R. "About to depart on the morrow". Why does it say that?
J.T. It suggests the general attitude in which we are found. We are looking for the end of things. Paul was leaving them. He says later, "*I* know this, that there will come in amongst you after my departure grievous wolves", @Acts 20: 29. How important it was for them to listen to Paul!
J.M.B. There was no breaking of bread till they had heard the discourse.
J.T. There were interruptions. Eutychus is mentioned as falling from the third storey and being taken up as dead, but Paul said, "his life is in him". The potentialities of life were there, and so we may say he was rendered capable of taking up Paul's ministry. They brought away the *boy alive*, and were not a little comforted. Young brothers should look especially into Paul's ministry. "*Thou* hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching" (@2 Timothy 3: 10), Paul wrote to Timothy. That is a word to all young ones in the faith.
{249}
FRIENDSHIP WITH GOD, WITH CHRIST AND WITH ONE ANOTHER
@John 15: 13 - 15; @2 Samuel 15: 32 - 37; @Genesis 18: 17 - 22
My subject this evening is friendship -- friendship with God, friendship with Christ, and friendship with one another. I have read these passages, accordingly, as speaking of this great subject -- the Lord Himself speaking of it says, "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you". We have this great subject set out in the most perfect and concise way from the lips of the Lord Jesus, who Himself answers exactly to what is said in the Old Testament, "there is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother" -- that is the idea of friendship set out absolutely in Christ; and every true christian knows that He is a Friend above all others.
Before proceeding with the subject in a positive way, I may say a few words about friendship with the world. If there are any here who are cultivating friendship with the world, they are not likely to have much interest in what I have to say about friendship with God, friendship with Christ, or friendship with the people of God. James tells us that "friendship with the world is enmity with God" (@James 4: 4) -- a most solemn statement -- so that if there is anyone here who is friendly with the world, he or she would not be interested in what I am saying about friendship with God. James speaks very strongly, and other scriptures are full of denunciation of friendship with the world. It is an insidious thing, and comes out even in a man like Jehoshaphat, for instance -- he was a very honoured man and used of God, but he cultivated friendship with the world. Jehu charged him with
{250}
it and said, "Shouldest thou ... love them that hate the Lord?" (@2 Chronicles 19: 2) -- a very simple and forceful way of putting the matter. How often that is the case with many of God's people! They love God, as Jehoshaphat did, and yet go far in forming alliances with worldly people in marriage or in business. But we have this word which shows that it is abhorrent to God and inconsistent with the light which we profess to hold; so James warns us and says if you are on terms of friendship with the world you are at enmity with God. Let us face this matter; whatever excuses we may bring in, if friendship with the world exists we cannot hide it from God. He is not occupied with outward appearances, but with the heart. His word is "sharper than any two-edged sword, ... and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do"; for even if we are to be shut out of the presence of God for ever, we have to do with Him -- whether as converted or unconverted persons, we all have to stand before the judgment seat of God. Christians do not stand before Him at the same time as unbelievers, for their matters are settled before -- but we all have to stand before God; hence the seriousness of friendship with the world.
James also tells us that Abraham was called the friend of God; others in the Old Testament had said it, indeed Jehoshaphat, to whom I have referred, said that Abraham was God's friend. Isaiah says it, quoting Jehovah Himself as saying "Abraham, my friend".
Now we want to see what friendship with God implies. It means that God is pleased to take a man into His confidence. A friend opens up his mind to you -- he confides in you. It is a question of confidence. God knows everything, but then it says, "If any man love God, the same is known of him". This is a distinction. He would regard you as a lover of His. God calls His friends by name. He says, "Shall I hide from Abraham
{251}
that thing which I do?" He knows every one of His lovers. Everything works together for good to those who love Him. He speaks of the "thousands of them that love me". He knows them by name and He gives us to understand that He knows us by name. You see that in Abraham, from heaven that name was called twice at one time (@Genesis 22). Think of having your name sounded out from heaven! Moses¬ name was sounded out twice also (@Exodus 3). Where there is evidence of love for God the name of the lover is delightful to Him. It is "written in heaven". Heaven called to Abraham: "Abraham, Abraham", and later "Moses, Moses". Jesus called to Saul: "Saul, Saul", and God called to Samuel: "Samuel, Samuel" -- all showing the interest of heaven. And so Scripture says, "If any man love God, the same" -- that is, that particular person -- "is known of him". All this should be a great incentive to us that we should maintain friendship with God.
But then there is more than that. He says: I can trust you! I do not know of anything more to be desired than to be trusted by God, and so it says here of Abraham: "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" And immediately He gives the reason for this -- that Abraham was trustworthy. God was about to overthrow Sodom and Gomorrah. God came down as to this. He heard the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah. Of course He knew what the cities were without coming down, but coming down shows His infinite fairness, that as to just what the state was, all should know that the judgment was according to first-hand knowledge. And then He says, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing? ... For I know him that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice". These are the reasons God Himself affords for entrusting this information to Abraham -- the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, meaning in type the overthrow of the world. What a great position a friend of God has -- he knows
{252}
what God is about to do, he knows more than the statesmen! The friend of God gets the divine secrets -- and one would urge upon the brethren the importance of this matter from the standpoint of the testimony. Some might ask: Has God in mind to let the world run on in wickedness? But the world is in reconciliation at the present moment. God is not imputing trespasses today and He is ordering everything through the powers that be, to keep the highways open for the saints. The time is not far distant when God will wind up the whole matter. God has told us beforehand that the day is fixed and recorded in His calendar when the history of the world will be finished in judgment.
We have an example in Daniel of one who was concerned for God. He lived to be a very old man and had a great deal to do with the government of the world. He was employed by the kings of Babylon and Persia, and continued to the reign of Cyrus. Daniel was concerned about the end of matters -- about the mind of God. He had plenty of distinction in his service but he wanted the mind of God, especially as to what relates to Israel.
Daniel prayed, as we read in chapter 9, and a messenger was sent from heaven -- no less than the angel Gabriel. He says: "At the beginning of thy supplications the word went forth, and I am come to declare it; for thou art one greatly beloved" (verse 23). This is written for every lover of God, everyone who thinks for God, who intercedes and prays. Daniel says, "I Daniel understood by the books that the number of the years, ... for the accomplishment of the desolations of Jerusalem, was seventy years" (verse 2).
It is most important to read the prophets, especially in the light of these things. Paul said to Agrippa "believest thou the prophets?" Do we all read them? Daniel read Jeremiah -- he knew "by the *books*", referring to Jeremiah, that seventy years were determined, and he began to pray accordingly; but he got more light
{253}
as to the matter even than Jeremiah, and his own book testifies to this. He got light as to the exact time of the restoration of Israel to their own land. First the city would be rebuilt, but after sixty-nine weeks it would be destroyed and there would be one week to run. That week, or part of it, is pending and is about to be resumed, as the book of Revelation plainly teaches. I do not want to speak on prophecy, but just to make clear to you God's mind in the book of Revelation, and Christ's discourse on this subject with His disciples recorded in Matthew, Mark, and Luke; and that we as understanding it may pray intelligently as waiting upon God. He imparts His mind to us and we thus acquire the character of friends of God.
I read the passage in Genesis, because it sets out the divine thought as to a friend of God. We get a wonderful picture in this chapter. It says: "Abraham remained yet standing before Jehovah" -- as His friend he would have a sense of liberty there. "And Abraham drew near" -- how pleasing that would be to God! He says to Jehovah: "There are perhaps fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy ... the place for the sake of the fifty?" And the Lord says, "If I find at Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will forgive all the place for their sakes". See how beautifully Abraham pleads for his relatives! and we may do the same for our fellow christians. There are many of our fellow christians today who are linked with the world, building it up and glorying in building it up. We wish their deliverance out of it, we do not want our brethren destroyed with the world, we want them taken out first. God is still patiently waiting upon men that they may be saved, and we desire that all our brethren should be taken up with the Lord to be with Himself. If there is one here who is linked with the world, the Lord would draw you out in view of the judgment that is pending. God says to Abraham that He would forgive the city if there were fifty righteous in it. Abraham had put the figure too high,
{254}
so he gradually drops until he comes to ten, and Jehovah says, "I will not destroy it for the ten's sake". But there were *not* ten righteous persons in Sodom. When the time came there were only Lot, his wife and two daughters -- four in all, "And his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt". She was typically a nominal christian -- a worldly woman, and her daughters were like her. You see therefore how little influence for good Lot had in Sodom -- even his sons-in-law regarded it as jesting when he urged them to leave. Is it not a warning to us fathers, mothers, uncles, aunts, brothers and sisters as to what influence we have with our relatives? Only three escaped from Sodom, and had it not been for the angels urging them, even taking them by their hands to lead them out, none would have escaped; it was, as the apostle Jude says, "Snatching them out of the fire". We do not want to be found lingering in the world. @1 Corinthians 11: 30 - 32 shows the divine urgency that christians should not be condemned with the world -- many were sick and some had fallen asleep to prevent this. Abraham stood where Jehovah had conversed with him and saw the doomed cities burning, feeling the judgment, but still the friend of God.
I want now to go on to the thought of friendship with Christ. I wish to illustrate it with the types, as we hardly ever get a clear view of things until we bring the types in. Hushai is called several times "David's friend". What you see is, that he came into Jerusalem as Absalom came into Jerusalem. Absalom is a type of antichrist, that feature of him that has got into the sphere of christian profession -- Christendom is marked by what is seen in Absalom. Absalom is an out-and-out opposer -- an ungrateful rival of his father David. He had been secretly traitorous, but now he has taken up a public position as in rebellion against his father.
Hushai came into Jerusalem. Absalom came in at the same time, and the idea is that Hushai is to be an over-thrower
{255}
of Absalom. What is it but that true christians are to be over-throwers of the usurper? -- the spirit of antichrist whether in this city or any other city. There is "that which restrains" and it will restrain, that the personal antichrist should not come, @2 Thessalonians 2. There can be no doubt that the Spirit of God and the assembly are included in this. Has it ever occurred to you that in our prayers, our feelings, our thoughts, God is using us just as Hushai was used by David to overthrow the kingdom of Absalom? And, we may say, he did overthrow it. You will notice how Hushai was sent back to Jerusalem to defeat the counsel of Ahithophel. In this world there are wise men which the world would use, and the presence of the Spirit here in the saints would expose them. For a hundred years the whole system of apostasy has been exposed -- by whom? By those who are the friends of Christ. "*Ye* are my friends if ye practise whatever *I* command you". He says as it were, I have attested My love in dying for you, prove your love, therefore, by doing what I say. He says further, "all things which I have heard of my Father I have made known to you". They were the depositories of His thoughts, and He calls them His friends accordingly. They were left here as such and would maintain the rights of Christ against all His rivals. The apostles, and many others who followed in the spirit of loyalty and faithfulness to Christ, have gone to be with Him, and now it is our privilege and responsibility to continue these marks of friendship to Him to whom we owe everything.
David says, "Hast thou not there with thee Zadok and Abiathar?" There were also Ahimaaz and Jonathan, and added to these there was a maid who also served -- remarkably like the little maid of Naaman -- and she became a link for conveying the information to David which led to the complete overthrow of Absalom. It is a remarkable thing how the defeat of Absalom is effected by means of these five men and the maid. The idea is
{256}
a divine system of things here, although small and hidden; and, correspondingly, while the Holy Spirit is here, while lovers of Christ are here, while lovers of God are here, apostasy is held in check; but when they are taken away there shall be manifested the man of sin. You thus see, dear brethren, how great the position is!
Then finally there is the thought of friends of one another. The apostle John is writing his last letter; the third epistle says, "The friends greet thee". Why did he say "friends"? He did not say "christians", he selected the suitable word, he meant persons who confided in one another, who loved one another. We may assume that he learnt friendship from Christ in leaning on His bosom, as we have seen; and he records Him as using the word "friends" in its truest sense. We must learn everything from Christ, and we learn in Him "a friend that sticketh closer than a brother". John learnt it, as I said, in the bosom of Jesus, he learnt from the Lord in the place of love. I believe he is the last of the apostles -- he lived to be a very old man, but he carried on in love. His ministry is full of the thoughts of love; that we are to love one another and keep ourselves from idols -- keep ourselves from idolatry and all that is antichristian. And so he speaks of those with him as the friends -- the "friends greet thee", and also those with Gaius -- "Greet the friends by name". In those days the enemies were always attacking, the lives of the saints were exposed, and therefore they needed particularly to confide in one another. Today the same conditions exist, only more in a spiritual sense, and so the need of true friendship amongst us, that the brethren should dwell together in love, and confide in one another, that we should be transparent and each know that the other would not betray him but rather protect. John says, "The friends greet thee". That is not a mere handshake but a salutation that comes from the heart -- from friend to friend. As Jehu says to Jehonadab, "Is thy heart right, as my heart is with thy heart?" That is, he
{257}
challenges his love, his candour, and Jehonadab says "It is" -- he was true; that is what is needed in the fellowship today. We are to be friends, confidants of one another.
The friends are all known by name to each other. John says, "Greet the friends by name" -- every one of them. Paul writing to the Romans sends twenty salutations, each one saluted and called by name. How beautiful for them to be known in that way by heaven! The apostles were representative of heaven, speaking in the power of the Spirit they would convey the mind of heaven.
Well, I hope what I have had in mind is clear to you -- as it is essential to our salvation at the present time that the thought of friendship with God, friendship with Christ and friendship with one another, should be maintained.
{258}
THE CITY OF THE LIVING GOD
@Hebrews 12: 22, 23; @Genesis 26: 32, 33; @Ruth 3: 15; @Ruth 4: 1 - 3; @Zechariah 14: 10, 11
I wish to speak about the divine idea of a city, having in mind that the ultimate city in the history of time and eternity is the assembly, which is said to come down from God out of heaven, having the glory of God, and her light like unto a stone most precious. I began with Hebrews, because it says there that we have come to that city, meaning that all true believers are privileged and dignified by the fact that they have come to it. Many other things are mentioned in the chapter in this way. We are said to have come to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, also to mount Zion and to an innumerable company of angels, and to the assembly of the firstborn, enregistered in heaven. These are generally political thoughts. We are all by nature political. It is innate in us, and God takes account of this and would deliver us from what holds us in the way of human politics by replacing it with heavenly politics.
Christians are said to have their citizenship in heaven; "for *our* commonwealth has its existence in the heavens, from which also we await the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour, who shall transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory", @Philippians 3: 20, 21. That is what stands in connection with our economy, our political system -- power in the One who inaugurated it to change our bodies of humiliation, making them like His own. We do not always accept that our bodies are bodies of humiliation, for we naturally do our best to be good looking and to decorate them, but the fact remains, and we might as well face it, that our bodies are bodies of humiliation. But Jesus our Saviour is coming to transform us and make our bodies like His own body of glory -- a marvellous thought! It ought to have the effect of freeing us from what is merely human. Not that
{259}
one would say a word against human authorities in provinces and empires, for God has ordered that these should exist during the time of the gospel, subservient to Him because of the gospel, and we pray for them. But they are temporary, and it is well to face this fact that whilst we pray for authorities, kings, and even the policeman in the street, we have part in what is superior and outside of all that. God is educating us for the great display of heavenly power and rule, so that we should shine in it, and with this in view the writer to the Hebrews speaks about what we have come to. It is in the sense of a foreigner coming into a country and becoming a citizen. He comes into all that is in it and shares in it, and he is also required to know the constitution; that is what mount Zion means, that we have come to what transcends all other constitutions. It is a matter of God's sovereign selection. He has power to effect everything in what He selects, and this includes the city or capital.
It is the city of the living God. We are here now in a city that is growing in importance, and its fame enters into the pride of its inhabitants, but think of a city called the city of the living God! -- and, as if to establish us in the idea of its liberty and glory, it is also called here the heavenly Jerusalem. We come to that. God's intent is not to set us against what is here, because we share in the protection that He has ordained through it, but we come into this heavenly city morally. We have *another* city, the heavenly Jerusalem, and we have come to it already. It is to show us the magnitude of the position and to set us free correspondingly from all that is around.
Then there is the universal gathering, which implies legislative power, heavenly in character. The reference here, by way of illustration, is to the states of Greece, which would be well known. God employs what is current to illustrate His heavenly thoughts. So you have the universal gathering and all the distinction that goes with that, in which we have part. Then the assembly of
{260}
the firstborn; what I might call the *social* side, which is a great feature in any commonwealth. I am only speaking illustratively, I do not want to make anyone social in the worldly sense. The thought is to deliver us from these things by bringing in the heavenly order of things. The assembly of the firstborn is of persons of great distinction; each one is firstborn; you get nothing like that in this world. It also gives the thought of family affection; there is affection and distinction. Every city of this world has its society, and it is one of the most ensnaring things for christians; but I would seek that we should be delivered from that in order that we may be free for the heavenly.
Now we have not only come to the city, but we already form it, for the assembly is the city, according to @Revelation 21 and other scriptures. We, christians, are actually *part* of it. The passages read are to bring out, if the Lord help, what the city really is, how practical it is. The idea came in early. We have no city of God mentioned or alluded to until man's city is first seen. The first mentioned was Cain's, as you know, and it is a kind of prototype of all modern cities. This is an age of cities, and they all have the character of this first city -- in the way of industry and art and all that goes with these things.
We find that servants of God, in the exercise of His power against evil, *troubled* the cities of man; and on account of such service they were imprisoned in the most cruel way as in Philippi. What a real service they rendered, what benefactors they were! -- but the masters of the damsel there made gain from her because of the demon which Paul had cast out; and every city has that sort of thing, gain being made out of wickedness. When the Lord was in Decapolis He cast out a legion of demons and the people asked Him to leave, and He left. They preferred the demons to Christ! There is that which is, of God in the world, government and all authority, but there is that which is called wickedness, for "the whole
{261}
world lies in the wicked one", @1 John 5: 19. The work of God is not cared for, it does not fit into man's world. So the christian, whilst praying on the one hand for the authorities, is to discern the wickedness that is in the world, and to judge it.
There are several other cities mentioned in Genesis -- Nineveh, Babel, Gomorrah -- before God begins to operate in relation to His thought of a city. Perhaps we might take Cain's city, Nineveh, Babel, Sodom and Gomorrah as sufficient to set out what the characteristic city of the world is. It is said to be "spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified", @Revelation 11: 8. Whether London or New York or Johannesburg, there is no difference. The book of Revelation says, "The cities of the nations fell", @Revelation 16: 19. Every one of them comes in for divine retribution, and these cities in the early part of Genesis illustrate what the world's city is.
The last one, Sodom, had one of the Lord's people in it. Abraham intercedes for this city because of the righteous in it. He begs of Jehovah to save it, and Jehovah is ready to save it, but Abraham stopped at ten righteous, and the sequel shows that there were not ten there -- we know of only one being righteous. The New Testament tells about that man who vexed his righteous soul every day on account of what was in Sodom. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and what one has in mind in speaking is that there should be deliverance from these things.
Sodom having been destroyed, that is, the world in principle, God begins to indicate *His* city. It says in @Hebrews 11, "he has prepared for them a city" (verse 16). He called out Abram and his family and they looked for a city. I have no doubt that Abraham's desire for a city was greatly intensified by witnessing the destruction of Sodom. His interest in the heavenly city that God would establish was no doubt greatly enlarged by what he had seen.
{262}
Following on these things you have Beer-sheba, a city that has an important place. It is suggestive of the city of God; not that it ever became it, because historically Jerusalem was that; it stands out from the time David took it, right into eternity. Jerusalem stands, but the principle of it in the true sense is in the passage I read in @Genesis 26, where the christian -- that is, Isaac, who is a type of the heavenly man -- overcomes the temptation of the world to allure him into society. Abimelech came to Isaac with Ahuzzath his friend and Phichol the captain of his host, that is, he brought the *social* man with him as well as the captain of his host. Earlier he came with the captain alone, but now he brings one representing the social element. But Isaac overcame them and sent them away. What a victory when young christians send away their unconverted companions! It is a great point and an excellent beginning to see and accept that we have come to the city of God.
Then it says, Isaac's servants came and told him they had found the well (verse 32): it is *support* for the heavenly man as denying the world and its influence. The well, as understood spiritually, makes us independent of the world's city. Isaac now has this well, and the place is called a city; it was called a "place" earlier, but now a "city". We have here the idea of a city belonging to the people of God; "God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God; for he has prepared for them a city", @Hebrews 11: 16. God compensates and furnishes us with means of overcoming the world's city. Worldly links, links of the christian with unconverted people, are most destructive. The heavenly man sends them away, and then *God* comes in and gives him a well and engages Himself with the heavenly man. In these circumstances you will be despised, but God will see you through. In taking a share in the reproach of Christ you have support in the well.
Now in Ruth we see how a person entering into a contract, a marriage contract or any other, acts in
{263}
relation to the city. It says in chapter 3: 15 that Boaz "measured six measures of barley, and laid it on her; and he went into the city" -- that is the correct reading of the passage. He was entering into a contract, and the teaching in this for young people, for all who have anything to do in the way of engagement, contract or alliance, whether marriage, business or companionship, is to go into the city. Do not be satisfied with your own thought about the matter. If your thoughts are right they will be confirmed, if they are wrong, they will be withered up there. It is for this reason that many are secretive, but those who are with God in these matters go into the city. Marriage is to be *in the Lord* (@1 Corinthians 7: 39); the Lord must have to say to it. The city is a place of administration, where His mind is known. And if our thoughts about a matter are withered up there, it is for our safety.
So Boaz goes into the city in connection with this very important matter. Matters of this kind are very important, and in them there is great danger of selfish motives governing us. We want to get into the light which makes everything manifest. You get that in the city, that is, administrative light. And so Boaz went to the gate, the place of administration, and sat down; that is, he was *open*, there was nothing secret, and no disregard of the rights of others. And the kinsman of whom Boaz had spoken came by. "And he said, Thou, such a one, turn aside, sit down here. And he turned aside and sat down. And he took ten men of the elders of the city, and said, Sit down here. And they sat down". @Ruth 4: 1, 2. You see how transparent this man Boaz was. What are these things written for? It is not a mere story, it is something that bears on *us now*. One has often said that whenever the Scriptures are read, they bear at that moment on the person who reads them. Now the matter of a christian entering upon a contract has a bearing on the testimony, either for good or evil, and we want to avoid the evil. Then the man most concerned in the
{264}
matter came by just at that time. It shows that God was in it. The man withdraws his claim and Boaz can proceed. To make all doubly certain Boaz had taken ten men of the elders to deliberate on the matter; and thus he had the right hand of fellowship in his marriage.
The next thing I want to speak about is how in this great remnant book, Zechariah, the idea of a city takes form. There are the thoughts of the well at Beer-sheba and of the transparency of the man who had a contract in mind. But now it is a day of small things; we may say that relatively there is just a handful of christians walking in the truth in this large city. In the book of Nehemiah, you find that the city was large and great, but the people in it were few. In fact they had to urge them to come and live in Jerusalem. Perhaps some of you are talking about the fewness in this city and holding yourselves back, instead of coming into it and making the number larger! If the position is right, it cannot cease to be right, whether there are few or many. Fewness in number does not alter that. Zechariah was a prophet, but he worked as a labourer, a builder. A christian is not to complain about those who hold things for God because of their smallness and weakness; *he is to join in*. You must either show that the position is wrong or else enter on it, standing with what is right. Otherwise you are disloyal to Christ and inconsistent -- failing to follow righteousness with those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
It says, "Jerusalem shall be lifted up, and shall dwell in her own place", @Zechariah 14: 10. You could understand some worldly-wise people coming back from Babylon and saying, Let us build the city in another place, more physically advantageous, nearer the sea, etc. -- but they did not, they built it exactly where it was before. They built it in its place, "from Benjamin's gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner-gate, and from the tower of Hananeel unto the king's winepresses" (verse 10). Let us just for a moment look at these gates. They had a place in
{265}
Jerusalem before, and now they are to be revived. The question for us is whether what they represent is in this very city where we are. I believe they are, every one of these features; that is, among those walking in the truth of God.
The first is Benjamin's gate. Benjamin has a great place in Scripture, and his name signifies that he is the son of his father's right hand. That means that he is one available *for God*. If some one does not act for God you will never have anything for Him. Benjamin is the son of his father's right hand. Of course, Jesus was that pre-eminently, but I am speaking now of a local company. He is also the son of his mother's sorrow. That is, he has occasioned sorrow, but he has also gone through sorrow himself, through conflict. His first appearance in Scripture as a grown man is as an overcomer: he is free from the murderous intent of others against his brother Joseph.
"From Benjamin's gate unto the place of the first gate". The first gate would suggest first principles. One could say much about that from the book of Acts, the great administrative power and order which became operative as the Spirit of God came down from heaven. First principles are never to be abandoned. A man working for God will see to it that he does not copy from current religion, he will go back to first principles.
The next is the corner-gate. That is the point where trouble arises. That is when the testimony requires changes, additions, replacements, etc. We see this in @Acts 10, for instance. There is always pressure at that gate and greater need for vigilance, but there is always more support at the corner, that is not to be forgotten. Christ is said to be the corner-stone in God's building. In the course of the testimony in any locality, and generally, the corners have to be watched, so that the enemy does not get advantage over us, as for instance when meetings "hive".
{266}
Then there is the tower of Hananeel: that is the place for support. Gates are administrative, that is the usual thought in them. This tower of Hananeel is historic; it is mentioned by Jeremiah and earlier in this book. The meaning of Hananeel suggests the grace of God. How important that is amongst us! You cannot have the features of the city of God without the grace of God. That grace reigns is a tower of strength, and it reigns through righteousness. One of the most beautiful thoughts in @Luke 24 is that when the two came back from Emmaus, they found the disciples saying, The Lord is risen and has appeared to *Simon*. That was grace! Grace must reign, but it reigns through righteousness. In cases of difficulty we have to consider ourselves lest we also be tempted.
Then the final thought in our passage is the king's winepresses. These suggest pressure occasioned by the Lord. The Lord carries on His discipline. "What son is he whom the father chasteneth not?" @Hebrews 12: 7. The more discipline we go through with God, the more profit we are in the meeting, the more contributory. Then there is the thought, "men shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more utter destruction". We are not looking around as if we were afraid of one another. *Men* in the true sense dwelling together have confidence in each other. "Jerusalem shall dwell safely"; there is a sense of security where the features of the city of God exist. Men dwell there, and God is known amongst them of a truth.
As I said, I believe all these features are to be found in this city in which we are. In the principle of it the city of God is actually inside this great city. What a thought! How it should appeal to every young person here, and indeed to the old too, to have part in this great city of God, where heaven is represented and the mind of heaven carried out administratively. May God bless the word!
{267}
SPIRITUAL CAPACITY
@2 Kings 2: 8 - 14; @2 Timothy 4: 13; @Ruth 3: 15
These verses of Scripture present to us the idea of a mantle or cloak or general outer covering, and that is what I wish to speak of, such a garment having, as other garments in Scripture, a symbolical significance. Clothing has a great place in Scripture, the first to make clothing being God Himself, not for ornament but for covering; so that the thought is dignified in that way.
Clothing later came to take on the idea of ornament, representing also rank and office, as appears peculiarly in the book of Revelation; but it also especially suggests one's measure, another important suggestion, for God is the God of measure, and whilst that includes the universe in its immensity, it also refers to persons particularly. That brings up what no doubt each of us has had before him, the necessity of knowing one's measure; for, as constituted a part of an organism, each of us has to fit; the measure must be accurate otherwise he will be a misfit and practically excluded from the working out of the great organism of which we form part.
The apostle in writing to the Romans says that if we think of ourselves at all, we should "think so as to be wise". "I say ... to every one that is among you, not to have high thoughts above what he should think; but to think so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith", @Romans 12: 3. Thus we shall find our place in the organism of which that chapter tells us, "we, being many, are one body in Christ"; not *of* Christ, but *in* Christ. We are dignified as having that status, and living outside the range of the ordinary thoughts of men.
Now, in thinking of the Lord Jesus we take account of the fact that He is of course beyond measure, as we have been singing:
<blockquote> "Upholder of the universe, <br>To Thee as God we bow". </blockquote>
Yet, while He is the Inscrutable, He has come into our view and into our way of thinking, in great compression,
{268}
and, as contemplating the facts stated in Scripture as to the humanity of Christ, we are impressed by the marvellous self-sacrifice involved in order that He might come within our range, and thus be compassable. The ark symbolises this great compression, for it was a small vessel. It speaks of the Lord Jesus Christ in His humanity. Though small, the ark was said to be the power of God and the glory of God, @Psalm 78: 61. The greatest thoughts attach to it.
That is what comes out in Elijah's cloak. Elijah, who is a type of Christ in many respects, is seen here, like Him, exercising power over death. We are to be affected by the history of Elijah, a man who appeared without any introduction or previous announcement. He appears suddenly, and sets forth a man who can do things by himself, and that was pre-eminently seen in Jesus. Each of us has to understand the Lord in this way -- a great matter in relation to the testimony of God. It is a question of what He can do. Elijah stood up and said, "As the Lord God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word". What a great thing to be able to say! He had it from God that it would be so, and it was so.
In regard to his mantle, it indicates the power that he had to attract people God-ward, an influence for good. He cast his mantle on Elisha, and Elisha followed him. He was influenced so that he had a great place with Elijah. I hope that Christ, through what I am saying, will have a greater place with every one of us. What Christ is, is what first touches a person in regard of Him. He said to the Jews that He was "Altogether that which I also say to you". We have therefore the means of knowing what He is by what He says: He touches us in that way, as He touched Mary of Bethany. How the greatness of Christ flowed into her soul as she sat at His feet! and it increased. She was in the enjoyment of nearness to Him, and she was prepared for His death: "Against the day of my burying hath she kept this", @John 12: 7.
{269}
I want to show how love has had to say to death, for death was upon us; it stood as a great barrier between God and man, because all have sinned. Death is seen condensed at the cross, as seen in type in the Jordan, its power shutting us out from the greatest thoughts of God about us. So in the journey recorded here Elijah and Elisha came to the Jordan, and Elijah took his mantle and *wrapped it together*. Elisha does not do that, Elijah only did it. It refers to dealing with death by inherent power. Christ said, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up". That is John's point of view. It is the inherent power of Christ over death, removing the greatest barrier that stands between us and God. Elijah, it says, "wrapped it together, and smote the waters". That brings to our attention the measure of Christ -- more than the measure of a man. No mere man could overthrow death, though a man might do a miracle in the power of God. Elijah uses the mantle, and it has its effect. There is no minimising the power of death, but "they [the waters] were divided hither and thither, so that they two went over on dry ground". It is an act of love. What Christ has done in this way should touch our hearts and attract us to Himself so that *we* follow Him. We are not content to be anywhere other than in His company. "As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee". What an attachment, figuring Christ and the saints passing over together. When they were gone over there is the expression, "as they went on, and talked"; it is a beautiful picture of association with Christ.
Now Elisha was to be left by Elijah. Being left to ourselves after such an expression of love and power brings out where we are; it brings out *our* measure, whether we have followed on and grown according to that mantle. "Ask what I shall do for thee" is the question. The Lord would like the very youngest brother or sister to ask what He should do for them; that is what is implied by Elijah's remark. Elisha was to be left -- a great crisis in his history! He knew what he
{270}
would need as losing his great head, and Elisha is equal to it, and answers accordingly. Let it impress us also with the need of being equal to the occasion. God is great, you cannot ask too much. Elisha says, I would like to have a double portion of your spirit. What an appreciation he had of his master! The true disciple seeks no other spirit. Of the supply of it there is an abundance, and Elisha would have it. Elijah did not underrate the magnitude of the gift Elisha asked for. "Thou hast asked a hard thing", he said. It was not a trivial entreaty; so he says, "If thou see me when I am taken from thee"; that was the test. You must see as I go up; you must get the idea of ascension. Many of us are content with resurrection, but there is the going up; resurrection is the expression of God's power, but it is not the end of what He has in mind. Christ in heaven, and we conformed to Him there, is the end. He is the measure of the divine thought for us. He is now the measure of our sanctification. You must see me as I go up, Elijah indicated. As they were talking in the way, the chariot of fire separated them, and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into the heavens. Elisha saw it and cried, "My father, my father! the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof!" That was his gift, so to speak; it conveyed the impression he received.
As you seek to serve you get some distinctive impression of Christ. That is what you need in the service which the Lord has for you. In the presence of the terrible state of things then existing in Israel that impression remained and increased to the end of Elisha's days. Joash, the king, at Elisha's deathbed uses the same words: "My father, my father! the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof!" @2 Kings 13: 14. Others get hold of the impression and so use it.
Here we read they were parted asunder. We have to experience Christ being parted from us. We have to stand on our own feet and use the power He used, as the apostle says, that the excellency of the power may be of
{271}
God. He says "Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me". You scorn any other power, you simply want the power of Christ. Elisha rends his clothes, this is a new start. You want other clothes, not exactly to put on, but to use spiritually as power. It is a question of appreciation of the power of Christ, not my own power. Elisha does not wrap the mantle together. It was not a question of inherent power in him, but a symbol of Christ's power. "I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me". In this sense a young brother arrives at the point where he disallows his own ability and makes room for Christ.
I now want to pass on to Paul's cloak; what I have said is linked up with it and the parchments and books that were left at Troas. Troas was a town of no little significance in the testimony. One of the most interesting occurrences took place there. On the first day of the week we, says the writer of the Acts, came together at Troas to break bread. What he further says indicates that as sitting down to break bread we must think of what is set forth in Paul's cloak -- we must have before us his ministry as governing the Lord's supper. The instruction we have through him shows that its setting is in the assembly. Before they broke bread at Troas they listened to Paul's discourse till midnight. That it was a discourse with power we may be assured. There is surely a spiritual connection between this significant occasion and the leaving of Paul's cloak and the books in the house of Carpus in that town. He would think, we must assume, of Paul's size spiritually and reflect too on the books he read. Think, young people, of the books that Paul read! He would not read novels! One of the most pernicious things which affect the young are these published untrue stories; they are full of corruption. Look at the titles of Paul's books, see what they are. What did Paul read them for? Those are the suggestions. It was the particular books that he left at Troas with
{272}
Carpus that the apostle wished to have at Rome. Can we not assume that Carpus would read them? Carpus means "fruit", and would thus suggest an allusion to the result of the testimony of Paul. What I would mention in regard to Troas is the idea of potentiality.
What interests me at the present time peculiarly is the young. That is what Eutychus signifies, and he was resuscitated from the dead by the embrace of Paul. What an example of the power of christianity there! This young man, Eutychus, is taken away by those who cared for him. They brought away the boy alive, suggestive of how parents should look after their boys spiritually. He is now alive by the power of God through Paul, who discerned that as in his arms his life was in him. That life is to be nourished in the meeting at Troas. The suggestion is of great potentiality in the "boy alive" through Paul's instrumentality.
All this links on with what I have been saying about Elijah and Elisha, the *continuity* of the testimony -- generation after generation. The things thou hast heard of me, writes Paul to Timothy (two generations), the same commit thou to faithful men (three generations), who shall be able to teach others also (four generations). Paul's measure, as it were, is carried on. It is carried down to us. The Spirit of God being here, these things are possible, the continuation of the very best results of the gospel.
It was left to Timothy peculiarly to *bring* those things and *as he came*, those things would not be omitted, Paul's cloak, his books, and his parchments. Young brothers and sisters should read the Scriptures. It is said of Timothy that he knew them, from a child. How important to bring up the young to read the Scriptures! Fill their minds full of the Scriptures, and in due time results will be manifest. Then there are books which help us to understand the Scriptures; these should be read; also books containing the direct ministry of the Spirit. I believe the Lord would encourage us to build
{273}
up wholesome libraries. Nevertheless we must attend to the Scriptures themselves, but as we are apt to read them in a perfunctory way, we are enjoined to search them. Philip said to the eunuch, "Understandest thou what thou readest?" He replied, "How can I, except some man should guide me?" Thus we may read and not understand, but the Spirit will guide and would use books to this end. Why should we not have the very best things to read? They do not cost much materially. There is divine provision for us in this sense and wisdom would lead us to use it.
This is a very simple incident, but it has a place in Scripture, and it has to be noted. Paul wanted the cloak and he wanted these books to read, then he wanted the parchments to write on -- as it seems. The Spirit of God would not write this incident without some meaning in it for us.
Now as to Ruth. "Bring the cloak that thou hast upon thee, and hold it", says Boaz. The cloak speaks of capacity. Young people have to cultivate capacity for the reception of divine things. Ruth had a remarkable history, a type of a young christian who becomes attached to the testimony through his or her mother or relatives. She begins that way, and then she becomes connected with Boaz, a man of wealth, and a man in family relationship to her. Christ stands in relationship to us as men; being a Man. He can take up that position, and as such He had the right of redemption. In exercising this right He would develop growth in the saints, and that is what takes place in this book of Ruth. Beautiful story, but beautiful spiritually too! In the passage read it shows a certain measure or capacity is looked for. This suggests what is gracious, what is considerate, and what is best for yourself.
Why all this experience, and why this development going on in relation to the man who had the right of redemption? He was engaging her, and he is raising the question, What is your capacity? You come to the meetings,
{274}
the Bible readings, and others, but what is your capacity for the things opened up? Do you *receive* them? The Corinthians, shallow though they were, had received the gospel, but the apostle says, I cannot say very much to you because your capacity is so small; they were not spiritual, @1 Corinthians 3: 1. We speak wisdom among the *perfect*, he says, but I cannot speak wisdom to *you*. The point is to judge and disallow carnal thoughts and ways, so that there might be capacity to receive and retain the truth. Ruth would see the size of her cloak, as Boaz in his bounty dealt six measures of barley into it. It is a question of growth and consequent spiritual capacity in view of our relationship with Christ. To the Romans the apostle says you have been made dead to the law that you should be *to* another (chapter 7: 4); it is that we should be *to* Christ. In addressing the Corinthians he says, "I have espoused you unto one man", @2 Corinthians 11: 2. This involved that He should have their undivided attention and that there should be capability of intelligent response to Him.
Boaz then went into the city, chapter 3: 15. He is now about to enter into a great transaction. By application to ourselves, it is Christ securing us. If the assembly is to be the bride of Christ it must be great. It is a vessel of great capacity. It comes down out of heaven from God having the glory of God, also prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.
I submit that we should give attention to this thought of capacity or measure; that the young people might see that the Lord is looking for increase in receptive ability, so that we may fully answer to Him in understanding and affection, as taking in and feeding upon what is presented to us in the power of the Spirit; we are to become full grown and able to respond to Christ. In type, Ruth answers to this, and Boaz goes into the city and the marital transaction is completed. May God bless these thoughts to us.
{275}
YOURSELVES
@1 John 2: 27; @Jude 20 - 23; @John 13: 35
What I have in mind to speak of centres in the word "yourselves". It is found in each of the scriptures read, as given in the New Translation, and points to any local company of God's people, as also to all the saints on earth as responsible, left as it were to *themselves*. Not that we are left to ourselves in another sense, for the Lord says to us, "Behold, *I* am with you all the days until the completion of the age", @Matthew 28: 20. This promise is of course contingent on conditions, but nevertheless it can be relied upon, and becomes very great where two or three are gathered together unto the Lord's name, for He says, "there am I in the midst of them". In another passage where the saints are seen as bereft of all, having been on the mount of transfiguration, and having been bathed, as it were, in the radiancy of the glory on the mount, and hearing the voice out of that glory as the scene of glory disappeared, it is said, "they no longer saw any one, but Jesus alone with themselves". Those who love Him are content with Him. He is sufficient, Jesus only!
Some are discontented at times because there is not something more than Jesus with the brethren, but there it was Jesus only with themselves. Others are discontented because Jesus is not clothed with current religious garments, but we are told that certain of His disciples were content to take Him "as he was", that is, there is no thought of adding to Him so as to gratify natural religious desire. They took Him "as he was" into the ship. Further, at Sychar, in a passage of scripture which impresses us with what He is essentially, it says, He "sat just as he was" on the well. There was no effort to disguise anything at all; indeed He was weary, a fact which the enemy might try to use to detract from
{276}
His glorious Person. Yet Scripture does not disguise the fact that although He who is God over all was there, a real Man sat thus as He was on the well. These are very precious truths, and should be cherished in our hearts.
On the other hand, we have to see that He has left us here. He was received out of their sight. We are told in @Acts 1 that "a cloud received him out of their sight". He was parted from them, just as in the type Elijah was parted from Elisha. Again, we find that the Lord, as children were brought to Him, laid His hands on them and blessed them and *went away*, implying that the parents had themselves to look after their little ones (@Matthew 19: 15). He had laid His hands on them, but the parents would now be responsible. They can of course reckon on Him as having laid His hands on them, as identified with them; and so with every child born into the household of faith. The parents can reckon on the Lord to help them in looking after them, but He says, it is your affair to keep them from evil as much as you can. *You* are to do it.
Again, as regards the damsel whom He raised to life, He told others to give her something to eat. He commanded them to do it. He does not do it Himself. Thus the Lord imposes responsibility upon us, and in leaving His own where the enemy was. He said, "I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever, ... for he abides with you, and shall be in you", @John 14: 16, 17.
The apostle John, having this latter fact in mind, alludes to the Spirit's presence, in the verse read from his first epistle, and addressing the brethren as "little children", says, "And *yourselves*", not 'ourselves'. He had been speaking to them about the antichrist, reminding them that they knew that he was coming. It was a matter of christian knowledge in the early days that antichrist was coming, and that already there were many, and the apostle gives indications as to him and
{277}
them, so that as discerning these marks we should know that it is the last hour. That does not simply mean the last hour of the dispensation, it signifies the whole dispensation. All the dispensations have entered into this. It is the crucial one, the last one in which sin will have sway, and we have God's testimony here as to the means of superiority and victory in it. What marks this hour for true believers is the Unction. The Holy Spirit is seen in this way, not simply as present, but as distinguishing God's people in the way of intelligence. The idea is that every christian, however young, should, among other things, be distinguished by intelligence. The fruit of the Spirit is in variety, as seen elsewhere, nine fruits being mentioned in Galatians, the first of which is *love*, but we should be intelligent, and as having intelligence and knowing its source, we are independent of man. It is not that man may not be used of God. The Spirit is not incarnate and therefore uses teachers, but that is not what is meant; man in his natural attainments is in view.
The influence of Greek philosophy was being felt, and Satan was using it, and some of the brethren were going so far as to welcome it, thinking by it to add to what they had; but that was just making room for what exists today, the enormous systems dependent on man as such, although distinguished by religious garb and education. It is just *man*. A man having four or five sons will make one of them a clergyman, as one of the general professions in the world.
John, in calling attention to the Spirit, would show that, as having received Him, there was no need that any man as such should teach the saints. "Yourselves", he says. You might look thus upon the brethren here in Johannesburg. When the apostle Paul was at Miletus, he called over to him the elders of the assembly at Ephesus, and he put it upon them to look after the saints ... to take heed to *themselves* and to all the flock. He also urged the Philippians, saying, "work out your
{278}
own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God who works in you both the willing and the working according to his good pleasure" (chapter 2: 12, 13).
If God gives the Spirit, He has in mind *yourselves*, but this implies that room is to be made for the ministry which *He* affords. Being dependent on the anointing there attaches such a dignity as no university in the world can confer. In the recognition of the anointing, brothers come to the Bible readings with something, in dependence on the Lord. "Whenever ye come together, each of you has a psalm, has a teaching ...", @1 Corinthians 14: 26. Coming together is not enough, we should count on the anointing. It is a question of accepting obligation, and in dependence making room for the Spirit.
The Unction, John says, "teaches you as to all things". The Spirit, the Lord said, will come and bring demonstration to the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. It is not simply that the world is convicted, it is rather that things are brought out in power, through the Spirit here, in the saints of God. The idea of sin is brought out, the idea of righteousness is brought out; also the idea of judgment -- the judgment of God. We are to carry the sense of all this. It affords moral victory in a world of sin and Satan's power. These things are to be in evidence -- that there is such a thing as the judgment of God, a judgment capable of dealing with the whole world system. The prince of it *is* judged. "Now is the judgment of this world", @John 12: 31. Its execution is future, although in principle it exists, so that John says, "He that is not subject to the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him". It is the present tense. Undoubtedly he alludes to the Jewish system, but there is that which corresponds today, and God has brought in the judgment of that *system*, which refuses Jesus. So that the apostle Paul says, "Wrath has come upon them to the uttermost", @1 Thessalonians 2: 16. It is a standing testimony, so that man may fear God; God is to be feared. John has that in mind, in opening up this
{279}
epistle to these little ones. The Unction has come, and we are to have a clear perspective of the whole position, and have the knowledge that God has the entire situation in hand. That is a great matter for young people. It is not the result of going to universities, but by holding things in the dignity of the teaching of the Spirit of God, as John says, "the same unction teaches you as to all things". The Spirit is here and may be relied upon. Thus we do not need any *man* to teach us.
Now as to Jude's epistle, we again have this word "yourselves". Jude was an apostle, as was John. He had in mind to write of "our common salvation" -- that is, what enters into the preaching of the gospel. God grant that there may be more of it! "Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season", we are enjoined. Jude would have liked to have written on that subject, but he says in effect, the apostasy is coming in with such force that I have to turn aside to speak of it and expose it. Jude's epistle has a great place in these last days, and fortifies us as to what we are to do. He exposes the tide of apostasy. If exposed, it is *morally* settled. That is important in regard to @John 16. If exposed, evil is morally settled. When sentence upon a criminal is passed by a court, and the punishment to be inflicted is pronounced, the execution of the penalty is a detail, a matter of time, but the case is morally ended. The Spirit brings in demonstration of sin and judgment; God has power to deal with the whole matter, and hence, as divinely demonstrated, sin is morally dealt with. So @John 16: 8 - 11 clears the whole scene for us. Apprehending what the Spirit has done, the believer sees all things clearly. Some of us do not perhaps; we stay too much in the village; our minds dwell in it. In @Mark 8, the Lord took the man out of the village and touched his eyes, enabling him to see all things clearly. The whole landscape is seen in this way. So that the believer moves on. He knows what is before him. He treads his way with firm step.
{280}
Jude exposes the evil, and shows how it is to be met; he says, "But *ye*, beloved, building yourselves up on your most holy faith". How is it to be done in the midst of the things he has been exposing? "Praying in the Holy Spirit". That is a word for Monday evenings, and for secret prayer too. Prayer is to be in the Holy Spirit. The Book of Common Prayer is not that. The Holy Spirit is in the prayer meeting. It is prayer in the Spirit that expresses the need of the moment.
It is "*yourselves*" here, "But *ye, beloved*". One covets to have such affection for the brethren so as to be able to use this word. "David" means beloved, and the Spirit of the Lord came upon him. The apostles are able to clothe the saints in this beautiful dress. "But *ye*, beloved ... keep yourselves in the love of God, awaiting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life". These things are held out to our view as incentives to hope. Hope is a great element in the Christian's experience. We are too content with present things. Hope "does not make ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit", @Romans 5: 5. The Spirit inspires hope in our hearts. Thus we are "looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life".
This is not the hope that is spoken of in Philippians pressing "toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus", that is the supreme thought, the heavenly calling. This is "the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life". It is associated with mercy; the Lord Jesus Christ comes in for us as the pressure of death is felt, but presently He will take us beyond it for ever. There is that in Philippians which is most strengthening to our souls: "*Our* commonwealth has its existence in the heavens, from which also we await the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour, who shall transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory".
{281}
Associated with that is @1 Corinthians 15 in regard to the raising of the dead, where we have the utterance, "Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ". Who has not been disturbed by the thought of death? But the Spirit, as we come to understand the truth, gives the sense of victory. Not setting ourselves up here, we have a sure outlook and are praying in the Holy Spirit.
"And of some have compassion, making a difference, but others save with fear". We are confronted amongst ourselves in every locality with "some" and with "others". There are those that we are to be compassionate towards. The same things may attach to them as attach to the others, but with the former it is not so serious. Environment has much to do with our characters. In dealing with souls I always like to get information regarding their parentage, nationality, business, and so on, because God has taken all these things into account. "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your Father; but of you even the hairs of the head are all numbered", @Matthew 10: 29, 30. How much more does He consider our fathers, our environment, our tenets, our present occupation, and all else. All these things enter into the calculation of a spiritual man.
"But others", Jude says, "save with fear, snatching them out of the fire" -- they are actually in it. Although born of Christian parents, they may frequent the cinema. Pull them out of it! "Hating even the garment spotted by the flesh" -- that is the thing, the garment, not the persons. Look out for the spots. In Leviticus, it took a priest to do that. Leviticus speaks about *garments* being leprous. Look out for the spots! Hate them!
The final thought is in chapter 13 of John's gospel. The Lord begins this section in verse 33. He calls the disciples "Children"; it is a parental word. John in his epistle calls the saints his children. The Lord addresses His own as children. It is a question of His parental
{282}
affection for them. He had been washing their feet. Think of Him thus, the lowly Saviour! How it should appeal to every one! Was it for them only? No, for us too. Indeed He puts it upon us here to wash one another's feet. I do not believe I shall ever wash a saint's feet if I do not *respect* him. I shall never love a person I do not respect. The truth sets aside all the things that distinguish us after the flesh. We have to clothe the brethren with heavenly dignity and respect. God is no respecter of persons in the gospel. What a variety of persons were converted in the early days! There were high-born and rich men as well as low-born and poor. Let no one despise a rich man. One man of whom it is said he was rich "sought to see Jesus who he was". So we must not despise any because of outward circumstances. The apostle appealed to the Corinthians, who were making much of men in this sense. He says, "Consider your calling". The generality of those called were of the lower strata of society, and this was to bring to nought among the saints the great things of the world. Christ took a servant's place in going round washing their feet. Then He sits down and addresses them in dignity, and says, "children". What a beautiful address that is! It is no mere formality. This is love seen in the Lord Jesus. Children, He says, if you wish to be known as My disciples, "have love amongst yourselves". Have it as a quantity, as it were. Not simply that one or two brothers love the others, but it is to mark all -- "love amongst yourselves". It is an appeal, and "love never fails".
Was the description of love in @1 Corinthians 13 applicable to the assembly at Corinth? Alas! no. Had it been so the picture would be much more attractive. Because of the sorrowful state at Corinth the apostle was obliged to describe love in an abstract way. The Lord in the passage before us sought that love in a positive way should be amongst us. He says, "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves". How can I sit down with a
{283}
brother and participate in the symbols of the death of Christ, and refuse to speak to him? It is foreign to love.
The Lord is thinking of the saints as left to *themselves*. He would be away, but, as it were, instead of Himself, there would be *love*. In love I make room for the Spirit. The Lord would encourage us to have love among ourselves -- each one accepting the obligation of having it.
{284}
LEADERSHIP
@Genesis 24: 67; @Romans 8: 14; @Hebrews 2: 10 - 12
That to which I desire to attract your thoughts this evening is leadership, a wide subject in the Scriptures, but in making what I have to say intelligible, I will endeavour to be a brief as possible. The thought is seen in the Old Testament, in Jehovah leading His people. He led them "like a flock", we are told (@Psalm 77: 20). In the New Testament we have leadership in Christ, leadership in the Spirit, by angels, and by men. I have in mind to begin with Christ, and to show in my opening remarks something of the dispensational position. Rebecca was led into Isaac's mother's tent, he "led her into his mother Sarah's tent". The previous chapter dwells on Sarah, and it does not appear that she was removed on account of failure. The years of her life are mentioned twice in the opening verse, as if God was pleased with her, and much is made of the burying ground in which she is interred, in which she lies, and in which indeed everyone dead in Christ lies until the morning of the resurrection. For that field of Machpelah is by extension just the burying ground of the saints, of those who fall asleep through Jesus. It is under the Lord's eye; the burying places of the saints are precious in His eyes; He knows where they are.
Sarah having vacated her tent to lie in her tomb, another has to take that position, for there are no voids with God, the position of the testimony is always to be occupied. God has never left Himself without a witness, and He selects His own witnesses. Rebecca was carefully sought. How Jehovah had watched over her, in view of this great position she was to occupy! What interest there was in heaven when the great patriarch Abraham, as he was about to die, called his servant to swear that a wife for his son would be sought from amongst his
{285}
family, and that his son Isaac would not be taken out of the land of Canaan. The matter had the greatest attention from Abraham, and what we see in him reflects what was in heaven. For in truth, Jehovah took charge of the whole matter, as He always does in what relates to His testimony, and watched the journey of the servant of Abraham with the camels and the men, until they reached the spot where this favoured one was.
She was without doubt set there by God, and she shone there; for the divine selection always corresponds, either potentially or actually, with the divine mind. She appeared at once: there was no need to search from house to house for her. She was not like Saul, hiding himself amongst the stuff. Many do that in false pride, but it is a poor thing to be hidden in this sense. Some are now hidden amongst the stuff who ought to be shining in the traits of Christ, so as to be discernible and available for the assembly. Rebecca stands out beautifully, she is on the spot, and the result is that worship is drawn forth from this servant of Abraham, who was over all his house. He is not a mere domestic here, as earlier. His name is not given, it is his *office* that is now in view; showing that all that Abraham could afford in this sense was used. How beautiful it is when brethren, for in truth that is the idea, when those who have the care of the assembly, of the affairs of Christ here, see the young coming out instead of hiding in the stuff, whatever that stuff may be, appearing brightly and cheerfully, ready for what is divinely needed. That indeed elicits worship from their hearts. Rebecca here appeared exactly as might have been desired, so much so that the servant was astonished. A work of God, a pure work in the young, loves to show itself, and causes delight as it is discerned, and the brethren are looking for it.
I need not go over the ground: it is one of the best-known chapters; the servant here typically reflects the feelings of the Spirit of God Himself, in astonishment, for the Spirit of God takes a wonderfully lowly place.
{286}
He is God, He has part in Deity, but He has taken a low place to effectuate the divine thoughts. Here He is in the attitude of a servant, and as the work of God appears it is (speaking reverently) delightful to Him. So as the Lord met one and another in whom God was working here below, how pleased He was, how refreshed, how delighted, as the true Rebecca in her members appeared as the gratifying result of His unwearied service! We see this in that well-known passage in @John 4, where the Lord says to His disciples, "I have meat to eat that ye know not of"; and there are many other instances. Matthew, indeed, would say in effect that the Lord, without looking for it, found a treasure. It was not Israel, for "he came unto his own, and his own received him not". Although Israel is first loved and has the first place, for Rachel is Israel, this is not Israel, it is something better. He found the treasure in the field, before we are told that He was *seeking* for something of that kind. It was there, and He hid it, and He bought the field, so as to have a right to it. It is an important thing to have before us in service that the Lord has acquired the field in order to acquire a right to what was in it. This is something He must have, and no one else must have a right to it. The idea is well enough known in these parts: if gold is found, how readily the land is purchased in order to acquire a right to what is there. It may take years to get the gold out, but the right is there. So the Lord has acquired a right in that field. You see, therefore, that we have no option in these things, the option is His. He has a right to buy and having done that, He asserts His right to *you*. That is what He is doing, and has been doing in the gospel all these centuries; and He will have a full result.
Then there is an additional thought, as I said. After the Lord found the treasure. He is said to be "seeking", going beyond what He has found. He is looking for something even better. He is seeking as a connoisseur of pearls, looking for *goodly* ones. That is what is in
{287}
mind in Rebecca. Her name signifies that she was attractive, not surely by mere physical beauty, but by moral beauty. It was there. The Lord had that in mind, and sold all that He had to acquire that one pearl of great price.
Now I want to show how this incident typifies the present dispensational position. The Lord, we are told, led His disciples "as far as to Bethany". He was received up, as Luke tells us, from Bethany. It was the Jewish position. "They ... returned to Jerusalem with great joy: and were continually in the temple praising and blessing God". They were not yet the assembly publicly; they were just His disciples -- known to be such, but not yet formally detached from Israel, from the Jewish position. He brought them, dear brethren, to the place of love, to Bethany. It is the remnant position, the true remnant of Israel, where love was, but it was not yet Sarah's tent. Isaac, we are told, led Rebecca into Sarah's tent. He *led* her in. The disciples went to Jerusalem, and were there praising and blessing God with great joy, but it was in the temple: it was very near the idea, but not fully. The Lord had in mind that these disciples should take on something more than being just His disciples, and so Luke, when he employs his pen the second time, makes no mention of Bethany, but tells us that the Lord presented Himself to His disciples *living*; then it says that He assembled with them, and that He spoke to them about the kingdom of God, not the kingdom of Israel. It was a great universal thought that He was speaking about. He was received up as they were speaking, "they beholding him". They were to see that wonderful movement called the ascension, not yet His own act, for it says, "a cloud received him out of their sight"; and they returned to Jerusalem; but they go to the upper room. The upper room does not refer to Sarah's tent. It is a new thing. From there they went to the temple, but they were learning, and they broke bread in the house. They had caught the thought
{288}
that the Lord's supper was a family matter. They were getting on to family lines, and so it is that in the households (which includes all believers¬ households) the family thought finds a place, and grows. In the apostle Paul's ministry it was developed, and household baptism came into evidence for the first time. It would enhance the idea of the household: it was a place for children, a place for family affections, but in opening up the truth of the Lord's supper, Paul says, "Have ye not houses to eat ... in?" The Lord's supper belongs to the assembly: "When ye come together in assembly" -- that is the thought here. Paul brings in the Supper in a new way. He says, I received it from the Lord. It came in from the Lord. The Lord had gone into heaven, as we are told in the early part of Acts, but a great deal has been added since He was received up. Luke merely says He was received up, but Paul speaks about His being received up in glory, and about His having a body of glory, and His coming to change our bodies of humiliation like unto His own body of glory. From all that glory scene the Lord speaks about His supper, and about His thought as to it, for it has come to us not exactly in the words of Luke; there are additions and subtractions, but there it is, come down from that scene of glory, handed over by the great minister of the assembly, so as to be enshrined in the assembly; for that is the place for it.
Now all that enters into this position. Rebecca is led into Isaac's mother's tent, but the union had not yet taken place. The union comes under the apostle Paul's ministry, if you understand me. I hope I am not speaking about what you do not understand. Union belonged to the apostle Paul's ministry, and so it is that as Rebecca was led into the tent, Isaac took her. The name Rebecca means attractiveness, and typically the assembly was becoming more and more attractive down here. It speaks in Canticles about the king being held in the galleries (@Song of Songs 7: 5) or "The king is fettered by thy ringlets" (New Trans.). That is the attractiveness
{289}
of the assembly. Under the teaching of Paul it becomes increasingly attractive to heaven, and is not Christ entitled to value what is attractive? Must He always fall back on His divine, sovereign love, that can exercise itself apart from loveliness in its object? Surely not! Surely no lover of Christ would say, He will love me anyway! No! I want to be lovely. The Lord has an eye for loveliness; He is seeking goodly pearls.
The apostle Paul came out in the Lord's due time. He appeared when the perfection of the assembly was required; the day had arrived in heaven for it. Isaac took Rebecca; there was a formal action on his part. It is here the bridal thought comes in, not earlier. It was as she was led into Sarah's tent that he took her. It was marital; but you never get any marriage transactions in a public sense in the Old Testament. Things are kept as simple as possible, for all is awaiting the glorious nuptials between Christ and the assembly: when "the marriage of the Lamb is come". That day has not yet arrived, but union takes place before that, and it is as in Sarah's tent that you get the transaction: "He took Rebecca, and she became his wife, and he loved her". All is perfectly orderly spiritually. It is in the order of one, two, three, for everything must be so in divine transactions. He took her, and she became his wife, and he loved her. Is that not orderly? Paul's ministry has come in here. It is not that the Lord did not love the Pentecostal assembly; He did, but it required greater formation, beautification, the impress of heaven. Paul brought that out, so that gradually but surely it became more and more attractive, and Christ loved it. Rebecca is said to signify what captivates; and the assembly became that peculiarly under the apostle Paul's ministry. I am speaking in this way so that our hearts may be drawn into the thoughts of Christ as to what He sees in His counterpart -- the assembly.
Can we not afford to Christ that right? -- to have such an admiration for what is delightful to His mind, that it
{290}
is captivating to His heart? It eclipsed the position of Sarah. It is a heavenly Man and His bride here, in union, in testimony. Dear brethren, what a position we are in! That is the dispensational truth. It is not to bring out that Israel failed, that it murdered Christ -- that is not what Sarah stands for. It is to bring out that the position of testimony is held in a greater way than she could have held it; for it is Christ known in heaven, as He appeared to Paul. Paul was caught up there: "caught up to the third heaven", he says, as far as that, and then "caught up into Paradise". He had some conception of what was there, and of what was needed for Christ. He kept it in his heart for fourteen years, but how much it would affect his ministry! I would like to leave the impression with you of what the assembly is here, as in Sarah's tent -- the tent, as it were, continuing; once graced by Sarah, but now more then ever by Rebecca, as the wife of the heavenly Man. It is a heavenly Christ, and a heavenly assembly in testimony here.
Peter's vision (@Acts 10) is brought in immediately as Paul comes on the scene. It is to make way for the full scope, for the setting out of the mystery -- the assembly as united to Christ. Ephesians teaches us that we are "raised up together" -- that is not with Christ, but with one another, for that is the point there. I do not want to go without the brethren, I love them and want them there too. He "has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together", we are told (@Ephesians 2: 6). Then the epistle brings out what is down here, that is, the habitation of God. The apostle says, "Ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God, being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the corner-stone", @Ephesians 2: 19, 20. Then he says, "*Ye* also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit", so that as the result of the work of
{291}
God among the gentiles is brought in, the *full* thought of God comes to light.
I am saying all this that we might understand the magnitude of the position. John's ministry comes in reflectively, bringing to us the glory of the heavenly city, the bride of Christ, so that it might shine upon us *now*, and shine out from us.
Now the leading of the Spirit runs parallel with what I have been speaking about; for in order to understand the assembly as Rebecca, how captivating she is to Christ, we have to understand what the members of Christ are; and sonship necessarily underlies the beauty that shines in the collective aspect. She comes down out of heaven from God, having the glory of God. Think of being in that which is the residence of the glory in heaven! She comes down with it, she *has* it. That is how John helps in what I was saying; and sonship, and our being led as sons, is to bring out how it works, how the captivating features appear as the sons are set in relation to God and to one another in sonship; and in relation to Christ and to one another as brethren. To the Galatians Paul says, "Because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father", @Galatians 4: 6. Peter had not spoken about that. We do not get a word from Peter about sonship until he is about to put off his tabernacle. It belonged to Paul to develop. Peter knew about sonship, for the Son of God was disclosed to him, but he did not speak about it, showing how perfectly these great ministers were controlled by the Spirit. They did not say all they knew. If Peter was free to say all he knew about Christ as Son, how much he could say! but as he was about to put off his tabernacle he speaks about it and in the most glorious language. He speaks long after Paul's ministry had come out: "When we were with him on the holy mount", he says. In Romans, Paul works it out.
Dear brethren, we are apt to be very doctrinal and theoretical in these matters, but that will not do for
{292}
the apostle Paul. He is clear enough as to doctrine, but he is concerned that we should know the things inwardly. There is the building *inward*. As everything is cleared; first the question of sins in @Romans 1 - 5, then the question of sin, up to chapter 7; he brings in the Spirit, and you find the Spirit mentioned very much in chapter 8, something like thirteen times from verses 4 to 17. God is impressing us with this, that the Spirit is here, and that room is to be made for Him. I come to realise that there is such a Person; I realise it by the effect He has on me: He sheds abroad the love of God in my heart, (@Romans 5: 5) a great service. In this chapter it says, "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free" (chapter 8: 2). It is not only the Spirit, but the *law* of the Spirit of life. We have to understand the word "law" here contextually, as indeed all words in Scripture. *This* law sets me free; it is an experience. We must have experience, or our christianity will be merely theoretic. Experience is the thing now, and so we are told what the mind of the Spirit is -- it is "life and peace". If you get a little experience of life and peace, even for an hour, you prove that you have the Spirit. He is available to me here. "If, by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye shall live". You cannot do that by your own will power. We are to be a testimony here in this world; that is what we are left here for: we are to be here in power as sanctified, using the Spirit to mortify the deeds of the body. How otherwise could we do it? Let anyone try to do it by his own power! It is only by the Spirit. The light comes in, that the culprit, the flesh, has been condemned, and now you execute him. The sentence has been passed, and by the Spirit I keep him under control, mortifying the deeds of the body, and so I live.
Then the chapter also says, "If the Spirit of him that has raised up Jesus from among the dead dwell in you, he that has raised up Christ from among the dead shall quicken your mortal bodies also on account of his Spirit which dwells in you" (verse 11). All these operations
{293}
become familiar as we are with God, and then we come to this significant verse, "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God" (verse 14). That is, the Spirit is recognised and given His full place. We find it set out in the types. In @Exodus 17, at the smitten rock, the Spirit is typified in the water that came out, but it does not say there, that the people *drank*. Of course they did drink, but it does not say so, as if God is calling attention to the feebleness with which young believers appropriate the Spirit. When we come to @Numbers 20, in spite of Moses¬ disobedience the water flowed, and they drank. So today, in spite of the disobedience of those who are in public charge, the ecclesiastics, as we might say, the water flows. Where should we be if it did not! In spite of the lawlessness that existed, the assembly drank, also their beasts; there was plenty of water, and there is today.
Then when we go on to chapter 21 we come back to the true Moses. The well is dug under his direction by the leaders, and they sing to it: "Spring up, O well". The springing up is the point. You do not get it out of the rock: it is *digging* now, dealing with myself. Digging refers to my state. I see the value of the Spirit now, and I sing to it. From that point we find that typically the Spirit is leading. Israel journeyed from that point until they came to Pisgah, where they looked "over the surface of the waste". We realise there, that in spite of the waste, God is leading us *in*; and how? By the Spirit. As moving in that way we are self-judged and self-denying, so that when we come together in assembly, we recognise the Spirit's leadership, and move under that leadership. If one says, "Lord Jesus", we recognise it; if one says, "Abba, Father" in the power of the Spirit of adoption, we recognise it, and move accordingly. If we do not, we are interfering, and the service is marred. As together in the assembly if I bring in the Lord Jesus after the Spirit of adoption has brought in the Father, I am interfering with the service. The sons of God are brought to light
{294}
because of the way they move: they are led by the Spirit of adoption and say, "Abba, Father". The most beautiful note that can enter and resound in heaven is, "Abba, Father", and that is what sons say.
Just one more word before I close. The Spirit's leading brings on to the ground of the assembly as the place of service God-ward. The assembly is the residence of the glory, but also the place of divine service, and in order that it should be effective according to God, we have not only the leadership of the Spirit, seen in brethren saying "Lord Jesus" by the Spirit, and "Abba, Father", by the Spirit, but the Lord Himself comes in, for the Spirit ever makes room for Christ, whatever is in view, and the most exalted thought of leadership is that in which Christ has part. We are prepared for it by the action of the Spirit. These are exalted things, dear brethren, and perhaps difficult for the young to understand. It is a service suitable for heaven, and to go on eternally: nothing less than that.
The writer to the Hebrews says, "It became him [that is, God] for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings". It is not that the Lord Jesus was ever imperfect; the idea is that He has taken another condition and that through suffering. The original word for "leader" here is used four times in the New Testament, and means a person who sets out a thing and exemplifies it. We must understand who our Leader is, and how He exemplifies things. It is a spiritual matter and only those in the Spirit will understand. We view our Lord in this way, as a Leader, perfected through sufferings. What a touching thought! He showed them His hands and His side. He *showed* them, that is the idea. The Spirit touches our hearts, but the hands and the side of Jesus should also affect our hearts. He is made perfect through sufferings, and now He is conducting this great matter, the service of God. When we come together in assembly we have to
{295}
learn to give place to Him, and if the Spirit has His way the Lord Jesus will be given place, and then the service is God-ward, the God "for whom are all things, and by whom are all things". The Son and the Spirit are engaged with one great matter: God is to be worshipped and served suitably now, as He will be eternally. It begins here, and goes into eternity.
The passage goes on to say: "For both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren, saying, I will declare thy name to my brethren; in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises".
The foregoing is what I had in mind. I hope you will be able to connect it in your souls, for no doubt most of you will follow what I am speaking about; so that the great service to Him "for whom are all things, and by whom are all things", should be carried out that *God* may be worshipped in spirit and in truth.
{296}
LIFE IN THE BOOK OF REVELATION (1)
@Revelation 1: 17 - 20; @Revelation 2: 7, 10 (last sentence); @Revelation 3: 5
J.T. The subject of life is not treated of formally in this book, but it is mentioned throughout informally, and it may help to look at it as applying to remnant times. The whole book is addressed to the assemblies that were in Asia at that time, seven mentioned by name, so that what is brought before us is of direct interest and importance to the saints of this dispensation. Although the book is prophetic, and deals very largely with what is coming hereafter, yet it is addressed to the saints of this dispensation, as responsible, and it is intended to instruct us in view of the apostasy that has already come in, and indeed had come in, in principle, when the book was written. The apostasy is not a modern thing; it began, we might almost say, in the apostles¬ time. The second epistle to the Thessalonians treats of it as coming in before antichrist appears, but how long before is not definite. That epistle states that the mystery of iniquity already worked, and it has been here ever since; it has increased enormously in our own times, and this book whilst opening up the mind of God to us, unveiling the things that will happen, will fortify us in view of it. One of the most important things in it is life, because it is not only for enjoyment, but is a preservative; it preserves from corruption. That is what I had in mind.
C.C.E. How do you develop that?
J.T. The thought of preserving is to be noted. Life is not only for enjoyment: it is essential for preservation in view of the general decay and corruption, so that the Lord speaks to John here, he being the servant who speaks as much about life as any. His ministry is full of the thought of life, opened up in his first epistle in an orderly way, and greatly amplified in his gospel. The Lord undoubtedly had that in mind in selecting John for this service. "He signified it ... to his bondman John,
{297}
who testified the word of God". He is a trusted servant and one conversant with the great subject of life. He presents Christ as *the* life. The life as in Christ is first treated by itself: "That which was from the beginning".
The Lord had this in mind and laid His right hand upon John, according to the first passage read, saying to him, "*I* am the first and the last, and the living one"; *the* living One. This is personal. Life in Him is inherent. He laid His right hand upon John and touched him, and in the sense of that touch of life, John was to write the book. It was written in the energy of life, his own feelings being brought into it. Then the Lord adds, "I became dead, and behold, I am living to the ages of ages". These remarks really dominate the service of John; it is carried out in the sense of the touch of life; and that is essential in all ministry. He laid His right hand upon him, alluding no doubt to the power that was available to John, the power of the *living* One, living to the ages of ages. Then He tells him what to write, as if he is to do so in that feeling, the sense of life.
J.A.T. Ministry cannot give life, I suppose, but where there is life it responds to the ministry.
J.T. It cannot give life, but ministry should be enhanced by life, it should be given in the sense of life. Before the Lord tells John what to write, this happens. We may minister from mere intellectual power, but it is to be done in a living way. The great clerical ministry, so called, is very largely a matter of doctrine or creed, without any thought of life; but this is in contrast to that.
C.C.E. Sardis had a name to live, but was dead.
J.T. It is what marks the system, especially Protestantism. What is called worship, as carried on, is without any thought of freshness. The prayer-book is the same for every Sunday of every year, and hundreds of years have gone on like that. There is no suggestion of life. It is just words. "The kingdom of God", the apostle says, "is not in word, but in power". Hezekiah speaks of the *living* praising God -- which he was doing.
{298}
The Lord is here seen as walking in the midst of the candlesticks, but in a particular garb, denoting distance and judgment. John was to write about that. Verses 17 and 18 allude to what is special to John, what is to affect him in view of what he was to write, that he might do so in a living way. And so we find the thought running through the book, the last chapter speaking about it as much as any -- especially of the tree of life and the water of life.
C.J.B. Do you suggest the imparting of life with His right hand?
J.T. It was the touch of His hand, a method that the Lord often employed. The Lord would identify Himself with His servant, not as an authority in heaven, but as the living One, who had been dead, and is now living. It is His present state. The touch would be to convey that to him.
W. It is life seen in man in a substantial way.
J.T. Yes. John treats of life as a substantial thing. He begins his first epistle with the neuter pronoun: "*That* which was from the beginning, *that* which we have heard ... *that* which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life", @1 John 1: 1. It refers to Christ personally.
W. "In him was life, and the life was the light of men".
J.T. He is here laying His hand on His servant; it is a living touch.
S.C. At the sight of Him, John became as one dead.
J.T. The garb was new to John. It was so different from the way he knew the Lord. He had leant on His breast, but now he could not do that. The Lord is seen in a judicial garment. But the Lord would reassure him, for John was in his place, a devoted servant, suffering on account of the testimony; there was nothing there to judge, so these two verses (17 and 18) are for John himself, and of course for all servants who seek to serve the Lord faithfully. These judicial garments have no
{299}
reference to those who love Jesus, but to the general profession become apostate; although of course all are responsible as to this. The Lord says, I am thoroughly identified with you. You may have to touch the apostasy in your ministry, but the Lord identifies Himself with every true servant. We see that in the case of Jeremiah: he was made as a strong brazen wall, and the Lord was with him. And so with Ezekiel, his forehead was made hard as an adamant, as testifying to rebellious Israel.
C.C.E. What a difference it would make if all the great ecclesiastical dignitaries would do what John did here, fall at His feet, instead of maintaining their dignity!
J.T. They wear showy garments also, as if to take the place of judgment, like the Lord.
In this it is not the doctrine, but the concrete idea of life. That is what marks off christianity from the religions of the world. These have nothing substantial, nothing but the doctrine or creed. What the Scriptures present is substantial in Christ, a real Man. We have heard Him, seen Him, handled Him, says the apostle. And now this is life out of death. Christ as in deity could say, "I am ... the living one" but, having become Man, He has actually been dead, and now lives again, and this is life that man can participate in. In His life before He died none could participate; now He is in risen life and we can have part in that. Eternal life is life out of death, seen in One who is out of death.
C.J.B. Is that so in principle as John falls at His feet as dead?
J.T. John takes the place suitable to the circumstances. In @John 13 he is in a different position. But now the Lord's attitude is judicial, and it is suitable to take a place at His feet. For we all have a share in that which the Lord is judging, the state of christendom; although we may be personally immune from it, it is right to humble ourselves in regard of it.
{300}
In the beginning of the first epistle, John speaks of life as being personified in Christ. It is brought in here informally, but sometimes an informal introduction helps us more than a formal one. The thought of the living One here is to encourage John; he would know what that meant. It is proper, however, when we are in the midst of judicial circumstances, to take our place with the rest. The Lord did that when John was baptising. "It becometh us", He said, "to fulfil all righteousness". It was righteous. So the most spiritual man today accepts responsibility in relation to the apostasy; and God honours that. We are not overwhelmed by it, but face it in the power of life. John is called upon to write, and the word is for us therefore, in regard to ministry or any endeavour to help the saints. Let everything be done in the power of life.
F.J.F. Would that characterise the ministry that the Lord is giving in these last days? It would be a living ministry that should touch people.
J.T. That is what I think is brought out. The idea of life developed into the idea of eternal life. Particularly now in regard to ministry, things are to be living.
W. One needs to be living to eat the sin offering, as John here.
J.T. It is as having life that you can appropriate death. "My flesh is truly food and my blood is truly drink", the Lord says in @John 6. Appropriation of Christ as having died, that is the food for life. Then He speaks of those who eat Him as living by Him: that is, eating Him as risen. But there is the appropriating Him in death; "I became dead", He says here. It is not the Lord's supper that is in view in @John 6, but the Lord in death as food for life. He gives his flesh for the life of the world. That is, He became dead. His flesh and blood are to be eaten. What food to appropriate!
Now if we have the ministry in this book clearly understood as taking on the character of life, the next thing is the overcomer in the declining church. In verse
{301}
7 of the next chapter we have the tree of life to be eaten: "I will give to him to eat of the tree of life which is in the paradise of God". That is also food and is the next part of our subject.
W. I suppose the Lord Himself is the Tree of Life?
J.T. Quite so. The second reference is to the overcomer in the failing church, and the lovers of Christ are provided for in the tree of life -- a beautiful thought, extending back to Genesis and running through to the end of this book. It is an apprehension of Christ as bearing fruit: beautiful fruit, to be appropriated; it is a delicate, refined thought that is very appropriate to an Ephesian overcomer, because an overcomer in Ephesus would be able to enjoy the most refined things.
W. All the apostles would be overcomers, would they not?
J.T. No doubt, but the point here is the overcomer in that particular church. The church as a whole had lost her first love; there was definite decline, noticed only by spiritual persons. A spiritual christian is a refined person. It is refinement that is in view here; not living by the mere essentials of life. There is this delicate fruit, it is for enjoyment. The tree of life speaks of Christ in His own sphere, the paradise of God. There the tree is seen in its beauty, not only in itself, but, as it were, surrounded by all the other trees in the paradise of God.
F.J.F. Is it the highest thought of life that is presented in the tree of life?
J.T. I think so. And it is *where* it is, in the paradise of God. Anything offered to an overcomer would be something that *he* cherishes. The epistle to the Ephesians opens up the highest thoughts; anyone can see that in reading it. An overcomer in that church is a person who cherishes all this; he is not giving up *anything*, and he would understand what the Lord meant in saying: "I will give to him to eat of the tree of life which is in the paradise of God". One might say it is enough to have
{302}
the tree of life, but the Ephesian understands the Lord's mind as saying, "in the paradise of God". That is the supreme place.
M.A. Caleb and Joshua brought back of the fruit they had found in the land.
J.T. It was the fruit of *Canaan*; the point was *where* it grew. That is important, for it is not only the things themselves, but *where* they are. God "has blessed us with every spiritual blessing", but where? In the heavenlies. The supreme thought is connected with place.
F.J.F. The surroundings are in agreement with what is eaten.
J.T. Yes, there is nothing to distress the heart. Paul says, "I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago ... caught up to the third heaven. And I know such a man ... that he was caught up into paradise", @2 Corinthians 12: 2 - 4. The preposition is changed, it is not *as far as*, but *into*. He was there. The first reference is simply to elevation -- as far as that; but the second is the place of enjoyment; and that helps us here. It is actually *in* the paradise of God.
C.M.P. Is it said to be the paradise of God because it is the place of God's joy?
J.T. Yes, it is a question of what God regards as paradise. What a place of delight! And the tree of life is there. We are to bear in mind that it is the Ephesian overcomer that is contemplated here.
W. That is the Spirit's voice at the present time. We have the Urim and the Thummim today in Christ. As we hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies we get the mind of God.
J.T. Yes. "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches". Not to any particular church, but to *all* of them; so that what he says to the overcomer in the church at Ephesus is for me to hear. It is not what the Spirit will say, or has said, but what He *says*. What the Lord says is written down in these few chapters, but what the Spirit says is not written
{303}
down: it is the opening up of what has been said by the Lord. And that is what we need at this moment. The Spirit keeps on ministering. It is to be noted that the Lord says, "I will give to him to eat". That is, there is a link with the Lord Himself in it.
F.J.F. Would the way in which first love is maintained in the heart be by the eating?
J.T. I think the appropriation of Christ viewed in the exalted way we have spoken of is presented here. It is not, as in John's first epistle, what He was. It is what and where He is *now*. It is a very exalted thought, intended to sustain us in the light of Ephesians.
J.A.I. To go back a little to what you were saying about preservation, would that be in the ministry of the Spirit at the moment?
J.T. Yes, that is what preserves. There are "ten thousand instructors" and sermons in proportion, but they do not stir up spiritual affections. The ministry of the Spirit does, and so preserves us from decay and corruption.
J.A.I. You can only preserve what is good.
J.T. Quite so. Life is really the greatest preserver there is, and when it disappears, how quickly corruption sets in. "Thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead". Sardis is dead, and that is the secret of the deadness of the ministry generally today.
F.J.F. The first mention of life is in connection with everything that liveth "and moveth".
J.T. Yes. There was vegetable life on the third day, but the word life appears first on the fifth day. The fish and the fowls are the second things in the creation, as we have it, that are said to have been *created*. That was on the fifth day. The fishes seem to have been beyond the range of the flood: they are not said to have died. There must be some thought in it figuratively of life going through in an abstract way. The living things filled the waters; there are living activities. They were created on
{304}
the fifth day, and following on that the word "created" is mentioned specifically only of man.
Ques. Do you mean that the fishes were carried beyond the flood?
J.T. Yes, and life has also gone through in the ark, which represents Christ; but I think the principle is abstractly represented in the fish. They did not come under judgment, they went through.
Now in verse 10 we come to the *crown* of life. "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give to thee the crown of life", is said to the assembly in Smyrna. The Lord introduces Himself to that assembly, as you will notice: "These things says the first and the last, who became dead, and lived", (verse 8). He is speaking to persons about to undergo terrible persecution, and many of them would be killed. So they were to know that He had been dead. But, He says, I *lived*. It is a historic statement. Things are on a lower level here than in Ephesus. The historic facts of the Lord's death and resurrection -- that He became dead and lived -- are brought in, that the saints might be supported. But it is not as elevated a thought as the tree of life. Things had got low in the public body, and the Lord takes account of that. Ministry that they can take in is presented. The great historic facts of His death and resurrection are presented, and He promises a crown of life, which would fit in with the mind of persons who were suffering such persecution.
R.S.M. Is the tree of life a future reward or is it present? I notice this crown is future.
J.T. Both statements are in the same form: "I will give to him to eat of the tree of life". But these things are now laid hold of. The crown will undoubtedly appear by and by, but the necessity of eating is present, so that we might be sustained in the light of Ephesians. But things are on a lower ground in Smyrna.
F.J.F. Would you say that hope is brought into view in these conditions?
{305}
J.T. I think it is to inspire hope, the crown at the end. It is the historic side, the fundamental truth of the gospel, not so much bringing the actual living Christ near. The *facts* of His death and resurrection are pressed.
C.C.E. As a matter of historic fact, we know that this is what did sustain the witnesses -- the thoughts of Christ having been through death and of His resurrection were really a great comfort, and enabled them to go through.
J.T. That in which the soul rests is accredited facts, the foundation of God, which stands. Sometimes people are apt to give up, because they have not the *enjoyment* of things on account of circumstances. Then the soul finds support in solid facts.
F.J.F. The epistle to the Hebrews brings forward the thought of hope.
J.T. Hebrews is very much like this. Things were low down and the saints were suffering, exposed to persecution; and so they were to be supported by the solid facts of the gospel.
Ques. What is the thought connected with the crown of life?
J.T. Well, these promises are to persons who would understand them and cherish and value them. If your life is about to be taken in martyrdom, as was the case here, what a great thought life beyond death is! And this is the *crown* of it. I have no doubt this would sustain every martyr. In the understanding and appropriation of this promise, martyrdom would be victory.
R.T. Their lives were considered worthless, but the Lord would show them that they were worth something to Him.
J.T. If you think of all the awful feelings of enmity that surrounded the martyrs, you will see how greatly they needed to be sustained and to have their feet on the solid ground of the truth of the gospel and the faithfulness of God. They would find comfort in the thought of the crown of life, for there is nothing higher than the
{306}
crown in relation to anything. It is *victory*, for as losing their lives here they were coming into life in this supreme way. Nor is it something that would exist for a little while only; it is incorruptible and unfading, as Peter says.
C.M.P. The Lord shows sympathy: "I know thy tribulation and thy poverty; but thou art rich".
J.T. And how comforting, too, that however severe the pressure might be, it was definitely ordered and was for a time! That enters into the smallest suffering I am enduring; it is limited: the Lord allows it to go so far and no further.
W. The three young Hebrew men in the furnace would be in the enjoyment of life, in the company of the Son of God.
J.T. Yes. The fourth is the Son of God; John's gospel specially brings in the Son of God. What victory! There was not even a smell of fire on them. The crown of life was there.
C. He will make the issue.
J.T. Quite so. God is faithful, who will make an issue. These ten days would show the Lord's supremacy in the whole matter. For, after all, the enemy is only doing *His* work. No doubt these tribulations were needed to revive the failing church. They were severe and extended, but the Lord was with His people in them, endearing Himself to them and giving them victory.
W. The christians were brighter under Nero than under Constantine.
J.T. Yes, and they were safer from the world.
The final thought we come to is the book of life, brought in in connection with Sardis. They are on rather low ground. "He that overcomes, *he* shall be clothed in white garments". One can see the great difference between that and partaking of the tree of life in the paradise of God. "And I will not blot his name out of the book of life". It is a negative statement, but one that fits in with Sardis, with Protestantism, where there are persons who have a name to live and are not even
{307}
converted. This is a word to real christians in such circumstances: their names are in the book of life.
C.C.E. What do you think the book of life is?
J.T. I think it is to meet a certain state of soul.
Ques. Does the book of life only contain the names of those who are really the Lord's?
J.T. I think so. The Lord speaks to His people according to their state. In Protestantism this thought of final, eternal safety is a great matter. Real christians are there partaking of the "sacrament" with unreal christians, but the Lord gives them to understand that He respects those that are real. It is low ground and negative, but comforting in such circumstances.
F.J.F. Is the book of life the final reference?
J.T. It is the last word. After all the other procedures, those who are not written in the book of life are cast into the lake of fire. It is to ensure that no one who is the Lord's goes into the lake of fire. Not that one would disparage any truth in Scripture, but the book of life generally contemplates a low state of things, where you have to cling to God's faithfulness instead of being in the *consciousness* of His love. Peter speaks about making your calling and election sure. There it is a present thing in your soul at all times. But there are many who live in a poor state, just trusting the Lord as to their safety, and with scarcely any consciousness of His love and present care. It is pitiable to have to rely on that alone; still God provides for the assurance of His saints. It is said that God swore by Himself, in order that the saints might have strong consolation. But why should God have to swear to me? If I am conscious of His love I do not need this. But God condescends to come down to our low state so that we may be sure that we are safe.
F.J.F. It is like descending from the banqueting hall to the archives!
J.T. Yes. In the account of the prodigal son, for instance, those partaking of the joy inside the house did
{308}
not need to see if their names were in the records. They were feasting inside. Christianity is inside; but God graciously keeps a hall of records, so that those who are lean in soul may be certain of their ultimate salvation.
D.R.G. Does this scripture infer that there will be names blotted out of the book of life?
J.T. It is a record of persons who are *alive*. It is not a mere book of profession. The negative promise here refers to those who are real. A careful examination of the references to the book of life in Scripture will show that it contains only the names of those who live eternally.
Ques. Would it imply that God's thought for all is life, but that there are those who are blotted out?
J.T. I do not think it means that any are blotted out. It is merely put in a negative way to assure the feeblest christian that he is safe.
C.C.E. No christian will go into the second death, of course, but God just assures the feeblest that they will not.
J.T. It is the final appeal at the great white throne assize, @Revelation 20: "if any one was not found written in the book of life he was cast into the lake of fire". It is not, 'if any one is blotted out'. Paul says of certain fellow labourers, "Whose names are in the book of life": if *all* professors¬ names were in it this would have but little value.
{309}
LIFE IN THE BOOK OF REVELATION (2)
@Revelation 4: 6 - 11; @Revelation 5: 1 - 10
J.T. It may be remarked that our subject is life as seen in the book of Revelation, the object of the readings being, not to bring out the prophetic things of the book but life as appearing, as we remarked, informally, and yet of course in spiritual accuracy as indited by the Spirit of God. What all should observe here in these chapters is that the word "beasts", which is frequently used, is properly translated "living creatures", four of them being mentioned. Another thing to be noted is that these chapters contemplate the beginning of the last section mentioned in the end of chapter 1. The Lord says to John, "Write therefore what thou hast seen, and the things that are", referring to chapters 2 and 3, "and the things that are about to be after these" (verse 19). That is what is in view in the fourth chapter and onwards, the things about to be after these, that is to say after the present period, the church period. Chapters 2 and 3 contemplate the seven assemblies, that is, the whole assembly at any given time, and the whole assembly from the time of the failure to the end of the dispensation; so that in this chapter we are in a set of circumstances properly speaking after all that, but having their beginning, as we see from the second epistle to the Thessalonians, at that time. The apostle says there that the mystery of iniquity had already begun, but it was held in check by certain instrumentalities existent, and until they were taken out of the way the antichrist would not appear; but here he is about to appear, so that it is not properly the church period but the period of judgment that is in view.
What I have in mind now is to call attention to these living creatures, the word "living" linking up with our subject, and the word "creature" pointing to the creation.
{310}
The twenty-four elders refer to one line of thought, beginning with @Genesis 3, as we may say, and the living creatures to another line, also beginning there -- the life line. My thought is to connect the living creatures with those who form the assembly, and to show how we represent the creation as living. The whole creation is about to be delivered from the bondage of corruption, set free into the liberty of the glory of the children of God (@Romans 8: 21), but already the saints are delivered and are the first-fruits of the creation, so that there is the idea of the creation as sympathetic with God. It has been alienated through sin, but those delivered by the gospel are regarded as representative of the creation, and are viewed as living and sympathetic with God. The number four would denote that the bearing is universal. The Lord commissioned His disciples to preach the gospel to all the creation. That has been done, and the result is that God has in the saints representation from the creation sympathetic with Himself, interested in all that is about to take place. For the throne represents God coming in to deal with things on earth.
W. Creation seems to be connected with God's throne; all were controlled by the throne and were responsive to it.
J.T. The living creatures are not said to be on thrones like the elders; they are in the midst of the throne and around it. Their position is less official, but they were there, and, as it were, everywhere; their perception is universal; nothing can escape them, they are full of eyes, before and behind. It alludes evidently to the energy of life in the saints, unofficially but sympathetically. A saint who is really living is always interested, ready to do what he can. It is a great help to have a sense that the brethren are all sympathetic with what God is doing, ready to lend themselves to it in whatever way they may, to do what the hand finds to do, and do it sympathetically. The elders dominate the position; they take up things, and each matter is finished
{311}
and settled under their hand; they have the mind of God. They are those who have experience and the knowledge of God's ways amongst the saints, but the idea of the living creatures manifestly is general and everyone has part in it.
C.C.E. What is the relation between these living creatures and those in Ezekiel?
J.T. There is a very strong allusion to Ezekiel. The roots of this book are largely in the Old Testament, but the living creatures in Ezekiel are much more organised. They are connected in an organised way with government under God in view of Israel being set aside. They stand related to the instrumentalities of power and movement, all under the control of God Himself. We have not the twenty-four elders there. The elders allude to the two dispensations, that is, the completion of the work of God in both dispensations, all now standing in intelligent sympathy with what God is doing. Therefore the most perfect influence and administrative ability is seen in the twenty-four elders, and they go right through the book, as also the living creatures, to chapter 19.
F.J.F. Is life seen in the elders in the aspect of intelligence and repose, while the other is more activity in relation to the interests of the throne?
J.T. Yes, I think that is right. The root of the twenty-four elders is in 1 Chronicles, where David is seen in headship. He formulated the idea of twenty-four, really having in mind to get the most possible out of the saints.
J.S. Would you say that the different features of the creatures would represent the different varieties of life?
J.T. Yes, in the sense in which life may show itself amongst us in sympathetic activity. First it is said that they are full of eyes, before and behind. Vigilance is contemplated, and what an important feature that is. The Lord said, "What I say to you, I say to all, Watch". They have eyes within, too, there is inward
{312}
perception. Then it is said that the first living creature is like a lion, the second like a calf, the third having the face of a man, and the fourth like a flying eagle. These are all symbols of life in the way they work out in the saints. The lion would mean that in our energy we do not turn aside when there is danger. If a thing should be done, do it, even if it occasions trouble. The lion does not turn away for any. Then the calf: what he does is with a firm step. The carefulness of the ox in choosing his steps is well known. One is careful in what one is doing, but if a thing should be done, it is done carefully, and one does not turn away even if it incurs suffering. Thirdly, there is the beast whose face is as the face of a man. That denotes intelligence in what is done. Man's face is attractive, especially as conveying intelligence. There is nothing so attractive in the universe as a man's face, in the sense of appealing to the intelligence. How eminently so in the face of Jesus! But this refers to creatures. A man commands respect in doing things intelligently. A man according to God is dignified; that man is to rule is a primary thought of God. The fourth creature, the flying eagle, would indicate that if a thing has to be done it is to be done at once.
C.C.E. Why do you think the word calf is used here instead of ox?
J.T. It is of that species. The thought would be youthfulness in that feature, that whilst one is careful as to one's steps, youthfulness is maintained. An old brother is apt to be too careful, the young brother too careless. That kind of creature being present, there would be reliability and steadiness. I do not think the idea of sacrifice or food enters into it. It is a question of effecting things for God here in a sympathetic way, and doing it well although unofficially.
F.J.F. Does the figure four signify a great universal fellowship?
J.T. I think that is right. You are not partisan. They move together here. There are traits or features
{313}
that are to be found in christians. I mean to say, in the doing of things you need these four features; whether one or any number do something, these features should be looked for.
C.J.B. Would you say that these are the features of the Lord Jesus coming out in the saints?
J.T. Yes. Everything must be learned from Him, but He is never contemplated as a creature; He is Firstborn of all creation: the thought of creature never attaches to Him. All that we do is to be learned from Christ, and especially the working out of life, because He is said to be the Originator of life (@Acts 3: 15). That word is used four times in the New Testament, meaning one who originates a thing, and not only that, but who exemplifies it, sets it out. The gospels show *how* the Lord did things. You get a good deal there about His walk and the way He spoke, the promptness with which He did things, and the courage with which He faced difficulties. Every one of these four features comes out perfectly in Him, and they are presented in the gospels so as to impress us, that we may take on that character. The Lord said in Mark, "Go into all the world", @Mark 16: 15. That would require the lion character, because the world is opposed. Then it says, "Preach ... to all the creation", the creation being viewed abstractly as in relation to God, although alienated. Every creature is sustained by God and has in that sense a link with God. It is one thing to preach to a man as a worldling, and another thing to preach to him as a creature.
F.J.F. You would approach him with respect as being God's creature and a moral being. The one speaking and the one listening are equally dependent.
J.T. Yes, he has a link with God as being also His offspring. Paul says: "In him we live and move and have our being". It makes a very great difference whether I speak to a man as opposed to God or as a creature, as dependent on God.
{314}
C.C.E. God says, "Honour all men".
J.T. Quite so. The more we get into that spirit, the more effect we have on people. "We are", says the apostle Paul, quoting one of their poets, "also his offspring", @Acts 17: 28. That is a fine way to get down to people where they are. I believe that is seen here in these living creatures, they are the outcome of that, brought round to be in sympathy with God.
C.M.P. They are said to be in the midst of the throne as well as round about it. Is that representative of the One who is upon the throne?
J.T. They see that God is carrying on, and they are sympathetic. The position is that God is operating in this city according to His own principles, and we are with Him in it. We are in the midst and round about, ready to do anything necessary. I believe that is what is meant, a very remarkable thought. The symbol has to be understood.
God has set up authority here: Christ is at His right hand -- that is authority. It is exercised in and through the assembly. In spite of the failure of the assembly, God is still carrying on -- a very great thing -- and He works on His own terms and in His own way. There are no innovations allowed in God's ways. These living creatures are energetic, ready to do what they can. There is the throne, and He who sits on it and the elders; but these living creatures represent the sympathy and the power which should be seen in every saint, old and young.
C.M.O. Would a predominant feature of life be holy discernment?
J.T. That is what comes out here. After the four creatures have been mentioned they are said to be round and *within* full of eyes, "and they cease not day and night saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, who was, and who is, and who is to come". They understand. God has helped us greatly as to Himself. The field opened up in this respect is infinite. These living creatures have the idea of the Deity: "Holy, holy, holy,
{315}
Lord God Almighty, who was, and who is". It is not "who is" and "who was" as in chapter 1, it is more historic here.
A.V.LeR. Why three times holy?
J.T. I think three is always a complete testimony to a thing. God has this going on every day, every week, every year. It is a wonderful thing that God has this from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof; there are those who praise Him, who recognise what is due to Him. How great a testimony that is, over against the seething wickedness in the cities of this world. It reminds one of the seraphim in @Isaiah 6.
C.C.E. Would you tell us something of the seraphic character?
J.T. It is over against the cherubic, which is seen in the twenty-four elders. The seraphic character is connected with the holiness of God. What a great thing it is, the saints in their feebleness celebrating the holiness of God in the midst of the terrible wickedness all around! It is to keep us out of the wickedness.
J.S. Would you say that there is some affinity between life and holiness?
J.T. Yes. There is constant activity, but in the sense of holiness. That is what is seen here: they are occupied day and night, saying Holy, holy, holy.
W.P. Why are there six wings?
J.T. @Isaiah 6: 2 says: "Seraphim were standing above him: each had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he flew". It is a means of expressing reverence and humility, and yet liberty to act. You are not deterred from action by the sense of holiness in God's house. These wings are to cover you, so that the work is done quickly and well. Many are hindered in the meetings because they are legal and not set free in the sense of holiness. Romans teaches us as to holiness; Corinthians also -- "perfecting holiness in God's fear", @2 Corinthians 7: 1. We do things reverentially and humbly, but
{316}
we do them. Many omit to do anything out of fear that they might do something wrong, but this passage indicates that we can do things acceptably to God. There are some who may be bound up in legality. These creatures are reverential but free, ready to do things, although saying, "Holy, holy, holy", day and night. These things have to be done, because Christ is not here personally and the Spirit is not incarnate. So everyone should be available, and available in holiness.
After that it says, "When the living creatures shall give glory and honour and thanksgiving to him that sits upon the throne, who lives to the ages of ages, the twenty-four elders shall fall before him that sits upon the throne, and do homage to him that lives to the ages of ages; and shall cast their crowns before the throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O our Lord and our God, to receive glory and honour and power; for *thou* hast created all things, and for thy will they were, and they have been created" (verses 9 - 11). That is, the elders wait till the living creatures act. It is as if the elder brethren would watch the movements of the younger brethren and when they do what is right as living, the elders rejoice. The elders always give an account of things intelligently. A young brother may do something and do it well, and yet not understand the full bearing of what he has done, but the elders give character and dignity; they have full understanding.
F.J.F. The Lord often remarked on what He saw done -- sometimes a remark of approval, sometimes disapproval.
J.T. That is the principle throughout the gospels, there is the spirit of control and of approval. A workman has to show himself approved of God. God delights to approve His people as they do what is according to His mind. You see the Lord standing over against the treasury, looking at a woman who is doing something in a living way -- for she was not told to do what she did -- casting all her living into the treasury. The Lord
{317}
approves and speaks of it. With Mary of Bethany it is the same: He approves her action and passes judgment on it. So with the woman in @Luke 7.
N.A.S. Are the crowns that are spoken of crowns of life?
J.T. These are administrative crowns; they are said to be golden. They are representative of God, for gold usually represents what is of God; here it is administrative. The elders represent God -- a very important thing. Much provision is made for elder brethren so that we are not to lightly bring a charge against them. The epistles to Timothy and Titus, on the other hand, provide for what they should be, so that they *might* represent God and not give any occasion to be spoken against.
C.M.P. Doing homage is something deeper than giving glory and honour and thanksgiving.
J.T. Yes, it is. The word means that in mind and affection you are *toward* the One worshipped. The affections were toward the One on the throne. It is an inward attitude of the mind in abstracting oneself.
F.J.F. Would the idea of the elder be seen in Moses and the living creature in action in Joshua, his servant?
J.T. I think that is right. Moses represents God, by experience and by appointment: "my servant Moses", he is called. Joshua represents the energy of life. The first mention of Joshua is in @Exodus 17, where he is not called a young man, but is made general of the army and is allowed to make the selection of his troops. He is a man of great energy and great trustworthiness. The thing is done well, and God says to Moses: "Write this for a memorial in the book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua, that I will utterly blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under the heavens". He is to be made intelligent as to the war that is to go on from generation to generation. Later on he is a "man in whom is the Spirit", formally said to be such by Jehovah. That is a great thing to keep in mind in all the activities amongst
{318}
us: the young men are to be marked by the Spirit in what they are doing. So a young man gradually qualifies for greater things. Philip was appointed to be a deacon, but he becomes an evangelist; so he represents this energy of life, but used circumspectly, so that no charge can be brought against him. Stephen acquired a wonderful place in the testimony, and he had been appointed to be a deacon. These all purchased to themselves a good degree. Joshua qualified for greater things in serving in the energy of life as a young man.
{319}
LIFE IN THE BOOK OF REVELATION (3)
@Revelation 5: 6 - 14; @Revelation 7: 1 - 3, 16, 17; @Revelation 11: 11
J.T. We have considered together the "beasts" of chapter 4. (The true rendering is "living creatures"; the word "beasts" is misleading.) They are viewed as living, the link is with the living creation.
In chapter 4 they are in the midst of the throne and round about it, full of eyes before and behind, and within, the features being that of a lion, calf, man, and flying eagle. Each has six wings respectively, and they say, "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come". They are engaged in the worship of God and the celebration of what God is in His holiness. Then we are told of the form of worship of the twenty-four elders, and that in verse 11, they say, "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created". We see what is in mind. These living creatures are representative of the whole creation as living and as for God's glory, for His mind, and for His pleasure.
Chapter 5 is Christ typically, viewed as a Lamb as it had been slain, in the midst of the throne -- not *on* it, but in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures. In chapter 5 the living creatures are mentioned first (verse 8); in chapter 4 the elders are mentioned first. Chapter 5 contemplates a state of things marked by life, and the Lamb is seen symbolically in the midst of the throne, and of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the elders. Although the throne is there, suggestive of authority, the state of things is more mutual, and brings out and makes room for the activity of life now founded on redemption. So that it would apply to ourselves. Under some circumstances the elder brethren, who represent moral authority, are more prominent, and
{320}
necessarily so; on other occasions it is a question of life, where the saints might be together in fellowship and mutual participation in the things of God. What is to be observed is a living state of things, so that the younger element comes into evidence with the Lamb in the midst. It is His place, the place offered to Him, fully owned as the Redeemer, and worshipped as such. It seems as if this chapter has in view a people being brought into redemption, and yet He is content to be amongst them, the idea of life being more prominent than that of authority. Where life is unhampered authority is scarcely necessary, and this applies to our eternal relations in heaven.
J.W. Is your thought of life the power to enjoy the relationship in which God has been pleased to set us?
J.T. We have to take up these words contextually. Wherever the word life occurs, the context indicates what is meant. Life has not the same meaning as eternal life. In the Roman epistle, we have eternal life formally introduced as the end of the kingdom; grace reigning through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord (chapter 5: 21). In chapter 6, our side is taken up and that from the standpoint of baptism. We have our fruit unto holiness, and the *end* eternal life (verse 22). That is the end of that course in our souls; in both cases it is a question of the order of things. Then we are told that "the wages of sin is death; but the act of favour of God, eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord". In chapter 8 we have the word "life" in the sense in which you mention it. The Spirit is said to be life in view of righteousness, and what is implied is potentiality, that one has power to take up his relationships and in them manifest righteousness, and I have no doubt that the word "living" or "life" throughout the book of Revelation is of that character. It is an enlargement of @Romans 8, but it is life actually in persons. Eternal life is an order of things into which we come, but life is power to move and take up our privileges; indeed, to carry out
{321}
the will of God it is necessary to have it as power in the soul. It is the point of view generally in this book. The word "living" first occurs in Revelation in chapter 1, and it is the Lord's own word as to Himself, the "living one". It is an active word. Eternal life is a great general thought, and so is in a sense passive, but the Lord alludes to *life* here. "*I* am ... the living one: and I became dead, and behold, I am living to the ages of ages". "Living creatures" is an active thought, so that the lesson for us is that in our meetings and in our public relations there is to be this element of life, which is, as we said at the outset, preservative. It involves greenness, freshness for the eye of God. The features of these living creatures, God has already in the saints.
F.J.F. What you said about eternal life is very helpful. Before we come into that order of things there should be a state suitable to it.
J.T. Romans prepares for that. The Spirit is life not only in view of eternal life but in view of our family relationships. Then we have the Spirit of adoption, which is a higher thought.
W.W. In this chapter redeemed creation is viewed as living in connection with the Lamb, as it had been slain, in the midst of the throne, and there is that which is responsive -- the harps, the golden bowls full of incenses, which are the prayers of the saints, then the song, ascribing praise and glory to Him. That is how love would respond.
J.T. It is aglow with life, and the Lamb is seen in the midst of that, and in the midst of the elders, and all are marked by that which would please Him -- the prayers of the saints, for instance. The living creatures and the elders have "each a harp and golden bowls full of incenses, which are the prayers of the saints". How fragrant that is to Christ, because He is here seen as particularly concerned about the saints and those public conditions which favour the saints -- a very important point. These prayers are not seen here as offered, but
{322}
they are kept in golden bowls, kept in vessels of gold, as if to call attention to their preciousness. How fragrant they must be to the Lord, the knowledge that they are there. It might be applied to a meeting like this. While the Lord is known amongst us in fullest authority, the point is His *presence* and what those who are in the lead among us do; the services of those marked by life and experience with God. Here it is what the living creatures and the elders have, and then the joining in to worship, not Him that sits on the throne, but Him that is slain.
W.W. It is response in fruitfulness. There is the music, incense, praise, and singing. The whole scene is really alive with life that He has given to it.
J.T. It is replete with life, and life expressed in an exalted way. There is great fulness and refinement of quality in the service rendered. The highest suggestion of music is in the harp, and added to this is the new song, involving freshness. They are not repeating old things.
C.C.E. Which saints are these whose prayers are in the golden bowls?
J.T. It is their character that is in view. In chapter 8 we have them *presented*. "And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne" (verse 3). The prayers of *all* the saints are there referred to, but here it is what is characteristic. These prayers are *held* by the living creatures and the elders. It is to show that they are held by them in a spiritual way, according to God. It is a worship scene. It is to bring out that the Lord is now on our side; it is Christ in both chapters. In chapter 4 He is on the throne; in chapter 5 He is on our side. It is a Lamb standing as slain, showing that it is a suffering scene. The Lord is identified with the saints, but the Spirit is bringing into prominence the living element first, the administrative feature being second, and making manifest a scene entirely replete with life.
{323}
F.J.F. Why is He said to be standing?
J.T. Readiness for operations. Stephen saw Him standing, implying that He was still ready to act for Israel. He is always seen standing amongst the brethren at the endings of the gospels. At Emmaus He is seen "at table", but this was in view of the breaking of bread, and He vanishes immediately. Standing at the endings of the gospels indicates that the end was not yet reached. In our chapter He is ready to act in full power, having seven horns and seven eyes which are the seven Spirits of God which are sent into all the earth. What is prominent is what the living creatures and the elders and the others *do*.
So far our remarks refer to verses 6 - 10. In the later verses the whole realm of creation is brought in. "Every creature which is in the heaven and upon the earth ... and those that are upon the sea, and all things in them, heard I saying, To him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb, blessing, and honour, and glory, and might, to the ages of ages". He who sits on the throne is now worshipped as well as the Lamb. Here (verses 9, 10) we are on the ground of the full results of redemption in life. So from the four living creatures and the elders the circle enlarges until every creature is brought into it. This illustrates the great example and lead God finds in the assembly, widening out until the whole realm of creation is reached. What is small and despised will spread out universally. In all our meetings every element should help to bring the Lord before us; thus life being unhampered, our being free from the flesh, our service widens until God becomes all in all. Connecting this with the saints "in assembly", the Lord is seen as slain, pointing to His love, so that we call upon all that is within us to praise Him. It is what He is that draws it out, so that we have two scenes of worship. In verse 9 it says, "they sing a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open its seals; because thou hast been slain, and hast redeemed to God, by thy blood, out
{324}
of every tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation, and made them to our God kings and priests; and they shall reign over the earth". That is one set of worshippers -- the higher thought. In verse 11, we read, "I saw, and I heard the voice of many angels around the throne and the living creatures and the elders; and their number was ten thousands of ten thousands and thousands of thousands; saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that has been slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing. And every creature which is in the heaven and upon the earth and under the earth, and those that are upon the sea, and all things in them, heard I saying, To him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb, blessing, and honour, and glory, and might, to the ages of ages". It is a broadening thought, the whole of creation is being brought into this celebration of praise.
T.H. There is a good deal in the New Testament concerning the suffering Lamb.
J.T. The allusion in the word goes back to Isaac.
C.M.O. Would you say the first song was the more intelligent?
J.T. Evidently. In their song the living creatures and the elders give specific reasons for their praise; the great results of redemption -- the persons that are secured for God; but the second scene of praise is simply that the angels, with all creatures are celebrating the worthiness of Him who sits on the throne, and of the Lamb.
W.W. At the end of the chapter the living creatures say, "Amen".
J.T. They represent the side of sympathy. And the elders fall down and do homage. Earlier, as we were noting, they together sing a new song. This newness in singing should help in our assembly services. We must avoid current religious customs, in which there is great staleness and sameness; there should be freshness on every occasion. We should have that in mind. One
{325}
observes that in our services there is a sameness in the use of hymns. The book is not used as intended. It should serve a living state of things. If life is active there would be intelligence; these two sets of saints, as we have seen, are marked by intelligence. The elders always know what to say, they can always give an account of things. Now, if I give out a hymn, I ought to have a good reason for it.
C.C.E. We cannot make use of a hymn if we do not know it. We should read the hymn-book.
J.T. Yes, you have variety in foliage, in fish, in bird, in animal, and in mankind too. Sameness in this sense is objectionable to God, as it is to a spiritual mind. The hymn-book is intended to be the expression of life. "The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day", said Hezekiah. As made to live, he had a new song, that is the idea. The whole scene is replete with life.
J.E.M. In verse 9 they "sing"; in verse 12 it is "saying".
J.T. Verse 12 is what the angels *say*. It is not on the same level as verse 9. Verse 9 includes the saints of this dispensation, so we have a more elevated thought in the singing and what they sing. The Lamb has secured persons for the divine testimony and service; the second scene is on lower ground. Then verse 13 brings in every creature saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto Him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. They do not go so far as to say anything about the result of the testimony.
C.M.O. Would their praise correspond with @Psalm 150?
J.T. It is on that line. The living creatures say, "Amen". You love to hear the saints say, "Amen". It is a dead state of things if you do not hear the Amen resound. The elders go further and fall down and worship.
Ques. Should "Amen" be said by the sisters as well as by the brothers?
{326}
J.T. They ought to say it. "Let all the people say; Amen!" There are other scriptures that cover it. You can say things silently. There is Hannah, of whom it is said, "only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard".
C.C.E. You would not prohibit the sisters from saying "Amen". They take part in singing, and in a general way they can say "Amen" without being prominent.
J.T. Well, if any have a difficulty about saying it aloud, there is the case of Hannah.
D.G. Can you apply redemption to the assembly? Is it intelligent to mention it at the Supper?
J.T. Scripture says in regard to the assembly, "which he has purchased with the blood of his own", @Acts 20: 28.
W.W. All is taken up in Christ Jesus. God has changed His man. Therefore all must come out of Christ.
J.T. The only history the assembly had before is in the counsels of God. Eve is the type of the assembly properly, and she was brought into being before sin came in. The assembly viewed in the counsels of God has no sinful history, but viewed historically it has had a sinful history, that is in its members. "Such were some of you", @1 Corinthians 6: 11. We have to view it in these two ways.
J.W. You said in speaking of the types that Eve was the type which went through.
J.T. Eve is a type of the assembly as in the counsels of God. The others are in connection with what has arisen, through what has come in. We must never let go the primary thought; the primary thought goes through into eternity.
In chapter 6 we have the living creatures active in relation to the opening of the seals. The seals are preliminary, but God's dealings in them are mixed with grace, because it would seem as if God would indicate that His mind is still gracious. These earlier activities of the throne are mingled with grace, all having regard
{327}
to the saints being here. While happenings governmentally may be severe in the overthrow of governments and so on, still they are mingled with grace because the saints are here. That is why we have the living creatures in chapter 6. While God has unmitigated judgment for the world, He mingles His ways with grace in all that is happening today and from the time that apostasy set in, having in mind that the saints are here. He is opening the seals in relation to them; He is thinking of the saints. One has often observed that governments make use of certain men at certain times to make public announcements. Each of these men represents something. Each has his own point of view, and if the authorities wish to convey a particular viewpoint, they use the right individual to announce that policy. I am speaking illustratively. God puts forth these living creatures to illustrate what is in His mind at the moment. His judgments are tempered with sympathy. That should mark our prayers in regard to authorities.
F.J.F. The saints are in view in all God's governmental movements.
J.T. Undoubtedly. He would call us alongside Himself, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" Thus is opportunity given for entreaty for the saints. But the judgment will fall, although while the saints are here judgment is restrained. The living creatures being prominent in this movement represent the mind of God at this particular time.
F.J.F. That is a good thought. We should be sympathetic with God for the security of those who will continue the testimony.
J.T. Abraham is really on this ground in interceding about Sodom in view of the saints there. "Peradventure there be fifty righteous" and so on. The Lord through intercession has held back the judgment of God in view of the saints. So, too, the dresser answers the owner who ordered the cutting down of the fruitless fig-tree, "Let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about it, and dung it", @Luke 13: 8.
{328}
The Lord's intercession goes on all the time, and that intercession would affect the government of the world. Hence our prayers include those in authority.
C.C.E. Had it not been for that, considering all the vicissitudes, the testimony would never have come through.
T.H. Would it be right to mention judgment to come in preaching the gospel?
J.T. If you take Paul as an example, he mentioned judgment to come. The great gospel epistle (Romans) says, "The wrath of God is revealed from heaven". It is just held back. The intercession of Christ has a great deal to do with that, for the world is held as reconciled in view of the gospel (@Romans 11: 15).
F.J.F. And will not the next public action of the Lord be in judgment on this world?
J.T. Yes, as in @2 Thessalonians 1: 7, 8, "the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ". That is His next great act. This opening of the seals is not that. He is thinking of the saints in these preliminary movements, which are therefore modified.
It is wonderful how things have been in Europe for the last hundred years. What terrible chaos arose out of Napoleon's days! The ensuing change has been kept up ever since. The spread of the British dominions, largely the outcome of those wars, has, under God, made a way for the gospel everywhere. So, one might say, all this time there has been liberty to preach the gospel. That is the outcome of the intercession of Christ.
C.C.E. Roman wars were of little account during the time of the Lord Jesus, and during the days of the apostles. "See thou hurt not the oil and the wine".
J.T. There is a modification on account of the saints. This ought to bring all the brethren to have regard in their prayers for the state of international affairs, that
{329}
the highways might be kept open so that the ministry should go on.
In chapter 7 we have God's mind brought out as to *numbers*. One hundred and forty-four thousand have the seal of the living God. They are viewed administratively.
God is reverting here to His people on the earth, and all is stamped with life -- the seal of the *living* God. Then there is the multitude, which no man could number, led to "fountains of waters of life". Chapter 7 is the great chapter for numbers. If any one is concerned about smallness of numbers, let him read chapter 7. It is not the whole world saved, but *out of* all nations, and kindreds, and peoples, and tongues. God makes his own selection through the gospel, and they are all taken care of, and the Lamb leads them to fountains of living water.
In chapter 11 we have persons set apart for public testimony, who suffer. They are God's "two witnesses". The spirit of *life* from God entered into them and they stood upon their feet. Then they went up to heaven in a cloud -- as their Master went up. What an encouragement to be faithful in testimony!
{330}
LIFE IN THE BOOK OF REVELATION (4)
@Revelation 20: 4 - 6; @Revelation 22: 1 - 5, 14, 18, 19
J.T. We barely touched yesterday on the eleventh chapter, in which we read that the witnesses of God are left as slain three days in the streets of the city, and that the spirit of life from God entered into them and they stood on their feet and were taken up into heaven; showing how the idea of life is carried through, and that witnesses of God in that day will have their part in heaven. Applied to ourselves, it would signify the power of life in us as persecuted, so that we stand on our feet. Standing on our feet would suggest balance in testimony, a thought carried through from the book of Acts, where the lame men -- the one at Jerusalem, the other at Lystra -- were to stand on their feet. Here they stand on their feet before being taken up; God gives victory where we may have found defeat. Undamaged by the outward defeat we stand up in testimony in the very place of it.
What will occupy us in chapter 20 is the whole company of the redeemed in their different classes, having part in the first resurrection and sitting on thrones, living and reigning with Christ for a period -- also in testimony -- of a thousand years. Then in chapter 22 what we will have before us is the river coming out from the throne of God, the river of the water of life, clear as crystal, and the tree of life viewed in its bearing toward the nations, and then, in verse 14, the tree of life inside, the part in which is to be dependent on *washing*. It will be seen, therefore, that the bearing of all these passages is very strikingly toward the scene of testimony.
C.J.B. Would you make clear what you mean by balance in relation to the testimony?
J.T. It is one of the most important things, especially in young men. We are so apt to become one-sided. Balance is a great thought that enters into the whole
{331}
scheme of the universe. The principle of balance -- was brought in in connection with man, who is made to stand on two feet, instead of four like the lower creation. Man has the power of balancing, and spiritually it is so too. In testimony we have to watch that we are not extreme on any point. That is what I was thinking of.
C.J.B. I suppose it is an indication of the energy of life.
J.T. It is. As soon as life leaves the body, there is no longer any standing.
W. In Ezekiel that which was marked as dead, the dry bones in the valley, was found eventually standing on their feet.
J.T. Just so; that enters into this thought too. In chapter 7 there are a large number standing before the throne. They are all standing, not leaning on one another. Not that we may not do that, for we are to support one another, but here each is standing on his own feet. We see the principle in the little child, how difficult it is at first, but he learns to stand by himself by instinct. And so spiritually, we learn by instinct to balance ourselves, to stand on our feet.
J.H.T. You were speaking about being extreme on some point or other. When the Lord brings out a new line of truth, there is the danger of stressing that too much and leaving other things, as has been done with the truth of the Lord's coming. If the truth is taken in and absorbed, everything takes its proper place.
J.T. What is needed is manhood. Where brothers and sisters lean to one side, it is through want of balance. Manhood is marked by balance. It was the difficulty at Corinth. The whole of the two epistles is to establish a balanced state of things amongst them, and it is probably needed in every gathering in the world today.
F.J.F. Would you say the apostle Paul was used of God to teach the nations to walk? It says of the man at Lystra that he had never walked.
{332}
J.T. I think that is right. The man in Jerusalem was lame. There is a slight difference in the wording of the two cases. In @Acts 3 it says, "a certain man who was lame". But in chapter 14 it says, "A certain man ... being lame ... who had never walked". I suppose the man at the Beautiful Gate in Jerusalem would suggest the Jewish nation. There was some sort of hobbling there. But the gentile had never walked. Was that in your mind?
F.J.F. Yes. Israel had in a certain sense walked with God.
J.T. God says He taught Ephraim to walk. For how long we do not know; the allusion is to the wilderness path, a difficult path. It shows how ready God is to teach us, for He is the first who is said to have walked, and it is said significantly of Christ that John saw Him walking. What a walk that was! The Jew no doubt walked in some sense, but the gentile never walked. At least this man had never walked, but he is to stand straight upon his feet, and Paul speaks to the Thessalonians about how they ought to walk and please God (@1 Thessalonians 4: 1). For walking we need balance. Paul says to the man in @Acts 14, "Rise up straight upon thy feet". That is the full thought of balance.
It would seem that God honoured His servants, the two witnesses in chapter 11, by giving them the spirit of life. The spirit of life from God entered into them and they stood up upon their feet and were received up into heaven in the sight of their enemies. When there is difficulty amongst us, perhaps persecution, we are apt to lose balance and so rob ourselves of the glory involved in the matter. These men did not: they glorified God, standing on their feet where they had been slain. They had the victory where there was outward defeat, and then they are received up into heaven. It is a great matter for us, for anyone who does anything for the Lord is almost sure to get into some kind of persecution. He
{333}
may become one-sided, and try to defend himself A great thing in these difficulties is balance.
In @Revelation 11 we are really at the end of the testimony of God, because what follows is collateral with that chapter. In verses 15 - 17 is says, "And the seventh angel sounded his trumpet: and there were great voices in the heaven, saying, The kingdom of the world of our Lord and of his Christ is come, and he shall reign to the ages of ages. And the twenty-four elders ... worshipped God, saying, We give thee thanks, Lord God Almighty, He who is, and who was, that thou hast taken thy great power and hast reigned". That is the end of the testimony; what follows in the next chapters are collateral things. The two witnesses have great distinction conferred on them; they get the victory in the way of testimony before the thing testified against is overthrown in judgment. They do not have to wait for the overthrow of the opposition, God gives them the victory before that. Their dead bodies were left three days and a half on the street of the city, and they that dwell on the earth rejoiced over them. Then there was a great voice out of heaven saying, "Come up here; and they went up to the heaven in the cloud, and their enemies beheld them". It is a striking correspondence with the Lord; they are honoured in that way. These witnesses represent full correspondence with Christ in their testimony, and they are honoured in the same way: they are received up in the cloud, but stand on the earth first, the people fearing.
J.W. Would it answer to @Romans 8, "whom he has justified, these also he has glorified"? They were received up in the presence of their enemies.
J.T. Very good. They are justified in the presence of their enemies, and are then glorified, received up into heaven.
F.J.F. That is like @1 Corinthians 15, "We shall be changed". There is no word there as to the rapture. Thessalonians presents that side, the taking up.
{334}
J.T. Yes, it is the victory on earth in Corinthians. The mystery is the victory on earth -- the change of the saints and the resurrection of the sleeping ones. Thessalonians gives us more than that; there it is the assembly's place -- she is received up.
C.C.E. Is the number two literal or symbolical?
J.T. Symbolical, I think. The allusion is to @Zechariah 4, but whilst it is future, it bears strikingly upon ourselves. It teaches us what testimony really is. "My two witnesses", God says; that is, they are competent witnesses, answering to Elijah and to the faithful and true Witness. They are honoured, too, as Elijah was, as Christ was. It shows the fulness of God's thoughts of His servants. It is an incentive for us, for if we bear suffering for the testimony, God will honour us where we suffer. That is as sure as possible; and He will add to that by glorifying us. There will be something additional beyond what we expect, in the way of glory.
T.H. That is seen in the case of Elijah. He was afraid of a woman, but God in His sympathy made provision for him, and then took him up at the end of his journey.
J.T. Very beautiful indeed. Jehovah's consideration for him is seen in giving him two meals, so that he might go in the strength of that to mount Horeb where he was to meet God. When there, God says to him, as it were, Elijah, you are giving up, but I am not. That is the lesson to learn: to stand up where we suffer. God will honour us. Then God told him to anoint Hazael, and Jehu, and Elisha. That is, the testimony is to go on, and if we fail in it under suffering, God will give us to understand that it is to go on in any case, and we are missing the glory. He gives us the privilege of witnessing against the evil before overthrowing it. That is the idea. These two witnessed to it before it was overthrown. Later, in chapter 18, it says, "God has judged your judgment upon her". How great is the power of that testimony in this city, for instance, where saints are moving
{335}
in the light of the assembly; it involves the judgment of Babylon! No one can be truly in fellowship who has not some judgment of Babylon, because that enables one to come out of it, and God judges it according to our judgment of it.
Now in chapter 20 everything is gathered up as to those who bear testimony and who suffer. The prophet says: "I saw thrones; and they sat upon them, and judgment was given to them"; that is a general statement referring to all the redeemed. Then it goes on to speak of "the souls of those beheaded on account of the testimony of Jesus" -- that is another set -- then "and those who had not done homage to the beast nor to his image, and had not received the mark on their forehead and hand; and they lived and reigned with the Christ a thousand years". The Spirit of God reminds all who are suffering in any way, that the great general result will not be left out. They share with the most distinguished of the witnesses of God, for all the redeemed are in view here. There are three sets, the first general, including, I suppose, all the Old Testament saints, then there are those slain on account of the testimony of Jesus, and then those who had not done homage to the beast and had not received his mark on their forehead and hand. They are carefully taken account of in their faithfulness, and they are there on the thrones, living and reigning with Christ a thousand years. It is still testimony; there is plenty of time to bring out what they had been.
The second set are those *beheaded* on account of the testimony of Jesus. It is a remarkable way of dealing with those who testify. I think the allusion is to the intelligence that God grants to His people in their testimony, but which Satan hates. They know what they are doing. This enters into the assembly primarily, because it is the place of intelligence. Now they lived and reigned with Christ. The living with Christ is the point.
{336}
W. Living and reigning would be the answer to their faithfulness.
J.T. That is the way it is put here. It is what we are in the testimony that will come out in that day. It is not our eternal portion, but this ought not to be new to us, for we are said to be quickened with Him, raised with Him, made to live with Him now. So that we should know what it is. The things written in this book are intended for those who understand. There might be a feeling that those who are slain after the rapture, as we call it, miss what we have as being raptured with Christ, but this section shows that they also come in for the reigning. It is heaven's definite forethought and consideration for them, that no one should think they are missing something.
F.J.F. Would David's mighty men be an example? They suffered with him and they came out in his kingdom.
J.T. Just so. They are mentioned at the beginning of his reign in Chronicles and at the end of his reign in Samuel. We have the suggestion that the idea of mighty men runs through the dispensation. It requires power to overcome under the beast, and God takes special notice of them: they reign with Christ a thousand years, but the living with Him is the leading thought here.
J.H.T. The three friends of Daniel stood up in the crowd before Nebuchadnezzar's image and refused to worship. They were thrown into the furnace, but they were with Christ.
J.T. Yes, they were walking in the furnace with the Son of God. Their names are mentioned about thirteen times, as if the Spirit of God loves to dwell on them. It shows how heaven regards sufferers, and especially sufferers who come out victorious. All that we have been saying is so important for young persons who would have part in the testimony; for the testimony is the point; how we go through it, and what the result will be. Let no one take your crown. Whatever happens to you in the
{337}
testimony in the way of suffering for it, there is a crown attached to it, and you do not want to miss that. These faithful ones did not miss it.
C.J.B. What would answer today to the mark on the forehead and the hand?
J.T. The forehead refers to the intelligence; that is, what is manifest. The hand refers to the power to do things. It is seen today: the great effort is to get the children in the schools, to prepare them for the world through the teaching. That will come out very distinctly under the beast. For the children will be wanted by the beast. And he wants them not only as workmen but as having intelligence, their minds are needed. Education is a great thing in these last days. Then the hand means that their power is subservient to the beast. The state is already demanding power over the children.
R.S.M. In speaking of suffering, the apostle says, "Our light affliction ... worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory". Is that millennial?
J.T. It is eternal. It goes beyond the millennium, as it speaks about things unseen: "We look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen; for the things that are seen are for a time, but those that are not seen eternal", @2 Corinthians 4: 18. Eternal things go beyond what is millennial.
R.S.M. Would sufferings then have a double effect, rewarded first in the millennium and also working that exceeding weight of glory?
J.T. Yes, they are rewarded in the millennium, in living and reigning with Christ, but then there is the eternal thought -- an eternal weight. It is a remarkable expression, and shows how substantial the glory is; it is not a mere shadow.
A. In view of that reward Paul says, "I am now ready to be offered ... I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at
{338}
that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing", @2 Timothy 4: 7 - 8.
J.T. Quite so. What we shall be in that day will reflect what we have been here. It is an incentive to be faithful, whatever the little sufferings may be.
C.C.E. In connection with what you were saying, the beast would try to capture the intelligent class as well as the working classes.
J.T. That seems to be so. The present time indicates that already: there is such an immense interest in schools and colleges.
F.J.F. Why did Paul say to Timothy that he was not to be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord?
J.T. We are so likely to be ashamed of it; do you not feel that for yourself? The point here is the testimony and how life works in relation to it. We may think much of teaching and preaching and so on, but it is a question of what God has in His saints, and how it culminates in a living state of things, reigning in life with Christ a thousand years. It adds to that that they shall be priests. The thousand years is mentioned twice: "They lived and reigned with the Christ a thousand years ... This is the first resurrection. Blessed and holy he who has part in the first resurrection: over these the second death has no power; but they shall be priests of God and of the Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years". The thought of living is dropped when priesthood is mentioned, because priests are essentially alive. It is still a matter of testimony here. We are said to be priests *of* God here, not priests to God, as in the first chapter: "priests to his God and Father". There it is the bearing of our priesthood God-ward, but here it is priesthood in testimony man-ward. It is the great privilege we shall have, that in our testimony toward man we are priestly. There is intelligence, sympathy, and holiness in our witness. Another thought that goes with that is that the assembly grows to a holy temple in the Lord. That alludes to the same time, so that the rule will not be arbitrary, but
{339}
according to the temple, and according to priestly feelings. It is important to keep this in view, because what will be seen in the millennium is to reflect in our testimony now.
F.J.F. Would priestly service be seen in Simeon? He had the whole race in view in what he says about the Lord.
J.T. He represents the priesthood there. He blessed God, that is he is a priest God-ward. Then he speaks about Him as a light for the revelation of the gentiles and the glory of God's people Israel. He is looking out toward the gentiles. The whole position is magnificently priestly, and Anna joining in is priestly too: she blesses God. The service is God-ward and man-ward. This book contemplates the saints as priests unto God for His service, and then as priests of God, characteristically of God, and toward man.
C.J.B. Would you see God in the service of the priests?
J.T. Yes. It is a great system that will be set out in the millennium, the assembly being the centre of it. It will be a benign rule, and the saints are being formed for that now. Revelation does not give us much of what is towards God: Paul presents us to God, but John brings us out here representative of God. So in chapter 21 we have the city described, God and the Lamb being there, and in chapter 22 the river of water of life, bright as crystal, coming out from the throne of God and of the Lamb. The river would mean a great influence, a benign rule, as over against the governments in the world today; it is clear as crystal and in every way beneficial.
F.J.F. Have you any thought as to the way in which that will work out?
J.T. I think it is on the principle of Matthew. According to Matthew the Lord said, "Go ... make disciples of all the nations". *Make* them. Here we get the full thought of that: it is a question of influence. Applying to ourselves, it is not what one says, but the influence
{340}
that one has. Influence *makes* disciples, although ministry may *affect* men. This river is symbolical of a great influence, and it stands over against the terrible influences that some governments have today. There is nothing dark or corrupt about this river. Beautiful fruit is there, and the very leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations, showing how substantial the thing is. It is like the Spirit of God in the gospel of John. It is a substantial thing, first as a dove, then as wind, then as water, then as a Person, that is the Comforter, and lastly as a breath. It is practical and substantial, and so substantial is this sap of the tree of life that the leaves are for healing.
W. All the power given to Christ is in movement now.
J.T. Yes. When the Holy Spirit came down at Pentecost. He could be seen in those who had Him. It was noticeable. People said that they were filled with new wine, but christianity is balanced, not marked by drunkenness.
C.M.P. Why does it say in connection with the holy city that God and *the Lamb* are there?
J.T. It is the testimony that is in mind. The Lord Jesus is honoured in the use of the word "Lamb". Where He suffered, there He is glorified. The word "Lamb" is diminutive in Revelation; it implies that He suffered and did not defend Himself, but as having suffered, He is now honoured, and the whole universe is blessed in that He is honoured. God also is there -- God involving all that the Deity is, and the Lamb bringing out the suffering side in a Man. John has a way of uniting Christ as Man with God in the Deity; he presents the Lord as Man, but the Deity is always present to the mind. If you read through John's gospel from that point of view you will be impressed with the presence of God in Christ right through. To the woman at the well of Sychar He says, If thou knewest the gift of God, and *who* it is. She would never forget those words, *who* it is. So with Zacchaeus, he wanted to see Jesus, *who* He was.
{341}
C.A. Is the thought found in the expression, "The good will of him that dwelt in the bush"?
J.T. Yes, the thorn-bush was a small thing, but God was there.
F.J.F. Would it also be seen in Nathanael's words, "Thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel"?
J.T. Quite so; Nathanael discerned what was there. In John's epistle you can sometimes hardly tell from the pronouns used whether he is speaking about God as such, or about Christ. In his mind -- and the words are indited by the Spirit of God -- the Two are linked so intimately.
The final thought, in chapter 22: 14, is a very practical side to this subject, because it involves persons seeking fellowship. The question is whether we assume to patronise them or whether we recognise them as having a right. I am afraid that very often, in what we call reception, we fail to see that the persons have a right, as shown by what is said here: "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city".
C.C.E. We should be able to discern whether they have washed their robes.
J.T. It is all we have to do. If they wash they have a right.
Ques. Is it not a period of exercise to let them wait?
J.T. Why should they wait if they have a right? To let them wait without a godly explanation is one of the most frigid practices one knows of.
C.C.E. If they wait too long it is because of our want of discernment.
J.T. Yes. And thus it would be night inside! And there is to be no night there. Things should be seen as they are.
N.C. Lydia paid attention to the things Paul said.
J.T. Yes, she established her right, and Paul discerned that. There should be no want of discernment with us.
{342}
J.R.N. What does washing involve? Is it not to go on all the time?
J.T. Yes. The word is used three times in this setting. First in chapter 1, verse 5: "To him who ... has washed us from our sins in his blood"; then in chapter 7 there is the multitude who have washed their robes and made them white -- that is, they did it well. Finally, in this scripture, there is the appropriation of the death of Christ. The tense shows that it is continuous, and that is what establishes the right. One might say, I was converted two years ago, but what is he or she doing now? The point here is: Blessed are they that *wash*; not have washed. The allusion is to the water, not to the blood. It is a christian that is in mind, cleansing himself morally by the water.
F.J.F. Those inside have no proprietary rights.
J.T. None whatever. A person who wishes to come in, if these conditions are present, has the same right as I have: "that they should go in by the gates into the city".
J.S.M. I suppose washing would be cleansing ourselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit?
J.T. That is right.
C.A. They have received the Holy Spirit.
J.T. It is more than that. Washing implies exercise as to what is due to God. The blood has brought peace with God, but here water is brought in. John speaks about the One who came by water and by blood. The water is put first in the epistle. The Spirit expects me to understand, and as understanding the meaning of the water I use it. There is plenty of it. Indeed there is the sea of water, not a mere laver.
Rem. The ten lavers in Solomon's temple could be carried.
J.T. Yes, when you go to see a person you can take one with you.
F.J.F. How many witnesses would be necessary to allow one to come through the gates?
{343}
J.T. Two witnesses suffice for anyone who wishes to come in. The point is whether one washes. If that can be established, no one can say nay. Of course we should be most careful: doorkeepers are necessary. There were as many doorkeepers in the system that David established as there were singers, but if the right is established, let no one interfere.
F.J.F. Would you accept the witness of two godly brothers as to the state of the person concerned?
J.T. Yes, and of course the person himself is a witness too. The Lord established that principle in @John 8: 18, "*I* am one who bear witness concerning myself, and the Father who has sent me bears witness concerning me".
N.C. Why does it say, "In the mouth of two or three witnesses"?
J.T. It is to make the thing sure. The person applying to be with us is a witness himself and two others furnish abundant testimony.
Every gate is one pearl; they are the same everywhere. No one local company should have different principles from other companies. One sometimes finds in going about, that certain things are legalised in certain places, but it should not be so. Every gate is alike.
Ques. Would this cleansing involve separation from every association that is not in accordance with the Lord's mind?
J.T. Yes, because the testimony of God is in view.
Ques. Should the testimony of the two be to the brothers in the care meeting or to the assembly in the city?
J.T. To the assembly, because that is the only authority there is on earth. "Tell it to the assembly". The brothers have no authority.
C.C.E. The matter cannot be decided by the brothers, although they may come to a preliminary conclusion.
{344}
J.T. The Lord is very jealous about the assembly and He values it when brethren walk in the light of the assembly and bring it in. On the other hand we must be careful not to attach the name of the assembly to what is not right. The question is not simply whether a person was converted so many years ago; what about the washing? There are those who admit people to the Lord's table without this state, and it will not do. God is not in that.
E.A.W. If the person is kept waiting, should not a reason be given?
J.T. Certainly. Intelligent persons should not have any difficulty in stating a reason. It should not be a mere feeling. We are viewed as intelligent persons: the assembly is an intelligent body. The apostle says: "Is it so, that there is not a wise man among you?" Wise men should be there. The all-various wisdom of God is seen through the assembly. Why should we not know what to do?
Ques. In handling an application to be received, if it is not possible to arrive at unanimity among the brothers, would it be orderly to bring the matter before the assembly?
J.T. The apostle speaks about "the many" as over against 'every one'. The idea is set out in @Exodus 12. It speaks there about the congregation -- that is, in its members -- and then about the assembly, which is a moral whole¦. We cannot be held up by one or two. We ought to be able to tell whether the objection is valid or not. Patience, of course, is a great thing, but the assembly should not be held up.
C.C.E. The power of the Lord may be so felt in the assembly that the objectors are kept quiet. One has known cases like that.
¦See note in New Translation, @Exodus 12: 6. 'Congregation' is the actual subsisting congregation composed of all its members; Assembly more the congregation looked at as a moral whole, a corporate person before God. See also @Leviticus 4: 13; @Leviticus 8: 3.
{345}
J.T. Quite so. The case of Corinth shows that they were not all agreed about the matter, for it says: "This rebuke ... inflicted by the many". It shows they were not all in it, but the rebuke was inflicted by the assembly as a moral whole.
F.J.F. As Paul entered Damascus he found the gates open.
J.T. The Lord very often has to put us right. Ananias would not have allowed Paul in. He thought he knew better than the Lord! So the Lord says, Go; but He was very gracious with Ananias in putting him right. Each of us should get to the Lord and give Him full scope in these matters. Do not say, Let the brother or sister wait. God has not dealt with us like that in His dealings with us.
Rem. Ananias was an adjustable man.
J.T. If we were all adjustable there would not be much difficulty.
As to the last scripture read, chapter 22: 19, there is the taking away the part in the tree of life. That is how it should read, not the book of life. The allusion is to mere professing persons: it is characteristic, as all such references are. Persons who would take away characteristically from what God says are not converted at all. That which they have is taken away.
{346}
*Pages 346 - 494 -- "The Spirit in the Corinthian Epistles". Wellington, New Zealand. 1936 (Volume 135)*
THE SPIRIT IN THE CORINTHIAN EPISTLES (1)
@1 Corinthians 2: 1 - 16
J.T. What I am free to suggest for consideration is the Spirit as seen in the two Corinthian epistles. The subject of the Spirit in these epistles is extensive, running throughout, and ending in the second letter with the fellowship of the Spirit. We may be helped at this time to consider the subject in relation to *revelation*, not exactly the revelation of God, but the *things* He has prepared for these that love Him, and it may be well to dwell on the relation of this subject to the ministry. That is how it is introduced, as will be observed: the apostle alludes to his own use of the Spirit, as a minister. These meetings are composed of brothers, and whilst all are called to serve, including sisters, yet there are those who are fitted to serve in a *special* way, and it will be perhaps wise to confine our remarks at this time as much as possible to the ministerial side of our position as seen in them.
Lately some of us have been considering the numeral *three* as in a large measure governing God's testimony. There is much throughout Scripture alluding to adequate or full testimony which God is pleased to give in any given relation. So that we noted the three men who came to Abraham, three patriarchs mentioned in the book of Genesis, and then the three leaders, Moses and Aaron and Miriam (@Micah 6: 4); these are formally stated in the prophet to have been sent before Israel. It is significant that the great minister, Moses, is seen as having to flee from Egypt, that is, he is persecuted, but he *sat by the well* in Midian, a very suggestive thought, implying that ministry is dependent upon the Spirit, not on any mere natural ability, and that is what the apostle
{347}
stresses in the opening of these epistles. It is also significant that he associates Silvanus and Timotheus with himself in this ministry at Corinth, and he states that the Son of God was preached by them among the Corinthians. So that we can understand the place the Spirit has in such a ministry, how he would exalt Christ, the Son of God, as Paul says, "the Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus), did not become yea and nay, but yea *is* in him", @2 Corinthians 1: 19. This shows that the ministry was to be marked by transparency, and single-mindedness. So he says, "our word to you is not yea and nay ... in him is the yea, and in him the amen, for glory to God by us. Now he that establishes us with you in Christ ... is God", @2 Corinthians 1: 18, 20, 21. He was in accord with all that. I thought these remarks would help us in looking into this chapter, because the apostle calls attention to the character of his preaching. He says, "*I* was with you in weakness and in fear and in much trembling; and my word and my preaching, not in persuasive words of wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your faith might not stand in men's wisdom, but in God's power".
Ques. Does the demonstration of the Spirit lay the foundation for what follows?
J.T. Well, I think the use of the word demonstration is very noticeable here; it shows that divine things are not merely theoretical. A demonstration is something manifest, and it attaches to the Spirit peculiarly, for the trend of our minds would be to make Him merely theoretical; in John's gospel the Spirit is presented in a substantial way. Substantiality is a great feature with John in regard to the Spirit; first bringing in the *whole* idea in the thought of the dove, and then the wind and the water. The Comforter is the personal thought -- One who would be active in looking after affairs in detail. So the Lord says of Him, "*he* will bring demonstration to the world, of sin, and of righteousness,
{348}
and of judgment", @John 16: 8. The Spirit in convicting makes the position clear. The *demonstration* is in power.
E.W.C. Would the demonstration be seen in the effectiveness of the Spirit's working rather than in Paul's word?
J.T. It accompanies the ministry: "my word and my preaching, not in persuasive words of wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power". There is something that affects people not only in the word but in the power in which it is spoken -- the manifest presence of the Spirit.
P.L. To continue the ministerial idea in Moses, would the signs and plagues (particularly the third, where the magicians allude to it as the finger of God) have the thought of demonstration in them?
J.T. Yes, the plague of lice. Life is there, life that can be *felt* too. This points to the irrefutable character of the testimony in those who are *living*.
W.J.H. You suggest that the well that Moses sat by would represent living resources in contrast to the wisdom of Egypt which he abandoned.
J.T. Yes. He sat by *the* well (@Exodus 2: 15); he sat by it, as identifying himself with it. 'Sitting' would mean a deliberate committal to the well, and the idea runs through his ministry. It is *the* well -- the *full* thought of it, and a known resource.
E.B.McC. We see the apostle here also sitting by *the* well, not using what was natural to him; though he had the ability in excellency of speech and words. He acknowledged this to be of no profit at Corinth.
J.T. The analogy is very strong, the apostle is identifying himself with the Spirit in his ministry.
J.C.S. Do you think the Corinthians had rather followed on the Egyptian line that Moses had forsaken, and had neglected the well in their midst, and were really slipping away from the Spirit?
{349}
J.T. Exactly. They were in the very centre of the world's resources, commercially, and particularly its wisdom, for Athens was near. The Greeks sought after wisdom. The apostle says in chapter 1, "and Greeks seek wisdom", they would work things out from their own resources. The Jews ask for signs, ready for any intervention of God, intervention such as at the pool of Bethesda, knowing that an angel came down to disturb the waters. They were ready to recognise that. They asked for signs, but the Greeks did not look for that -- they looked to their own resources, and shut God out. That is what man's resources do -- and that is what modernism is -- shutting God out.
J.R.F. Thus in the well you have God's power in contrast to man's wisdom.
J.T. First of all in ministry, God intends to overwhelm the resources of the world by the power of the Spirit -- that is what He intends in ministry. Paul speaks of "the overthrow of strongholds, overthrowing reasonings and every high thing that lifts itself up against the knowledge of God", @2 Corinthians 10: 4, 5.
F.S. "Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified", is introduced here to negative what is natural to us, would you say?
J.T. Quite so. That is what the apostle said; "I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified". They would no doubt prove him as to what he knew, but he carefully kept within bounds. He ministered what was needed. A point in ministry is that we do not need to say everything we know, but to restrain ourselves to what is needed.
J.C.S. Do you think that as sitting by the well one would acquire the feelings that are needed?
J.T. The nearer you get to the Spirit the more sensitive are the feelings you get, but particularly here the intelligence as to what is needed.
P.L. Moses rose and helped them and watered their flocks; is that what was needed?
{350}
J.T. Exactly. The women were necessarily weak, but had come to water their flocks. "The priest of Midian had seven daughters; and they came and drew water, and filled the troughs, to water their father's flock", @Exodus 2: 16. There is no attempt to damage the shepherds, to inflict any physical retribution as he would have done had he been on Egyptian lines -- as he *had* done indeed. Here it is the use of the water, what he is able to do. He did not attack the shepherds, but he *helped the women*.
Ques. When the apostle says, "we speak wisdom among the perfect", does he refer to the fact that the Corinthians had the Spirit and were competent to receive what he ministered?
J.T. I do not think he refers to the Corinthians, rather the contrary. He says in the next chapter, "*I* ... have not been able to speak to you as to spiritual, but as to fleshly; as to babes in Christ", @1 Corinthians 3: 1. That remark in verse 6 shows that wherever the spiritual conditions warranted it, he would speak wisdom, and wisdom that would eclipse this world. The allusion is to Hebron, to what was before the world; it was built seven years before Zoan, where the wisdom of the world was (@Numbers 13: 22). Greece was really that at this time, it was the place of the wisdom of this world. The apostle doubtless had knowledge of the classics; he would not bring that kind of thing forward, but the wisdom that God had prepared before the world for *our* glory -- a remarkable fact. It was not the wisdom of this world, which the Corinthians were reverting to, but the wisdom that God had prepared for the glory of the saints.
A.M.H. Would sitting at the well be necessary for the service, so that the servants would not be agitated in mind?
J.T. That is right. The sabbath-keeping is a suggestion that comes into the subject. Sabbath-keeping is a great feature for us -- restfulness of mind, in contemplation of everything divine. The Spirit is
{351}
essential to this. The Spirit is a divine Person here in relation to the believer and to the ministry.
P.L. The great model Servant Himself going up and sitting at the right hand of God and then working with them here.
J.T. The Lord working with them, as in the very centre of power.
F.W. We find the Lord sitting just as He was at the fountain.
J.T. Yes. Genesis is full of the thought of the well from the time of Hagar. It is seen in Joseph, who is a fruitful bought by a well, whose branches run over the wall. That comes into Exodus, and undoubtedly enters into Moses¬ position. Joseph is the nearest approach to a minister in the book of Genesis. He is a minister, but not as Moses was. He is presented to us a fruitful bough by a well. Thus it is not a question of great effort mentally or otherwise in the service of God, but restfulness and drawing on the resources that exist in the Spirit.
W.J.H. The disciples went away to buy meat, but the Lord says, "*I* have food".
J.T. Just so: there was resource. That He had "food" is a remarkable fact. "*I* have food to eat which ye do not know ... My food is that I should do the will of him that has sent me", @John 4: 32 - 34. That enters into service: the very service itself feeds us, the very difficulties feed us, the opposition is food for us: everything around us ministers to us as we are subject in our service.
Rem. "Who serve Thee with a quiet mind, <br>Find in Thy service rest".
J.T. Quite so. "In Thy service".
J.C.S. Sometimes a feverishness enters into service and produces bad results amongst the saints.
J.T. It should be before us to convey that what is being presented is the outcome of dependence on the divine source. "A fruitful bough by a well" means that the bough is drawing on something, the nourishment is
{352}
there, the refreshment is coming into it and it is fruitful and the branches run over the wall. I believe that Moses, whether he was intelligent or not, is instinctively in keeping with the close of Jacob's blessing of the tribes; with his blessing of Joseph.
P.L. He is qualified to become the custodian of Joseph's bones. He carried them out, linking up with Genesis.
J.T. Yes; ministry is cumulative -- what is of the Spirit is carried through. These bones would take on body form in time; without the Spirit these figures would have no meaning. Joseph, by faith, had given commandment concerning his bones.
W.S. The Corinthians would be familiar with ministry. They came behind in no gift, but they lacked spirituality.
J.T. They did not gauge their measure or the need of the saints. What the Corinthians needed was Jesus Christ and Him crucified, but they determined to know all they could so as to make themselves big. Chapter 12 shows how gift -- ministry -- is regulated so that we may have spiritual results.
W.H.W. It is helpful to see that these men, Joseph and Moses, were both refused before the well is mentioned, and here we have "Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified". *He* was refused, preparing the way for the Spirit to come in.
J.T. The power of the Spirit really stands related to the cross. As the word of the cross is maintained there is room for the Spirit -- the power that takes the place of man's will and intellect. Where Christ was crucified was the place of a skull -- an empty thing. The Spirit in those who accept the cross takes the place of all that.
E.B.McC. So we see the servant here qualified to meet the situation found in Corinth.
J.T. Exactly, it is wonderful how he does face the evil there though away from Corinth; he deliberately stays away evidently to let God work. Were he there the
{353}
manifest evil would be dealt with, but roots that needed to be exposed might remain hidden.
C.C.C. Would there be a special exercise connected with this ministerial service in the power of the Spirit, to secure results quickly? The father says, "Why are ye come so soon today?" @Exodus 2: 18, as though the results were unexpected.
J.T. That is a good suggestion. We must seek to get immediate results. As a matter of fact, things are very weak amongst us; it is a day of small things, yet immediate results should be looked for -- spiritual results. The gospel of Mark, as we all know, is marked by the idea of what is immediate.
J.C.S. The measure of demonstration accompanying the servant in his service would be commensurate with the measure in which he has accepted the cross in power in his own soul, would you say?
J.T. Yes, the cross makes room for the Spirit, but the *word* of the cross, not merely the fact. The word of it opens up the significance of it and displaces from one's mind what is contrary. Referring again to the allusion that has been made to the sabbath, Exodus opens up the sabbath -- the word is found there for the first time. We have before noticed that the actual sabbath keeping in Israel, if the commandments were followed, would require in a period of fifty years, something like twenty-eight per cent of one's time; a very significant matter, especially for servants. It does not mean mere physical rest and the like, but that one lays oneself open for the incoming of divine impressions -- what the Spirit will do. We need physical strength, of course, but the point is that one's faculties are available to the Spirit.
Ques. What is meant by, "*I* was with you in weakness and in fear and in much trembling"?
J.T. It occasioned this principle of the cross to be worked out. The apostle was made conscious of his weakness. He could enter the lists with anyone at Corinth as regards human wisdom, as we learn elsewhere,
{354}
but he is showing that he is not trusting in that sort of thing at all. It is the very opposite of self-reliance here: "weakness and in fear and in much trembling; and my word and my preaching, not in persuasive words of wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power".
P.L. Would the fruit of these principles with Moses be seen in the name given to his son Gershom -- "a sojourner in a foreign land"? @Exodus 2: 22. Is that suggestive of what later would be the assembly of God in the wilderness, corresponding with the assembly of God at Corinth? The cross secures us wilderness-wise in assembly features for God.
J.T. Quite so. So Zipporah, with their two sons, comes to him at Horeb. They fitted in *there*. No doubt the wife and children would help him in the wilderness circumstances; and he admits the need of allowing others to do things. One does not keep everything in one's own hands, but is great enough to let others have their full part in the work.
W.H.W. Following the previous remark, as to quick results, do you think that typically Jethro noticed that the full result of the ministry of the Spirit was not in his daughters? He raises the question of not bringing the *man* with them.
J.T. Yes, many profit by Christ and His work, but do not think of Him and His needs. The apostle says, "Be my imitators, even as *I* also am of Christ", @1 Corinthians 11: 1. As apprehending Christ in His great service for us, which Paul represented at Corinth, we are to make provision for Him.
P.L. They were not eating bread in the divine sense at Corinth. They did not have the Lord's supper there. They had left the man behind. They had traduced the one who had begotten them in the power of his own ministry, but in the second epistle they judged the evil. Is there a point of affinity now with Paul -- do they bring the man in?
{355}
J.T. I think he would be welcomed after the first letter was effective, but it is very sorrowful that they could go on without him and even exclude him.
W.S. Would the reference to Timothy at the end of chapter 4 cover this -- where he says, "For this reason I have sent to you Timotheus ... who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ", @1 Corinthians 4: 17. I wondered if that would set before them livingly the result of the ministry and bring the minister, so to speak, in with it.
J.T. I think it would make the way for it. They needed to be reminded of the apostle's ways -- it would make a way for him to come in, in the way he should be amongst them. Jethro says to his daughters, "Where is he? why then have ye left the man behind? Call him, that he may eat bread", @Exodus 2: 20.
P.L. Would that be a priestly feature -- he was priest of Midian? There is a suggestion in the second epistle, when priestly features began to take character in the Corinthians, that "the man" has no rest in his spirit till Titus comes. Does it suggest that such a minister is at hand when wanted? He is not present to "come in", but he is ready to be called. Is that Paul's appealing spirit for the Corinthians in the second epistle, "your servants for Jesus¬ sake", @2 Corinthians 4: 5?
J.T. Just so. Moses is called "the man". The second letter to the Corinthians, as you say, would bring in the feelings of the apostle, what he had been amongst them. To think of the minister in this sense is important. The minister must be cared for, as our brother has suggested. If we regard these women as typical of saints at the present time, the flock needing to be watered, the shepherds would be official men that really would not allow *such* watering as this -- they drove them away. The true ministerial service is seen in Moses. He represents the kind of ministry that has no official status nor seeks it. He does not work for wages. There is not the slightest suggestion that he asked for anything, he is left
{356}
out; but the father provides so that the servant is brought in.
S.F. The Corinthians were disregarding the matter of the Lord's supper in its true character and it is spoken of as their own in that way. Moses was overlooked. They were overlooking the apostle and even the Lord, and what was due to Him.
J.T. You may be sure that where this state of things is, God is not truly represented. Moses represented in type the spirit of the minister -- he is sitting by the well, and his readiness to serve is in keeping with that. He might have said much about his origin and what he knew. How he could have entertained these women about Egypt! But there is not the slightest suggestion of this. He was one who *helped* them in their need, but the picture is filled out in Jethro -- "the man" is brought in. The spirit of Moses runs right through Paul's ministry. He had rights -- "they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel" (@1 Corinthians 9: 14) -- but he did not assert them. Moses is cared for, but in circumstances such as he might not have chosen for himself. We cannot always hope to enter on the Lord's service in conditions such as we have been used to. If we are successful business men, receiving a good income, and have left our business, we cannot hope for a continuation of what that affords. Moses is simply one who helps others and is brought in to eat bread. He is *content* to dwell with the man. The suggestion is that the circumstances were very different from what he was accustomed to. He had been in Pharaoh's court. He stays in Midian for forty years looking after sheep. The history is to bring out the ministerial side, and the antitype is in first Corinthians, which we are considering.
P.L. At the end of forty years he has not one sheep that is called his own -- they are still his father-in-law's flock.
J.T. Paul says, "I do not seek yours, but you". He had espoused them to one Man, that was his aim, to get
{357}
the saints for Christ, and that they should provide for Him, as in chapter 11.
C.H.H. Do we see the wisdom of God appearing, in that Moses sees the need of the sheep and supplies it from the well?
J.T. He waters the flock, without treating the shepherds violently; and now he is cared for by Jethro, but in humble circumstances, and he is content to stay with the man for forty years, and feed his flock. Now God takes him on -- he has qualified himself, showing the spirit of the servant. The same thing is seen with Paul and indeed with every true servant. It was a question of the *will of God* that Moses should go through this humble employment for forty years. We are told he tended the flock of Jethro: "And he led the flock behind the wilderness, and came to the mountain of God -- to Horeb", @Exodus 3: 1. That is all in beautiful order and now God takes him on for the great service He had for him.
P.L. Would the first epistle to the Corinthians be leading the flock behind the wilderness and the second the new covenant, coming to the mountain of God in Horeb?
J.T. There is correspondence. One idea is that he gathered up the earlier ministry: "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided" is the principle. He recognised that and comes to it here -- whether by instinct or otherwise, he comes to the mountain of God.
Ques. Would you say a little more about "Why then have ye left the man behind?"
J.T. It shows how people may be served and accept the service, yet forget the servant; even Christ is forgotten in this way.
Rem. Those served by Him are reminiscent of Christ. The Galatians had received the apostle as the servant of Christ.
J.T. I think they received him somewhat extravagantly (see chapter 4: 14, 15). The epistle to the Galatians
{358}
is to modify us because if you receive a person in undue honour, you are all the more ready to take it away from him as quickly as you give it to him, and transfer it to another. This evidently happened in Paul's experience with the Galatians. What is seemly is sobriety in those served, in recognising what God gives and those through whom He gives it.
E.W.C. Every bit of spiritual help received brings increased responsibility, does it not?
J.T. There ought to be an acknowledgment; I think the Lord looks for that, not that the servant is looking for wages, except in the sense that John says, "He that reaps receives wages", @John 4: 36. Paul says, "I do not seek yours, but you". A t the same time there should be a spirit of thanksgiving for what you receive.
Ques. "Wisdom among the perfect". Would the apostle be referring to his experience amongst the Ephesians burning their books of wisdom?
J.T. It would correspond. Undoubtedly he wrote from Ephesus and the effect of the truth there was very fresh in his mind. He was speaking wisdom there amongst the perfect.
P.L. Would it be right to say that a true servant would find his reward in being brought in on mutual lines to "eat bread" with his brethren, to share the bounty of God in a mutual way? Would he not look on that as a happy recompense in any service rendered. I was thinking of the last verse of the second epistle, "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all", @2 Corinthians 14.
J.T. Yes. So the servant merges with his brethren. You get that in the example given in the Acts. Peter and John had great distinction, but being let go they went to their own and merged with them. They are not mentioned in any distinctive way in what follows in @Acts 4; and then in chapter 20 we are told that on the first day of the
{359}
week they came together to break bread, not "Paul and we", but "we" -- it is a mutual thought and a true servant enjoys that. To merge with the brethren and partake of our common heritage is in keeping with our eternal portion.
J.C.S. If the servant is not great enough to merge with his brethren he is not morally great enough to serve them.
J.T. As merging with the brethren he would acquire their confidence, and this would not detract from the respect due to him. "Less than the least of all saints" is a remarkable statement. We cannot think of the apostle not telling the truth. Of course, it is the truth, and he says "the least". How would that come out, but as one who served among the saints? It came out, for instance, at Malta in gathering sticks, a little service in ordinary affairs. If one is standing on the platform ministering Christ, he has distinction, but in ordinary affairs he moves in and out amongst the brethren doing what anyone else could do. Doing it as "less than the least of all saints" would come out there. On the other hand, humility in the saints would not abuse this, but would render due honour to one used of God. What has been called attention to leads us on to the ground of wisdom, which is the point now before us -- the ground on which wisdom comes to us, the wisdom that God has prepared for our glory before the world. Surely it is most attractive to see how that comes to us.
A.M.H. What do you understand by "our glory"?
J.T. It would be a rebuke, I suppose, to the leaders as to what *they* would consider to be glory.
A.M.H. You get the "Lord of glory" also mentioned.
J.T. It is a touch in the chapter that should affect us, our glory and the Lord of glory. I apprehend the Lord of glory would allude to the Lord as capable of diffusing it, administering it, as it were, knowing where to set it. It is a question of where glory fits, of placing it as a
{360}
diamond is placed. The Lord alone knows where to put it. He has it in all its variety under His hand; we have "the Lord of glory", "the Father of glory", "the Spirit of glory". The Lord of glory implies the dispensing of it, I think.
E.B. The apostle had hidden himself, as it were, determining to know nothing save Jesus Christ, and Him crucified, and as hidden he draws attention to the hidden wisdom.
J.T. Yes, and the Lord would confer glory on Paul in this connection. Time and again Jehovah came out and honoured Moses. One of the most interesting and comforting things in the Old Testament is the glory appearing in favour of the servant. The Lord dispenses glory. If the Lord glorifies a man in this sense, that settles the matter whatever others may think of him. There were those who would discredit Paul -- things were not going very well: why should he be in prison? Yet he said, "The Lord stood with me, and gave me power, that through me the proclamation might be fully made". "Through me" -- the Lord determined that His servant should not be deprived of the glory of fully preaching the truth.
J.C.S. Do you think that if the saints refuse a man upon whom the glory rests; it is an expression of their spiritual state?
J.T. They are exposed. Naturally we like changes. It is the spirit of the world. If the Lord qualifies and honours a man in His service and the saints refuse him, they are refusing the Lord in that measure. Brethren make their own terms sometimes instead of recognising what the Lord of glory does amongst us. He puts the glory where it should be, where it is enhanced.
P.L. It was said, "Has Jehovah indeed spoken only to Moses? has he not spoken also to us? And Jehovah heard it", @Numbers 12: 2.
J.T. Quite so, and the glory appeared very quickly. That is just the point.
{361}
W.J.H. Would the fact that the apostle was in weakness and fear and much trembling underlie honour conferred?
J.T. It would. The Lord honours dependence on Him. Paul sensed the position at Corinth. You will recall the facts leading up to the work in Corinth. The apostle had a peculiar kind of anxiety as seen in @Acts 17 and 18. One is impressed with the peculiar kind of anxieties he had in approaching this great service -- he had waited at Athens till Silvanus and Timotheus came, and as soon as those two brothers arrived at Corinth he "was pressed in respect of the word", and the work goes on. The Lord says, "no one shall set upon thee to injure thee; because I have much people in this city"; Paul stayed there eighteen months. A remarkable set of facts is presented in that chapter in regard to the service at Corinth. He sensed how things were, and that he had to get the people *there*, which was no small matter.
Ques. In saying "none of the princes of this world knew" about this wisdom, does the apostle strike a death blow at theology, which assumes to bring the things of God within the compass of the human mind, perhaps thereby crucifying the Lord of glory?
J.T. I think that is how the history of the church stands -- the public body's introduction of Greek philosophy in the second century has developed into a most elaborate system of doctrine, under the term theology. This is not a spiritual word -- it is a scientific word. This chapter is over against all that: "that your faith might not stand in men's wisdom, but in God's power".
C.C.C. Would you open up a little more how this wisdom comes to us? It is a point of great importance.
J.T. Paul said, "we speak God's wisdom in a mystery", (verse 7). We have to make up our minds for divine mystery, because we are apt to be like ordinary persons regarding christianity as within our natural range. "The mystery of piety is great. God has been manifested
{362}
in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit, has appeared to angels", @1 Timothy 3: 16. We have to be on these lines to be impressed and formed by the holy things of God. In Colossians it is enlarged on -- the mystery of God is said to contain all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
F.S. It speaks of the things being prepared of God for those who love Him. Does that suggest the affections entering into it?
J.T. It reads, "we speak God's wisdom in a mystery, that hidden wisdom which God had predetermined before the ages for our glory: which none of the princes of this age knew, (for had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory); but according as it is written, Things which eye has not seen ... God has prepared for them that love him". That is a great matter, to be amongst those who love God. That is the principle on which the apostle ministered; it was according to the capacity of the saints, because, after all, it is a question of what people are capable of receiving. The two things run together -- what is presented and what is received. He says in chapter 15, "which also ye have received". They had received the gospel. If he is to go further than that, there must be love for God -- those that love God. There are those that love Him and of course I want to be amongst them, and if I am, this wisdom is for me.
J.C.S. Is this found in an assembly setting?
J.T. It is very general here. We are taken back here to what God prepared before the world. He prepared things for our glory. It is a most affecting thought that He has prepared for "our" glory -- the idea of God *preparing* things, I suppose, antedates even what we have in @Proverbs 8, that God was thinking of us before that time and had devised a certain wisdom -- not merely the wisdom seen in creation, but a certain wisdom for our glory. The apostle quotes from the prophet Isaiah, chapter 64 verse 4, "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him", @1 Corinthians 2: 9.
{363}
First prepared "for our glory", and then "for them that love him". So it brings in the work of the Spirit in the saints. As we come to love God, we see that God has been thinking of us and preparing for us from before the foundation of the world.
Rem. What is the import of the word "things"? -- it is even referred to as the depths of God.
J.T. We must see that the Spirit alone can unfold these things to us. The revelation of God of course is by Christ, the declaration of God is by Christ, but the Spirit is here in the most marvellous subjection and humility, attending upon us and ready to make known to us the things of God as we are ready for them. Waiting upon Him things come to us, whether individually or more particularly together; things come out, they come out more clearly when saints are together. "God has revealed [them] to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God". He lets us in to the depths -- they are for us, the things that are there.
J.C.S. "The depths of God" would refer to what is within the confines of revelation, would they not?
J.T. Yes, in the sense of *things* -- God has revealed them to us by His Spirit. Things such as He prepared according to the purposes of His love are made known to us.
C.H.H. In @Luke 24 the Lord opens up "the things concerning himself". Does that come in here?
J.T. "And having begun from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself", @Luke 24: 27. That would be what is in the Scriptures, but here there is more than that, what the Spirit of God unfolds. The Lord says in @John 15 He proceedeth "forth from with the Father", (verse 26), and He says, "I will send him". He is sent by Christ, from being "with the Father" -- a remarkable sort of expression! Why should that be said? Of course He was with the Father, but why should that
{364}
be said except to come down to our way of thinking, and to indicate that He has first-hand knowledge of God, particularly what is opened up in Paul's ministry? The Lord says, speaking of the Spirit, "*he* shall testify of me". The Spirit is giving testimony -- and undoubtedly Paul's ministry in the main is in view, his wonderful unfolding of heavenly things. Then the Lord says, "ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the beginning" (verse 27), but the Spirit brought out the depths of God.
F.S. In the addresses to the assemblies in @Revelation 2 and 3 the Lord says, "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies". Would that be particularly a word to the minister?
J.T. It is a word to the saints, that is, to every assembly. The suggestion is that the Spirit is always speaking, and what He says would be what is needed at any juncture in the assembly's history; the Spirit would bring in what is needed. Here it is, "the Spirit searches ... the depths of God". It is the full divine thought. The Spirit has access to the depths of God. It says, He "searches", as if to say that there would be nothing omitted, but that everything would be brought out. Note, it is He *searches*, not has searched.
W.J.H. The apostle says He has revealed them to us. How does it affect us in the sense of revelation?
J.T. We have part in them now by the Spirit. It is not that things are coming out that were not there before. Paul is referring to his own experience; while he is leaving you with the thought that the Spirit is the fount of everything in service, yet he is referring to his own experience. God has revealed them to us by His Spirit. He knew what he was saying, but he leaves you with the Spirit searching the depths of God.
Ques. With reference to the second epistle, "we look not at the things that are seen", would that help in this connection?
{365}
J.T. I suppose so, the things unfolded, unseen to the natural eye. You are left with the idea that while christianity is a finished matter in a similar sense to the six days of creation, yet it is not a finished matter in the sense of the shining out, or fulness of it. We must look for the *fulness* of things. So that the Spirit is here constantly and you cannot limit Him. There is the development of a living state of things. @Genesis 2 helps us; we see there that God takes a new title. After the finished product, so to speak, of the six days¬ work God takes a new title, as if to work out *glory*, and that enters into what is before us. We are here in the realm of glory, the Spirit of glory is working out glory under the Lord. "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing; but the glory of kings is to search out a thing", @Proverbs 25: 2. That is what is going on -- the Lord of glory and the Spirit of glory. They will bring out what there is, so that any thing that the divine counsel has determined for us will be worked out and made effulgent in the saints.
J.C.S. There is thus a fluid condition and the Spirit gives us the fulness of things?
J.T. Quite so. Look at the crust of the earth. It is one element acting on another. The earth's surface affords what is referred to as *fulness*: "The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof". And so there is the fulness now of what God revealed. Everything is worked out to the fulness of it.
P.L. Would you connect that with the Spirit garnishing the heavens?
J.T. Yes. I suppose David is the vessel whom God used to bring out the heavenly side in the Old Testament. Solomon brings out the earthly side. He spoke of all the living things in the earth: not geology, but living things. Is there nothing living now? What is current, that is of God, is as interesting to God as in apostolic times. He looks to the working out of things in glory: there are new phases of life worked out by the Spirit. The Spirit is the
{366}
Spirit of life. Things are being worked out. It is a most interesting time for heaven in this sense.
P.L. Deuteronomy is on this line: there you get the *tenor* of the law.
J.T. It is much more open, elastic, than Exodus is; it is what *Moses* said. It is the minister himself, as it were, in his love to God and to the saints, opening up the glory of the things presented in the earlier books.
A.M.H. @Ephesians 2: 10 says, "we are his workmanship, having been created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God has before prepared that we should walk in them": is that a kind of spiritual world being brought to light for God's pleasure?
J.T. Just so. "We should walk in them"; there are not only the works, but the living feet, the living hands, the living eyes -- all involving the shining out of glory. God is delighted in the normal christian. Every christian makes history in heaven, that is, God delights in His people, as they develop before Him according to His purpose in man, as seen in Christ.
J.M. Is that why the apostle writes to the Corinthians as to his heart being enlarged and his mouth opened -- because of what he has heard of them?
J.T. Quite so. He has become freer because of what he heard from Titus, whose spirit had been refreshed by the Corinthians.
E.E.S.L. Are there not practical stages of progression in the terms used in our chapter -- demonstration, revelation, searching, teaching, and finally reception?
J.T. Yes. The thought of reception is worthy of special note: there is the power to present things to us, but too the power of reception, so that we have them and know them. It says, "*we* have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we may know the things which have been freely given to us of God: which also we speak, not in words taught by human wisdom, but in those taught by the Spirit, communicating spiritual things by spiritual means. But the
{367}
natural man does not receive the things of the Spirit of God, for they are folly to him; and he cannot know them because they are spiritually discerned; but the spiritual discerns all things, and *he* is discerned of no one. For who has known the mind of the Lord, who shall instruct him? But *we* have the mind of Christ". We have the power to think as the Lord does; and we have in us the power to receive things. The power of reception is a great matter in this subject.
Ques. Would it be exemplified in Apollos, a man mighty in the Scriptures and eloquent; but he needed adjustment in the truth and he received it from Aquila and Priscilla; then he became a waterer?
J.T. Yes. It is only in virtue of what we receive from God that we can be of service to Him.
{368}
THE SPIRIT IN THE CORINTHIAN EPISTLES (2)
@1 Corinthians 3: 16 - 20; @1 Corinthians 6: 11 - 20; @2 Corinthians 6: 16
J.T. We are considering at these readings the subject of the Spirit of God in the epistles to the Corinthians. This morning we dwelt on chapter 2, which led us to the remarkable statement at the end of the chapter, "*we* have the mind of Christ". The link with chapter 3 in regard to our subject is, therefore, obvious. Saints are said to be the "temple of God". "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" (verse 16). The Corinthians were the temple of God, not that they were characterised in that way, but they were so abstractly as believers. They had the Spirit, but they were not spiritual, and hence, although they are said to be "babes" in the first verse, it is "babes in Christ". They had this distinction that they were babes *in Christ*; that would help them in their minds as to what they were in virtue of having the Spirit. The introduction of the building implied what they were in a collective sense and leads to this remarkable statement that they were God's temple.
Paul says, speaking of himself and Apollos, that they were ministering servants "through whom ye have believed, and as the Lord has given to each. *I* have planted; Apollos watered; but God has given the increase. So that neither the planter is anything, nor the waterer; but God the giver of the increase. But the planter and the waterer are one; but each shall receive his own reward according to his own labour. For we are God's fellow-workmen; ye are God's husbandry, God's building. According to the grace of God which has been given to me, as a wise architect, I have laid the foundation, but another builds upon it. But let each see how he builds upon it. For other foundation can no man lay besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ" (verses 5 - 11).
{369}
These statements lay the basis for verse 16, which states that they were God's temple. The Spirit of God dwelt in them. So that we are now to consider the Spirit in this sense -- in the saints viewed collectively -- not exactly on the line of revelation as in chapter 2: 10, but as rendering the saints independent of man. We are to look to ourselves and to learn to make room for the operation of this great fact of the temple. The verse in chapter 6 of the next epistle was suggested to be read because it links on with this, and it intimates the important necessity of separation and sanctification as essential to God's temple.
A.M.H. What do you understand by the "mind of Christ"?
J.T. It alludes I think to the *faculty*; we have His power and way of thinking.
A.M.H. Does it enable one to come to a judgment according to Christ?
J.T. Yes. It is not exactly His mind about any given thing, such as is referred to elsewhere, but that way of thinking. The "*we*" would imply christians characteristically -- persons who speak consciously.
C.F.I. Does this apply to the saints in any given locality?
J.T. It is general. It leads to our being able to think as Christ does, and, as remarked, it enables us to reach His mind as to anything.
Ques. Does it refer to what we have individually or collectively?
J.T. I think it is a characteristic of christians, as over against what else there might be in Corinth, for there was the Jewish synagogue and the Greek way of looking at things all of which would be contrary to Christ's mind.
J.R.F. Do you connect it with the thought of unction, as in John?
J.T. Yes, but unction gives dignity, it renders the saints dignified in their knowledge of things, they are
{370}
elevated above the ordinary level. "Ye have not need that any one should teach you", is a point of importance. Christians have a certain superiority in this world. Here it is the mind of Christ -- a *sure* way of looking at things.
J.C.S. The effect of that would be to place the assembly completely outside the range of human wisdom.
J.T. Making it entirely independent of human wisdom, showing too the answer to the question raised, "Who has known the mind of the Lord, who shall instruct him?" That is to shut out man entirely. "*We* have the mind of Christ" is stated here to bring in what christians have as having the Spirit. I think the "*we*" here would allude to persons who experience the thing. It is not 'ye', but "*we*". Abstractly it belongs to persons who have the Spirit. The apostle does not shut out any christian, the statement implies that someone is conscious of the fact -- an important thing in the things of God.
J.R.F. When we reach the judgment seat, we will see things as the Lord views them. Would this be reaching the same end now?
J.T. It enables us to reach a right thought. Romans underlies all this -- the mind is brought in. The believer sees the importance of the mind, "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law". That is a great point to reach. Then the renewing of it in chapter 12, I think, underlies this complete change in the mind, the complete change in the very texture of it, so that the believer proves "what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God". It is a process -- the result being what "we have", as stated here.
Ques. Would it correspond at all to the breastplate and the Urim and the Thummim as making the mind of the Lord available -- the fitting priestly state to get that mind?
J.T. It means the faculty -- you may call it priestly state. It is ability to judge things and gauge things as the Lord would.
{371}
E.B.McC. If the Corinthians had been moving happily, they would have been growing up to this as being temple of God. They should have had the mind of Christ -- it would have been normal.
J.T. Believers in virtue of this get the mind of the Lord as to everything. You could not get it from all persons who may have the Spirit. It refers to the *exercise* of the faculty, and it is by the exercise of the faculty that each comes into this.
S.H.B. Would the apostle have exercised this faculty in chapter 7 -- his own private judgment? But he says, "I think that *I* also have God's Spirit".
J.T. It is a remarkable passage, and is the only verse in the whole chapter that speaks of the Spirit. It shows that the Spirit is distinct in the christian. God has His own mind in the christian and would impart that mind to him. The christian may be left to himself as regards a point, and he knows that he is left. The Spirit of God would thus bring out what you think and you are honoured in that. It is after all the judgment of one person, an apostle of course, and in that he has not the sense of the Holy Spirit giving him the judgment; it is to bring out what formation there was. The Spirit of God honours the christian's own judgment, and yet that is, as Paul said, "his judgment" not as binding on others except as in a moral way. He says, "I think that *I* also have God's Spirit". So that we might be sure what he said was right. It is remarkable that the believer is so honoured as to be allowed to express his own mind as distinct from the Spirit of God.
Rem. Those who think merely religiously, attaching Christ to the world as is commonly done, and those who think philosophically as the higher critics, for instance, would represent the Jewish mode of thought and the gentile mode of thought, but not the mind of Christ.
J.T. I think that is how it would stand at Corinth. The Jew would have his own way of judging. We know how @Romans 2 places the Greek and the Jew together in
{372}
that way. The Greek had his own way of looking at things, and the Jew his. Now here we have the third thing, the christian and how he looks at things. You can get the right thought from him only.
J.C.S. Do you think the babes in Christ would suggest the faculty was there but undeveloped?
J.T. Exactly, as in any babe; there is the potentiality of ordinary intelligence in any babe. However much you might try to educate one of the lower creatures, a dog or the like, you cannot get into him the faculty of a human being, and so christians have the faculty that no others can have. To continue with our subject -- the introduction of the collective thought in chapter 3. What the Corinthians were as husbandry and what they were as a *building* led the way to this question as to whether they knew they were temple of God. The Spirit of God dwelling in them stands in relation to the whole subject of the chapter, because it is a question of the responsibility of those who are regarded as the temple. For us immediately it is a question of our understanding the idea of the temple, of being God's temple, and whether it is workable now, whether we can get the gain of the temple as that in which there is light, in which there is divine speaking.
A.M.H. Would you mind saying how the planting and laying the foundation lead up to this?
J.T. They bring in the collective side of the position. The whole of the saints are in mind now. "For we are God's fellow-workmen; ye are God's husbandry, God's building" -- that is what they were. Paul had planted and Apollos watered, but God gave the increase. There was actual increase amongst them. Husbandry, I suppose, was more realised than the building, but both thoughts applied, that is, there was growth amongst them. "The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof"; the fulness springing up through Paul's planting and Apollos¬ watering; but the building was also there. It is in connection with the building that you get the danger
{373}
of false material being brought in and thus the possibility of corruption. The latter would be bad teaching brought in in an authoritative way; he who did it would be destroyed.
J.M. Would verse 22 apply to them as temple of God and as having the mind of Christ?
J.T. You mean these great ministers formed part of the temple? I do not think that is the point, because they were not there at Corinth, neither Paul, nor Cephas, nor Apollos. The point is that the Corinthians were "temple of God". It is what is local here: "ye are the temple of God".
J.C.S. God's fellow-workmen would refer to the apostle and his fellow-labourers, it is not the company.
J.T. Verse 22 is to show the folly of making leading brothers, or gifted servants, party leaders. They really *belong* to the saints as set in the assembly to serve.
J.M. Can the saints be the temple of God without the light of the apostolic teaching?
J.T. They were the temple in virtue of the Spirit. "Do ye not know ... that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" They were the temple as having the Spirit. If we learn this great principle we may obtain the mind of God as to every matter in any locality. We may have no special gift among us, but there is the means of going on together in the light of this fact -- the Spirit of God dwells amongst us.
Ques. Is the teaching of this part that those who are viewed as having the mind of Christ are collectively to be viewed as the temple of God?
J.T. The teaching of chapter 2 underlies this chapter and is connected with the dwelling of the Spirit -- "the Spirit of God dwells in you". It applies to the local assembly at Corinth. This fact would render them independent in this sense, even though there might not be any special gift. It is to work out according to the instructions given later in the epistle. They were to come together -- the whole assembly is stressed -- and
{374}
when the whole assembly comes together in one place this truth would work out.
Ques. Do you mean that meetings in every locality, no matter how small, have this characteristic feature?
J.T. That is the point, "ye are the temple of God". The Corinthians were in a very poor state, yet this can be said of them. It is a great source of wealth and spiritual independency. It is a means of complete independency from man, from clerics and that sort of thing.
W.J.H. That would make the local assemblies available for light from God.
J.T. It enables us to go on together. It is realised specially as all the assembly comes together in one place. These conditions have not been complied with in large cities and it has occasioned much concern in recent years. There is a danger of overlooking the assembly in a city. It is not a mere theoretical thought; it is a practical thought which should take form as often as convenient and would give room for this principle working out, "ye are the temple of God". What possibilities there are if it is accepted and we are moving in it! But the whole assembly is to come together in one place. It is not simply coming together "in assembly", but "the whole assembly" coming together in one place.
C.F.I. Would it make the assemblies in any locality independent of "outside" help in matters of judgment that come before them?
J.T. You have to watch that. There is only one fellowship, and if a brother be present in a town and he has ability from God -- the word of wisdom, or the gift of governments -- you want to avail yourself of him, and even if he is not in the town the provision is for the assembly. Gift is not only in the sense of preaching or teaching, but of government and the word of wisdom. In chapter 12 the word of wisdom is from the Spirit and the gift of government is set in the assembly by God. It is set in *the* assembly, not simply a local assembly, and is available. It is a definite provision. His responsibility
{375}
would be to act in a seemly way, but a gift is universal, and ought never be shut out -- assuming, of course, that he is not morally disqualified.
Ques. Would brothers who have a gift of teaching necessarily have a gift of government?
J.T. Not necessarily. It is remarkable in this very epistle you have the gift of government. Gift is not a question of leadership, but what God gives a man. To shut out gift is independency.
C.H.H. Paul was not local at Corinth, and yet through him help came in?
Rem. "Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas ... all are yours", all available.
J.T. I have known of able brothers being in a locality, but shut out of a care meeting, because they were not local -- that is positive independency.
Ques. Would the responsibility for arriving at a judgment be a local matter?
J.T. "Remove the wicked person from amongst yourselves". It is a local responsibility and the apostle is helping them to do that according to God.
P.L. Did Chloe appreciate the possibilities in that connection? Paul, in her mind, was available.
J.T. That is why she placed the information with him -- she knew she was placing it where it would be most effective.
J.C.S. What about the danger of one going into a locality and forming a judgment for the saints there?
J.T. That is another matter; a word of wisdom from one elsewhere is to assist, not dominate. The responsibility lies with the local brethren. They regard him as a *help* for the moment. The Lord is to give the judgment to the local company, but He *may* use the gift He has furnished in helping the brethren. There is a measure of moral authority with one having gift and experience. I am speaking of the thing as it was -- no one assumes that now. It is well to have right principles, because the gift is to the assembly -- set in the assembly
{376}
-- and it is available therefore wherever the person may be. But, as remarked, responsibility as to local matters belongs to the local assembly, and *their* judgment should be the result of *inquiring* in the temple, which as we see here, has a local application.
Rem. There is a possibility that Paul might have to come in with a rod.
J.C.S. Speaking of the assembly as the temple of God, that would be true characteristically.
J.T. It is true of the meeting in the place, and not of a subdivision. No subdivision of the assembly in a city should assume to this -- it belongs to the saints in a locality.
J.C.S. That is an important point, involving all the saints together.
J.T. It is important where meetings are increasing, as in the cities in these countries. Instead of a federation of meetings, each looking after its own affairs, but recognising the other theoretically, there should be a practical expression of oneness as often as you can have it, especially as an opportunity for ministry and the working out of it in the assembly.
Rem. It says, "If therefore the whole assembly come together in one place" -- it is the *whole* assembly.
Ques. Would the realisation of the unity that exists in a city be experienced through the amalgamation of readings on the Lord's day afternoon?
J.T. The more we can get at that the better, the more the saints can get together as a whole -- the whole assembly in one place.
J.C.S. Some seem to think that having all the saints together would hinder the development of gift, as it seems to develop more in the smaller meetings.
J.T. Chapter 14 specially mentions "the whole assembly ... in one place". All this is to exercise gift -- we are told we may all speak one by one. These meetings that have become more and more prevalent in recent years are developing gifts. Brethren are to use their
{377}
good judgment in taking part and make room for others. These meetings being monthly, or nearly so, enable the brethren to consider for one another and make room for one another. Even if one more gifted is present he can afford to be silent and make room for one of less note.
Ques. In inviting one who has a gift to help the brethren on a certain question, if you knew what his mind was, would you invite him to come to a meeting?
J.T. You mean his mind as to the matter before the brethren. Well, if I thought his mind was *right* I should be glad if he came, as he would surely be a help.
Rem. I take it in such a case the saints generally, having the mind of Christ, would be capable of judging whether that which was presented to them was or was not right. If the person gave a word of wisdom the mind of the saints would be carried.
J.T. Quite so -- if conditions are normal. It is remarkable how when brethren come together humbly and in subjection to one another what is right prevails.
Rem. You spoke of the temple character attaching to the meetings in a city. What character attaches to the individual reading meetings in the city?
J.T. As owning the truth of the temple in the city, a subdivision would get light. They have the privilege of breaking bread in a subdivision, but certainly not to render a judgment -- it is a city matter.
J.C.S. Would you encourage us as in cities where there are two or more meetings to have our Lord's day afternoon readings together?
J.T. I think it is a good opportunity for the brethren to show their oneness. The assembly in a city is a reality. I believe that is what the Spirit of God meant in chapter 14 -- "God is indeed amongst you". It is not a mere theory.
J.C.S. Do you think it would preserve more even growth in the city than the subdivisions developing each a line of its own?
{378}
J.T. I think it is a pity to see subdivisions doing things differently. This epistle would tend to regularise us -- "thus I ordain in all the assemblies", @1 Corinthians 7: 17.
Ques. What is the difference between a reading of the Scriptures and a meeting for ministry, as in chapter 14?
J.T. I have often thought that our Bible readings are perhaps more characteristic of the latter days than the beginning. It is very doubtful whether they had Bible readings as we have them now, and I think it is to bring out the mutual side. The epistles to the Corinthians are intended to bring out the mutual side. If the leaders or the elder brethren fail, as was the case at Corinth, then what is stressed is the mutual side, and I believe that, by extension, applies to the last days. The official side has broken down and the mutual or conversational side of the ministry has more application and brings in *all* the brethren. Paul's first word at Troas apparently was a discourse, and he evidently had much liberty to go on, but after Eutychus falls and is restored, it is a conversation -- they conversed. There can be no doubt the whole position at Troas is prophetic, involving the resuscitation of the saints, their being brought back into life. One idea of life is, there is uniform growth. We have here a plantation, a husbandry, the idea is general growth. It is earlier than the thought of a building. In @Genesis 2 we have the garden planted first, and given to Adam to dress and to keep, but obviously to make room for growth -- the fulness of the earth -- the outshining of glory. Then we have the building in view at the end of the chapter, the rib taken out of Adam built into a woman. I believe the resuscitation of Eutychus -- he is called a boy after he is resuscitated, and they brought him away and were comforted -- is potentiality in a living mutual state of things where there had been a breakdown. These readings, that we have, are pleasing to God in a peculiar way, for they afford opportunity for everyone to come in, especially in local readings in the week and on Lord's day when everyone can come in and
{379}
contribute; and I believe that God is blessing them. The earth is bringing forth, as it were; there is dressing and keeping, of course, but there is development of further life.
W.J.H. Would speaking "often one to another" in Malachi correspond?
J.T. Yes. The primary thought with God in Exodus was, "Let my son go, that he may serve me". Now Malachi brings that out. It does not say what they said, but "they that feared the Lord spake often one to another: and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name. And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him", @Malachi 3: 16, 17. If we apply that today it is very beautiful and ought to appeal to all the young brothers to come into the mutual side of things, to the freshness of life and energy, not simply sitting still. Everyone cannot speak in large general meetings, but in the local readings there is opportunity for all, and as the young brother opens his mouth he finds his place, and there is freshness.
E.E.S.L. Do your remarks as to the advisability of saints throughout a city getting together on a Lord's day afternoon apply to a great city where long and expensive journeys have to be made to get together? I had thought we had perhaps reached the point of impracticability where there is a very large number of us.
J.T. The first thing is to reach the right thought. Then we get wisdom from the Lord as to the application of it. Sometimes the word, "I will have mercy, and not sacrifice", fits. As we keep the divine thought before us the Lord helps us in detail -- He is with us in what we do.
J.C.S. Do you think if the right thought is reached, the ability to execute it will be simple?
{380}
J.T. The Lord gives understanding in all things.
Ques. Do you think Lord's day afternoon is not so suitable for meetings for ministry?
J.T. Tuesday is usually employed now. The Lord's day afternoon seems to be very convenient for mutual Bible readings, as we speak of them.
F.W.W. It seemed to be so at Troas. They conversed a long while after the breaking of bread.
J.T. That helps in regard to these last day conditions. The Lord seems to bless the readings on Lord's day afternoons.
Ques. Could you help us as to which is the more profitable -- to take up a special thought or go through a book?
J.T. The latter is the more general practice. In some places they leave it open on the Lord's day afternoon, and very happily too, but the Lord is not in this sense any less considerate than we are. We are often too Jewish in our thoughts and bind Him. The Lord is with you when you are with Him. The Lord preserved David *wherever he went*. If the saints are with God, He is with them, in what they are doing.
C.C.C. Is the meeting for ministry peculiarly local?
J.T. It is seen as local in this epistle, but after all there is only one assembly, so there should be nothing to hinder the Spirit of God using gift from any part.
J.C.S. Would you invite gift for such an occasion?
J.T. That raises another question as to whether you are dealing with weekly or monthly meetings or dealing with a special meeting, where the saints might wish to invite their brethren to come. Then I think it wise to make provision for them. The Lord is with us in what we consider to be wise and profitable. The Lord is much more with us than we are apt to think. I think there is a great deal of the Jewish way amongst us, binding things up instead of leaving them open. "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them", @John 20. He had
{381}
confidence in the disciples. Assembly conditions involve the Lord's confidence in us.
Rem. I think it would be a great help to us to see that the Lord leaves things in large measure to His saints in localities to work out.
J.T. He loves to see it. You can understand how God loves to see His thoughts working out. He loves to see His people moving in love and wisdom. He has part in the proceedings. There was not a boy in Troas like Eutychus, he was an extraordinary boy now. They take him away as if they valued him. That is the idea -- what will this boy become?
S.H.B. What should we expect in the ordinary city readings -- temple light?
J.T. Yes. We ought to come together with that understanding that we are "temple of God".
J.C.S. So in a locality where an inquiry as to a particular matter might be raised, and a desire in seeking light and help from the Lord in the readings and ministry, there would be temple light for the saints?
J.T. Certainly; another thing is that the Spirit, the Paraclete, is with us. Can we shut out from the Spirit the pleasure He has in standing by the saints as together? One says this and that according to his measure, and the Spirit helps him. One idea of the Comforter is that He is alongside of us; looking after us as thus engaged. He takes what is said, and puts it together, and the result is the saints get the light they need.
Ques. Would the thought of the temple include the care meeting?
J.T. The Spirit of God is with us. He is here to look after divine interests. What a thought that is in the care meeting. He helps in our remarks, as we are dependent.
J.R.F. It is emphasised that "the temple of God is holy".
{382}
J.T. It is not a place of licence for the fleshly mind. Every meeting is under the surveillance of the Spirit of God, who has first-hand knowledge of what is in the place. What can be of more interest to the Spirit of God in a way than a meeting set for the ordering of the house of God -- for the investigation of things, taking counsel, etc? He is with us. But we must be discriminative as to all this, for all meetings are not on the same footing. The meeting of the saints together "in assembly" has the first place.
The second letter, chapter 6, brings out the damage of evil alliances. The temple is brought in there in that connection. There can be no consent between the temple of God and idols. "Ye are the temple of the living God" -- not only God, but the *living* God -- showing it is a sphere of life. The living God dwells among us and walks among us. How wonderful that is!
Ques. Could two localities come together for a reading?
J.T. Yes, but you must remember that in whatever locality it is held, the meeting belongs to that locality.
Ques. Would it be right to come together thus?
J.T. Oh yes, it would be quite in order. For this it is necessary to keep in mind the two ideas; that which is general and what is local.
{383}
THE SPIRIT IN THE CORINTHIAN EPISTLES (3)
@1 Corinthians 12: 1 - 13
J.T. Our subject requires that we should refer back to chapter 6, so as to get the fulness of it. Chapter 6 speaks of our being washed from our pollutions and our sanctification by "the Spirit of our God"; and then it is stated that he that is "joined to the Lord is one Spirit", as over against being joined to a harlot. Then we are reminded that the body is the temple of the Holy Spirit which we have of God, so that we are not our own -- we are to glorify God in our body. This is an important item in the instruction. It is important as regards the believer's body. We see the high level from which the subject of fornication is treated. The fornicator is put away, according to chapter 5, as a wicked person -- such fornication as was not named even amongst the gentiles. The latter part of chapter 5 requires that if one is a fornicator we are not even to mix with such an one or eat with him. Chapter 6 treats the subject from the high level of the relation of the saint in his body to Christ -- he is a member of Christ -- and this is the bearing of this form of sin. It affects the assembly, but peculiarly the Spirit, for the believer's body is the temple of the Spirit.
W.J.H. Would you say what you understand by "he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit"?
J.T. The use of the capital "S" for Spirit in the New Translation implies that the oneness of the saint with Christ, our link with Him, can only be by the Holy Spirit. "He that [is] joined to the Lord is one Spirit". The "is" is not there. It is the character. He is one Spirit with the Lord -- that would be the force of it; "one" is the thought. The Lord and he are one Spirit, and that can only be the Holy Spirit. We have the capital "S" used again in chapter 12 in regard to what we drink into, and it is just a question whether it is the Spirit that pervades the saints, the assembly, or the Spirit of God;
{384}
but it seems to be both. The Spirit that pervades the assembly is the Holy Spirit.
C.F.I. Referring to verse 19, "your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit", is that individual, or taking account of the saints collectively?
J.T. It refers to a believer's body. "Do ye not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit?" Perhaps what is in your mind is that it is not in the plural -- "your bodies". I think it is a way of speaking implying that it is the body of each believer. Similarly, "Let not your heart be troubled" points to the unity that existed, but *each* heart is to be untroubled.
J.C.S. "He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit". Do you think it is preparatory to what is going to be developed in the following chapters?
J.T. Yes. It brings the doctrine relating to the Spirit's presence here to bear on this evil. This is a principle to be followed, and shows how a great doctrine can bear upon a particular matter.
P.L. So that the Spirit's resentment of evil is to find articulation in the vessel in which He operates; the assembly, as in the previous chapter.
J.T. Quite so. The whole assembly would be affected. Inasmuch as there is only one Spirit and each who has that Spirit is one with Christ, the introduction of the Spirit here lifts the subject to a high level and makes a great doctrine bear on a great evil -- one which would constantly have to be met in the history of the assembly.
P.L. Making the exclusion of evil in any one locality universal.
J.T. That is a principle running through these epistles. The bearing of what is said is universal, although its working out is necessarily local, so that we have "all that in every place call on the ... Lord", in the first letter; and in the second "the assembly of God which is in Corinth, with all the saints who are in the whole of Achaia". In the second letter the address is somewhat narrower, but both show that we can never be independent
{385}
in our actions in discipline. The great thought of the assembly, the one assembly, stands under all circumstances, and certainly it works out here in the great doctrine of the presence of the Spirit being affected by an act of evil of this kind. It necessarily circulates, so to speak, and affects us all.
W.H.U. Is that which is true of us collectively in chapter 3 pressed on the individual in chapter 6?
J.T. It is that sort of thing. The word "temple" is applied to our bodies in chapter 6, but in chapter 3 it is the local company, "ye are the temple of God".
Ques. What is the thought of being *joined* to the Lord?
J.T. I think it is a levitical touch -- the Levites were to be united or joined to Aaron for service (@Numbers 18: 4); it is not merely professed, but it is a real thing, "one Spirit". The body is to be governed by the Lord -- it is His. It implies the idea of an organism. The name Levi means *joined* (@Genesis 29: 34. See @Isaiah 56: 3, 6).
Rem. "They two shall be one flesh".
J.T. That is how it stands exactly, showing how serious this kind of sin is, because it involves the body of the believer, which is a member of Christ.
W.S. Would @Romans 7 be the idea -- married to another?
J.T. Yes. "To be to another ... in order that we might bear fruit to God". Joined is a real link between the believer and Christ. The joining is by the Spirit. The apostle is really bringing a great doctrine, which is developed more fully in chapter 12, to bear on this matter of fornication. He shows how serious it is, and how utterly beneath the dignity of the christian that his body should be so used, that which is actually spoken of as a temple of the Holy Spirit.
P.L. Is this the germ of what comes out in Ephesians, the culmination of which is union with Christ?
J.T. It implies union with Christ, but the great doctrine of the presence of the Spirit and what He effects
{386}
between Christ and His people is brought to bear on this particular thing, and ought to challenge us, because a sin of this kind affects the whole organism of the assembly.
A.M.H. Is not one great thought in the temple, that it is exclusive? In chapter 3, exclusive of man, and in chapter 6 of sin.
J.T. Quite so, and thus viewed what a power it is! If the saints accept the whole of its teaching there is a power in us to save us from this kind of thing, this uncleanness, which alas! comes up so much and affects the whole organism.
W.H.W. This matter is mentioned in the letter from the assembly meeting in @Acts 15, showing its importance.
J.T. The prevalence of it among pagans made the warning urgent. It is difficult to realise how the assembly of God should have persons in it guilty of this uncleanness, but we have to remember that the saints at Corinth were not more than two years old as christians. The apostle had been there a year and a half, and this letter was written shortly after, so they were very young christians having emerged from paganism marked by this licentiousness. The city was proverbial for it, so in chapter 12 of the second letter, the apostle refers to persons guilty of this, not having judged themselves. "For I fear lest perhaps coming I find you not such as I wish, and that *I* be found by you such as ye do not wish: lest there might be strifes, jealousies, angers, contentions, evil speakings, whisperings, puffings up, disturbances; lest my God should humble me as to you when I come again, and that I shall grieve over many of those who have sinned before, and have not repented as to the uncleanness and fornication and licentiousness which they have practised". This is difficult for us to understand perhaps, that we should have persons in the meeting here, for instance, guilty of fornication unjudged, but at Corinth apparently there were many. It has to be borne in mind that they had just emerged from paganism and this terrible evil is not easily overcome. The tenor of chapter 6 is to show
{387}
the bearing of the evil spiritually. It is an evil that the natural conscience judges more quickly than many others, but the chapter shows that it is to be judged in a spiritual way, as to the bearing of it organically on the saints.
J.C.S. Do you take it to refer to what had transpired before they had come into the assembly, or after they had the light?
J.T. Possibly both. They had professed to be converted, but not having given up this former course would call forth the apostle's words in chapter 12 of the second letter.
Ques. Had Joseph entered into this teaching when he said, "how should I do this great wickedness, and sin against God"?
J.T. His is a very good example, showing God had a testimony against this evil in a young man at that early date. Genesis gives prominence to the patriarchs -- mature men -- but Joseph sets before us the youth -- how pure he was. He kept himself *pure* -- a very excellent example. The young need to be reminded of this, to maintain self-judgment as to this pernicious thing that is so prevalent now, as it always has been, alas, in the history of mankind.
W.S. Would the expression, "joined to an harlot", bear upon the association of the saints with the system of things which is described as a harlot in Revelation?
J.T. It would work out that way. The system in Revelation is treated from that point of view, indeed fornication is a well-known figure in the Old Testament as applying to idolatrous associations.
E.B.McC. Here the privilege and responsibility was for them to glorify God in their bodies, was it not?
J.T. And the teaching lifts the body of the believer to the great level that is proper to it. Romans supports this, but it is made very pointed here, the dignity of the believer's body, and how he challenges himself as to evil
{388}
by the fact that his body is the temple of the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is there, the word "temple" being used.
J.C.S. Being maintained in the consciousness of what it is to be "joined to the Lord" -- one Spirit -- would preserve us from this uncleanness when we are apart from each other.
J.T. It would, the whole passage being to lift us up to the dignity that belongs to the body of the believer; his body here is regarded as a member of Christ.
P.L. So that in dealing with this evil in Israel, it says of Phinehas that he rose up from among the assembly. Would that show the priestly and holy zeal and energy that would handle this degrading matter in the light of the great thoughts of God as dwelling assembly-wise among His people?
J.T. Just so. Then he has the javelin -- a sure instrument of dealing with it -- the word of God, and involving both persons; for, however this matter is treated, there must be two persons. The Jews bringing the woman in @John 8 accuse her, but where was the man? We must be fair as dealing with these matters, and I think Phinehas represents that -- he dealt with both the guilty persons.
J.C.S. May not circumstances arise where one of the persons might prove himself to be clear, through self-judgment?
J.T. There may be, but we must certainly deal with both persons. If one has cleared himself, well, but both persons must be dealt with. The Jewish element would favour one or the other, and we must see to it that we are not one-sided in dealing with such cases. The Jews brought the woman, but where was the man? It was not that they were told she had committed adultery, but she was taken in the act. Why were not both brought?
Ques. What is the thought in "Every sin which a man may practise is without the body"?
J.T. It is to bring out this great principle as to the believer's body. In fornication, he sins against his own
{389}
body. What has been said about the organism should be borne in mind.
E.W.C. Do you think that this is in view of the believer's body being required for service, to man and to God Himself?
J.T. Yes, we cannot serve without our bodies.
Ques. Does the truth of @Romans 12 come in?
J.T. This chapter is properly to be connected with that chapter, and it enters into the teaching beginning with chapter 10 of our epistle: "we, being many, are one  body" -- our bodies are involved. The body of Christ on earth now necessitates the saints in their bodies, and chapter 10, as it bears on the Lord's supper, would bring out that our bodies are in subjection -- they are holy -- so that we sit together as one body. The teaching in Romans underlies all this as to the body, that is, "if Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin". The woman of Sychar, I believe, illustrates that strikingly because ordinarily she would be influenced by men, but after she had had to say to Christ, she was not so influenced. She comes to them and says, "Come, see a man ... is not this the Christ?" She was manifestly superior. In principle, Christ was in her.
A.M.H. When you said that both have to come under judgment, you mean that both would come under the consideration of the assembly, but the judgment in the one case might differ from the other.
J.T. Quite so. We must judge righteous judgment. The woman might not be guilty. The type shows it might not be her sin; though she must cry out if she is to be exempted. She clears herself in this way. I am sure that nothing is more important in the exercise of discipline than that we should discriminate fairly, and judge righteous judgment. What is before us now begins in chapter 10, verse 15; the apostle approaches the subject of the Lord's supper bearing on our public position and uses the word "fellowship". He speaks of "we, being many, are one loaf", so that the organism now is more
{390}
before us; and chapter 12 coming in after chapters 10 and 11 is a collective assembly position, and treats of the action of the Spirit here in the gifts He furnishes, as known amongst us.
C.F.I. What is the difference between "he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit" and all "given to drink of one Spirit"?
J.T. Oneness is in view in the first, and the second further indicates satisfaction. Drinking implies that we are satisfied in what all are satisfied in. The assembly is thus free for the Lord in holy satisfaction by drinking into the one Spirit. Being baptised, "in the power of one Spirit", would allude to baptism as in the Red Sea, whereas the drinking of one Spirit brings in the Lord's supper -- the cup. When Israel drank at first they were not satisfied -- the waters were bitter -- but afterwards they drank and were satisfied, for the waters were made sweet. There was a means of satisfying Israel in the wilderness although the external circumstances were very distressing.
Ques. Is there not a distinction of thought between drinking *out of it* -- the cup (@Mark 14: 23), and drinking *into one Spirit*?
J.T. There is. "They all drank out of it", would mean that there were not two or more vessels, but one -- indicative of the unity and liberty of soul and affection we have for one another. We drink out of the *same* vessel; but drinking into would allude to *what* we drink. The application of this to the Spirit as pervading the assembly is simple.
J.C.S. In chapter 10 it is the same idea: we all partake of the same bread.
J.T. Having part in the same thing is one of the great unifying thoughts in the epistles, carried through to the next epistle in chapter 3, where "*we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord ... are transformed according to the same image".
{391}
E.B.McC. In chapter 10, it is the cup which we bless, and the bread which we break. It is plural. Does that show how we are all bound up in the fellowship?
J.T. All are committed to what is done by one, but it is *we*, not ye: the *general* fellowship is in mind, and not the local. In dwelling on chapter 10, we alluded to drinking, but it is not the drinking in that chapter, it is the blessing of the cup. In chapter 12 the apostle refers to the assemblies of the saints in which ministry proceeds in order, in which the gifts are in exercise. For us it is not a question of demons, who may have been present in the Corinthian position, but of discerning what is really of the Spirit of God. The exercise of gift is governed by the Spirit. Saying, Lord Jesus, is by the Holy Spirit. Unless the Spirit has His place, such meetings cannot be profitable.
Ques. Why does the apostle consider it necessary to bring in the negative side in the first portion of verse 3?
J.T. Because of the danger that existed, indeed the fact was that demons had access to the Corinthian assembly -- a most awful suggestion, but in keeping with chapter 11: 13 - 15, of the second letter. They had just emerged from paganism, but before they were converted they had to do with the gross working of the devil through his agencies, and some of them were not free of this, and it was carried into the assembly. The negative side for us would be to see that we are not governed by feelings that would govern men of ability in religious circles, but aiming at giving the Spirit His place by saying, Lord Jesus and by the Holy Spirit instead of mere formality.
W.J.H. Would it also have in view that in the last days, men would apostatise from the truth, giving heed to the doctrines of demons, which might creep in?
J.T. I am sure that is important not to overlook -- some of the doctrines of Rome are doctrines of devils.
J.C.S. Do you think this chapter locates the well with all its wealth?
{392}
J.T. Yes; the Spirit in activity but through the gifts. As we run over the chapter we come to the body, but first of all it bears on ministry, to show what marks the procedure. There is the idea of the christian saying Lord Jesus, by the Spirit, so the meeting takes on the full holy acknowledgment of the lordship of Christ, and all contrary to that is shut out. Then the Spirit is mentioned as distributing the gifts, the Lord as over the services and the operations as being of God. The three Persons are brought in in a very remarkable way, bearing on our ministry meetings.
A.M.H. Is not the first test applied as to whether the Lord is honoured by what is said or done?
J.T. Yes. That would be in one who is ministering. You feel that he honours the Lord: he says, "Lord Jesus" in power, which is a reverential and affectionate way of speaking to Him. It is said in the assembly. We are dealing here with this particular subject, and it is well to keep that in mind. It is when the saints are together in the exercise of gifts. The chapter begins "concerning spiritual manifestations", that is what is in view. It is when the saints are together for ministry. Chapter 14 develops it more fully.
P.L. Your saying, Lord Jesus, in this way would suggest the credentials, the divine hallmarks, in which one serving appears among his brethren.
J.T. Yes. You feel how beautiful it is in this particular setting. The Lord Jesus is owned in a very real and appealing way, so that the section refers here to divine Persons. The Lord is over the services, the allusion is to actual service, what one is doing.
E.B.McC. You spoke of the three Persons, God, the Lord, and the Spirit.
J.T. The Spirit comes first, that is the point. The Spirit is seen in the distribution of gifts. These are spiritual manifestations. It says in verse 4, that there are distinctions of gifts but the same Spirit; that is the first thing. Then there are distinctions of services, and the
{393}
same Lord; and there are distinctions of operations and the same God. The outcome is that God is there. God dominates all.
S.F. Do you suggest that the wealth that is in the assembly is seen in that the three Persons are mentioned?
J.T. Yes. It is instructive to consider the fulness of testimony presented in Scripture in this way. We have here the remarkable assertion of three distinct Persons, the Spirit mentioned first, then the Lord, and then God, the same order as in @Ephesians 4 -- "one body ... one Spirit ... one Lord ... one God and Father of all". The great culmination of all this is that God is supreme, all the operations being His.
Ques. Should we approach all assembly services with this in mind, starting with the Spirit making room for the Lord, then moving on to God?
J.T. We shall never be right unless moving towards Him in this culminating sense.
P.L. All true ministry would lead up to and close in a note of worship.
J.T. Quite so. It is remarkable how much you get of that in Romans, the initial epistle; the Creator is worshipped even at the outset.
J.C.S. Prophecy is the end in view here, is it not?
J.T. That is how the subject works out, but taken up more fully as to the activity of the gifts in chapter 14: what bearing prophecy has, and the effect is that God is owned amongst His people of a truth.
Ques. What is the difference between the early part of the chapter, and what we have in verse 28 -- "God has set"?
J.T. The Spirit forming the body and operating in it is the main thought in the early part. In verse 28 it is not the body but "the assembly". After the truth of the Spirit is asserted, then, as regards God's public setting up of christianity, it is the assembly. The body is the inner thought, and you do not get it in Peter, or in the ministry of the twelve; it is the assembly, it is the
{394}
*public* body of called-out intelligent persons. God has set a variety of gifts there. The bearing is universal and not local. It is not in assembly, but in *the* assembly, the full thought.
J.C.S. The body is peculiar to Paul, is it not?
J.T. Quite so. It involves union, being the inner thought, the working out of the innermost thoughts of Christ, what He is in His saints, that is seen in wisdom. The body involves the working out of the all-various wisdom of God. Of course the word assembly is also used as to this, but the mystery lies in the truth of the body.
Ques. Peter does not even mention the assembly does he?
J.T. Well, he says, "Ye ... are built up a spiritual house", but not the word "assembly".
E.W.C. In @Acts 2 we read, "they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak ... as the Spirit gave to them to speak forth". Would you say a little as to the difference between the Holy Spirit filling them and speaking forth in the power of the Spirit?
J.T. There the gathered saints are seen as a suitable vessel for the Spirit and He takes possession and uses it. A divine Person was there active of Himself. This chapter, @1 Corinthians 12, brings this out very distinctly; He acts of Himself. He distributes the gifts of Himself.
J.C.S. What is the object in the apostle's mind in enumerating all these distributions?
J.T. To bring out the wealth that the Spirit has brought down here. What a variety of things is mentioned! First, the word of wisdom, then the word of knowledge, the gift of healing, the operation of miracles, prophecy, the discerning of spirits, and tongues, and interpretation of tongues. All these were most needed at that time. They are not all needed now, but what is needed exists now, and particularly the word of wisdom. In all the various matters we have to face, if there is one thing needed more than another it is the word of wisdom.
{395}
In chapter 6 the apostle says, "there is not a wise person among you".
Rem. It is remarkable that wisdom is mentioned first.
J.T. When creation came into evidence wisdom was there; it was there *when needed*.
W.J.H. James said, "Brethren, listen to me". He had it at *that* particular moment.
A.M.H. Does the word of wisdom manifest itself in various persons, or is it located in one as a gift? One has heard it spoken of in a general way, but this is very specific.
J.T. Here it is to one -- "to one, by the Spirit, is given the word of wisdom". Perhaps you have something in your mind. Brethren would do well to make the most of a person who has such a gift in any measure. It is given for the saints. If one has a *reputation* for wisdom he is a dangerous man unless he is governed by the Spirit: as one exercises his gift the Spirit gives grace.
C.C.C. Would temple light come in where the word of wisdom in one person was lacking?
J.T. Well, we are dealing here with the gifts. Gifts are given to individuals, not to the assembly as such; the persons who have them are set in the assembly. The company does not exercise gift -- it is the individual who exercises it. The thought of wisdom dates back before the foundation of the world. @Proverbs 8 shows that wisdom came into evidence as it was needed, not that it was not there as inherent in God, but when He began to do things, it was needed. And so the all-various wisdom of God (@Ephesians 3) is seen working out in the assembly; but the word of wisdom is in an individual.
P.L. Would you say presented in a body setting, and so would include sisters, as, for example, Abigail, Deborah, and the woman who spoke to Joab?
J.T. Quite so, and more particularly the wise woman of Abel.
{396}
Rem. In contrast with the wise woman of Tekoah who had a reputation for wisdom, but it was not used to a good end.
J.T. It is a great thing when a matter is to be solved, that it should be rightly ended. The wise woman of Abel recalled the ancient saying, "Just inquire in Abel; and so they ended".
W.H.W. It speaks of the distinction of gifts. Is it our responsibility to be able to distinguish where gift is? -- who has it?
J.T. Well, it is surely, otherwise you might be misled in attaching it to a man like Ahithophel, who had a reputation for wisdom, but he came under the influence of the devil. The "word of knowledge" comes after wisdom -- "according to the same Spirit", which would mean, I suppose, that he can apply known things; one would be conversant with the Scriptures.
Ques. Is it not possible for any of these words to be given on a specific occasion?
J.T. Well, they are called gifts here. The Lord might come in as He does at times, and use one and another, and the result would be wisdom; but we are dealing here with gifts, which are not to be given and taken away.
J.C.S. These gifts are distributed among different persons. Is there not a danger if one has a gift, of centring everything in him?
J.T. Quite so. We must discern what each is equal to. The word of knowledge is remarkable. It is a question of applying what is known, with ability from the Spirit how to do it. It is a very important side to our position. The *truth* is brought in.
C.F.I. How does the gift of government apply?
J.T. Governments, it is. That is in the next list, verse 28: "gifts of healings; helps; governments". I think government would work out in a son of the kingdom, not that a son of the kingdom is necessarily a gift -- it is what he is, he has grown up in maturity in the knowledge
{397}
of the kingdom, in the rule of God; but he may be given ability or gift in regard to government. One of the great features of the testimony is government, which was given to Adam in a certain sense, but properly to Noah, then to Israel, and now the nations have it. The great spiritual thought of government is in the assembly which is to rule by and by, and these gifts are to work out government today. The gift of government is set in the assembly -- it is a universal thought and hence anyone having that gift should be used by all.
Rem. We have to discern between spiritual power and a dominating personality.
J.T. A dominating personality like Joab may set aside the authority of Christ in a meeting.
A.M.H. Would being baptised into one body in the power of one Spirit have a great bearing on the use of the gift of government?
J.T. I think it does. The idea is that we merge in a spiritual way, which puts us all on the same footing. The exercise of the gifts would rightly give those who have them personal distinction, but the merging places them in relation to the brethren. We are happy with the brethren and with one another. Paul would take his place amongst the brethren most happily. The drinking is mentioned immediately after that; it makes us contented as with the brethren. If we have spiritual ability more than others it will show itself and will be owned by all.
Ques. What is the gift of faith here?
J.T. It is more than faith in the ordinary sense, it is faith for exploits, such as you have in Judges. Hebrews gives you faith evidenced in a variety of "witnesses", including what is contemplated here.
E.W.C. These diversities of operations of gifts are in view of the *work of God*. You spoke of wisdom coming into evidence in the work of God. It is in the work of God *today*.
{398}
J.T. Whatever little there is today should be thankfully appropriated as marked off from the wisdom of the world. Anyone can see the world's expedients are merely like patent medicines, but the word of wisdom divinely given stands. It began early; as the idea of creation came into evidence, then wisdom was "brought forth", and it runs right through. It is fully seen in Christ, but the Lord Himself saying, "wisdom is justified of all her children", shows that it permeates the saints. As the creation is in view, wisdom is there, and now in the assembly it is to be seen in a supreme way. The angels are to see it worked out in the assembly -- the "all-various wisdom of God", and these distributions by the Spirit have that in mind.
J.C.S. Would the fact that the distributions all come from the same divine Person help in the line of preserving us from rivalry or competition in our service?
J.T. I think so, and also the Spirit being mentioned in the distributions would imply that He has first-hand knowledge of the saints. Of course He has, God has, but the presence of the Spirit down here implies among many things that He has first-hand knowledge of us. He knows the saints and in the distributions He chooses His men. I refer to this as marking the divine way, establishing confidence in us.
Rem. Each exercise of the gift is a manifestation of the Spirit.
J.T. That is right.
P.L. Would that first-hand knowledge be implied in the expression that the Spirit "sat upon each one of them"?
J.T. They were known persons. Already they were known by name -- "the crowd of names". It was *each* person -- the Spirit "sat upon each one of them".
Ques. Would a word of ministry in the Lord's day morning meeting be normally given through a gift or through anyone?
{399}
J.T. I think the idea is that a gift, if present, would be used; not that I would exclude anyone, but the divine economy is *ornamented*. One of the features of the creation is ornamentation. Gifts involve ornamentation, and there is in them the idea of representation of God. It is not simply a word -- but *how* to say it. The gift has ability in this sense. I am not excluding anybody, but ministry in Scripture is on the principle of gifts.
C.H.H. Love lying behind all would secure it from man's ordering.
J.T. Well, God will have things according to His own mind. We are told He garnished the heavens, planted a garden, and so, running down through the Scriptures, we come to Jerusalem or the temple as an ornament, the ornament of the earth; the assembly is the culmination of all this. It is the great ornament of God, and in its function in the sphere of testimony gift has a great place; it is specially furnished to convey the mind of God in a dignified ornamental way. It should not be damaged by the vessel, but rather enhanced by it. The great pattern is Christ. He could say, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach". In the description the Spirit gives, in @Luke 4, of the Lord in the synagogue in Nazareth, we can see that ornamentation was in mind.
Ques. Are we not to desire earnestly the best gifts?
J.T. Chapter 14 shows it is legitimate to desire them. In Ephesians it is said that "to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ" -- that is *grace*. Surely every saint has grace, but it is according to measure. That gift too would be ornamental; that is grace in the christian to fill his niche properly. But the Spirit goes on to speak of specific gifts there. In chapter 12 from verse 14 to verse 27 it is a question of the human body as a figure, leading to Christ's body. It is an organism, and hence there can be no independency. All the saints are brought in when you come to the body.
{400}
J.C.S. What you have stated is a real difficulty at times. Sometimes you have one who seems to have gift, but there is great disparity between what he *says* and what he *is*.
J.T. Scripture should help us as to this. In @2 Timothy 2 it says the *vessel* should be sanctified and meet for the Master's use. There should be nothing to mar the precious treasure there. In @Numbers 15, as a principle, a man goes to the sanctuary with a gift, and it says the man with a lamb shall accompany that gift with so much fine flour, so much oil, and so much wine. Then if he brings a larger gift, he is to accompany it with an increased measure of flour and oil and wine, and so with the three distinct offerings, the last being a bullock. Each offering is to be accompanied by a corresponding proportion of flour, oil, and wine, meaning obviously that we are to be *balanced*. There is the character of Christ, the oil speaking of dignity, and the wine of what is stimulating in the offerer, not only in his offering, but in himself. One is delightful to God as He sees him coming to Him thus. The offerer is in keeping with his offering. That helps us as to the use of gift. In Ephesians the man is called the gift, involving what he is. He gave some apostles, some prophets, some teachers, etc. That is, He gave the persons.
Ques. Is the principle seen in Christ Himself? He was all that He said.
J.T. That is the thought. He was in complete accord with all He said.
C.F.I. What is meant by, "so also is the Christ"?
J.T. The allusion is to the saints as spoken of here. They are viewed in the dignity of the anointing. God would be represented in a dignified way. "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness". The "image" would require the anointing -- the representation of God in a dignified way. Here is a dignified authoritative company. We need to keep in mind that God is the end in all these things. God should be made known.
{401}
THE SPIRIT IN THE CORINTHIAN EPISTLES (4)
@2 Corinthians 3: 1 - 18
J.T. Our subject this afternoon is in the second letter. References to the Spirit are found in chapters 1, 3, 5, 6, and 13, the principal ones being in chapter 3. The consideration of chapter 3, the covenant, will fit in in order with what we have had. It may be of help to remark that we have more substance in the subjects treated of than in those in the first letter. The first letter having taken effect, the apostle is able to put more feeling and affection into his remarks. This particularly applies to chapter 3, because the covenant was already alluded to -- the blood of it as in the cup; here it is the spirit of it. We are much more ready to take up the letter of things than the spirit of any given subject. The treatment of the covenant, largely involving the Spirit of God, implies also the Spirit of the covenant.
The book of Exodus helps us as to this, in the advance in the second giving of the law. Moses had passed through much with Israel between the first giving of the law on the mount and the second, and so was equal to more glory, being more spiritual himself. Hence Jehovah makes His glory to pass before him on the mount, as if he could absorb something of it, which he did; God outlines certain things and gives him directions to write "after the tenor of these words", @Exodus 34: 27. Moses did not write the *tables*. Jehovah wrote them. The second time the outline of the covenant was given according to the tenor of what Jehovah said, as we have here, "not of letter, but of spirit. For the letter kills, but the Spirit quickens". There was more given than the tables. Moses comes down with the reflection of the glory and carries it forward into Deuteronomy, where he embodies it in his final book, which is more the tenor of things than the letter. Deuteronomy contemplates that the saints had progressed so as to understand
{402}
things spoken of in the tenor or spirit of them. The Spirit quickens. This chapter furnishes us, as we shall see, with this thought, and how it is embodied in the Spirit of God. The Lord is Himself the Spirit of the covenant, meaning that He embodies the divine thought in it, and makes it effective in that way in our souls. The first thought is what was effected through Paul in the Corinthian saints. I suppose he is able to speak of it in this way, because of the recovery in them that had been effected through the first letter, so he could go back to what was, and say they were "manifested to be Christ's epistle ministered by us, written, not with ink, but the Spirit of the living God; not on stone tables, but on fleshy tables of the heart". So that he begins the subject with the Spirit of the living God.
A.M.H. Would you connect the death of the testator, typified in Moses going up the mount to make atonement for the people if he could, with the first epistle, and this second letter with the glory shining in his face?
J.T. I would. Moses was ready to be blotted out. The first letter speaks of the *blood* of the covenant. Jeremiah does not mention the blood of it where the covenant is stated. He mentions the *result* of the blood of the covenant, that is, the forgiveness of sins, but the Lord mentions the blood of it, that there was more than the forgiveness of sins in it. He goes deeper than Jeremiah; the blood of the covenant witnessed the love of God, what was surrendered that it might be effective.
Ques. Is that seen in Exodus, where half the blood was for the altar, and half for the people?
J.T. Yes; and that is what is treated of in @Hebrews 9; it alludes to @Exodus 24. This chapter alludes to @Exodus 34. Chapter 24 makes much of the blood of the covenant, that is what entered into it on God's side, and the *volume* of it from God's side, but there is the ministration of the covenant too. You get no such allusion to the blood as you get in @Exodus 24 -- it is unique, marked by *quantity*.
{403}
W.J.H. Had you something special in mind in mentioning the Spirit of the living God?
J.T. I thought it was very significant. That is how the subject of the Spirit is introduced in the chapter; the idea of life is stressed, corresponding with the thought of quickening. The Spirit quickens. The use of the term "the living God" throughout the New Testament is full of instruction, and no part more so than here. The idea of writing is by the Spirit of the living God. The writing material is "the fleshy tables of the heart".
W.J.H. There would be a living result to the writing, would there not?
J.T. The second letter requires this. It requires not only bare statements of doctrine and principles but the living God. The writing is by the Spirit of the living God.
J.C.S. Why is it that he refers to the letter written in *our* hearts?
J.T. The verse reads, "*Ye* are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men, being manifested to be Christ's epistle ministered by us, written, not with ink, but the Spirit of the living God; not on stone tables, but on fleshy tables of the heart". The first heart is Paul's, and the second alludes to the saints at Corinth. The first means that the work at Corinth had such a great place with him that the results of it, the very saints, were, as it were, indelibly impressed on his heart. "Known and read of all men" would mean that wherever he went he spoke of them. I fancy the apostle, at a meal table, or at any time conversing, would bring forward the Corinthians -- what a great work of God that at Corinth was! He stayed there eighteen months, and there were results accordingly. I think that is what he means. A very suggestive thing for anyone serving -- you speak well of the saints, and not ill of them. Make the most of the brethren.
J.C.S. Would it be the normal consequence of the Spirit of the living God writing the covenant in our
{404}
hearts that the saints would be written in the minister's heart?
J.T. Yes. Those who minister should speak of the saints. Paul could occupy the brethren many a time with the terrible state of things which existed at Corinth, but he did not. He brought forward the good things. The early work there must have been wonderful. How Paul would refer to it with pleasure!
W.S.S. The spirit of Christ comes out in the apostle in his expressed esteem for the saints in the various places. He must have thought of them as the excellent of the earth.
J.T. You can always look at them that way. There may be shallowness, but we are always entitled to look at them abstractly. If we cannot speak much as to current facts we can revert to earlier days when the work of God was manifest in them.
P.L. So this goes with the Deuteronomy view, Moses blessing the tribes, the great minister clothing them with the thoughts of God.
J.T. That is right. Moses in speaking of them thus is called "the man of God". Comparing his blessing and the blessing of the tribes by Jacob, you have the two sides. Jacob, although a father, is not governed by natural feelings -- he is a patriarch in the true sense, as @Genesis 49 shows; he tells the whole truth, and gives the history as it would be. Moses is entitled to speak abstractly for the reason that God *had wrought*. If God has not wrought in a man's soul you cannot speak of him as to any good, but if God has wrought, you can speak abstractly of him in relation to what God has done. Deuteronomy contemplates what God has wrought, so the Thummim comes *before* the Urim in @Deuteronomy 33 because it involves not only light, but the effective work of God.
J.C.S. It is a very different standpoint from Moses speaking of the people as rebels.
{405}
J.T. Yes, that was on a different level from what he is as called a man of God.
E.B.McC. Were the Corinthians in some measure up to what the apostle says of them?
J.T. It was how he had them written in his heart, and he can speak of them in this way because recovery had taken place. "*Ye* are our letter". He is now free to speak to them in that way.
A.M.H. Is there the double thought -- what is written in *his* heart as a commendation, and what was in *their* hearts locally as the expression of God?
J.T. That is the truth. Being manifested to be Christ's epistle -- that is what was actually at Corinth.
Ques. Why does the apostle change from "our letter" to "Christ's epistle"?
J.T. Because he is alluding, as we have said, to what marked him as he moved about among the brethren in other parts. They were his letter, in the sense that he always spoke well of them. Anyone hearing him speak of the Corinthians would be impressed with his love for them, and no one is commendable who does not love the Lord's people. This is a great feature in a letter of commendation that the bearer of it loves the Lord's people.
J.C.S. And the more striking because he was not loved much by them, but he loved them "more abundantly".
J.T. How one can speak of the Lord's people is a great test. We may have to call attention to things that are distressing, and Paul does: he does it to *themselves*. To be a characteristic traducer of the Lord's people is one of the most objectionable of things to heaven.
P.L. It puts you in the company of the accuser of the brethren.
J.T. Yes, it puts you in the company of the devil. We have to discern anything in that connection, designed to discredit the Lord's people as this is directly from the devil, although there may be *some* truth in it.
{406}
Ques. Would Paul be speaking of the divine traits in them as the result reached through his ministry?
J.T. Quite so, and they became lovable to him. God loves us in spite of our state. Spiritual men are able to do that, too -- able to love the saints in spite of their naughty ways -- but I think that Paul would have indelibly on his heart what this remarkable work of God in Corinth was. It is presented in a very formal way in Acts; the time spent there enabled him to become acquainted with the brethren in a peculiar way, and they were endeared to his heart. His personal feelings expressed here are striking, for instance, "all things are for your sakes".
E.W.C. Would not the apostle's thoughts about the saints flow along the line of the work of God in them?
J.T. I think it is a great thing to cultivate the faculty to love what is lovable. We may be obliged to love people who are unlovely, yet knowing that the work of God is there, you can love them in spite of their unloveliness. Here it is to love what is lovable, and I am sure Paul had keen appreciation of what was lovable, and undoubtedly the work at Corinth was remarkable in its beginning. The formal way Paul approached it, and the real anxiety he had about it, all prepared a state of soul in himself that would take in impressions of the work of God in others, and the same thing appears in the second letter. He had to go through a remarkable experience before he wrote it (see chapter 1: 8 - 10).
W.S. Paul's ministry had been producing lovable features. Would evidence of lovableness now be coming in?
J.T. Yes. Titus would recount what he saw in this brother and that brother, and that household; and would also tell the apostle what he saw as the effect of his first letter; that there was sure evidence of the work of God.
W.J.H. He boasted about them to Macedonia, about their readiness to give, showing he delighted in the fruits of grace in them.
{407}
J.T. I think he had regarded that Corinth was a special piece of his workmanship. In view of the time he spent there, and what the Lord said to him about Corinth, there can be no doubt that it had a leading place in the apostle's thoughts.
E.B.McC. They would see the features of the new covenant in him; he could set them forth livingly in himself.
J.T. I am sure that is true, and that brings up the important side of ministerial responsibility; that one *is* what he says. He ought to be such a minister as would beget children. If one is not well formed himself, his children will hardly be well formed. I think it is a test as to anyone with peculiar or unspiritual qualities -- would you like a generation like that? We hear of people having peculiar traits, causing light comment, but the real test is, would you like a generation like that? Abraham is the great patriarch, the great progenitor, but before we get that, we get what Abraham was: his name had been Abram, "high father", indicating moral elevation and then there was a "wholly right seed".
J.C.S. If the servant is sensitive, the Lord would call attention to any traits in him that would not be lovable or suitable?
J.T. Well, anything that is not suitable should be called attention to.
J.C.S. Would the Lord call attention to any trait that is not good so as to correct it? It might be reproduced in those I serve. The Lord would call attention to it, so that I might check it.
J.T. Surely. The thing is to set yourself specially against it. Those taught are likely to take on what marks their teachers.
W.S.S. With regard to generation, he says, they were Christ's epistle -- not Paul's epistle. He brought Christ into it.
J.T. He never lost sight of that. The apostle was the minister, and Christ was the writer. He has to reflect
{408}
what he is ministering, an expanding of what he is as minister.
P.L. So the apostle would get free of what was uncomely. It is needful to be thus exercised and have the grace needed bestowed upon us.
J.T. You set your face against it, all the time, because natural proclivities only mar the vessel.
Rem. In the beginning of Matthew's gospel we read, "The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, ... Son of Abraham" -- the idea of a generation according to God.
J.T. Yes, showing that it is a prime thought, hence it is "Abraham begat", and so forth. It is a progenitive thought, and it is involved in @Genesis 22 -- the *ram* caught in the thicket involves the progenitive thought.
E.B.McC. Would you say a little as to the spirit of the covenant? "Not of letter, but of spirit".
J.T. The allusion to the spirit of the covenant is not at first to the Holy Spirit, but it merges into the Holy Spirit. In this chapter, verse 17, it is said, "the Lord is the Spirit", that is, the Spirit of the new covenant. We have to learn it from Christ -- He is the Spirit of it. There is the combination of the Lord and the Spirit. Thus the new covenant is made effective "even as by the Lord the Spirit".
W.J.H. Is that a reference to the Lord personally or the Spirit?
J.T. I think both. It is a unique reference; a combination, it seems to me, of the Lord and the Spirit in view of the peculiar subject on hand, the thought arising from the spirit of the covenant. Primarily, the covenant is expressed in Him, but He becomes also the instrument of effecting it. The combination of the Lord's authority and the Spirit is very remarkable in view of the effectuation in us of the new covenant. The spirit of the covenant may be viewed as an objective thought, but then it becomes in Christ instrumental according to verses 17 and 18. "*We* all, looking ... are transformed ... by the Lord the Spirit". That would include the
{409}
Spirit of the new covenant. It is an objective thing and we, as looking on it, take on the glory of it, we absorb it, as it were. But then there is the instrumentality in it -- "by the Lord the Spirit". We absorb the glory, but there is also instrumentality to effect it.
J.C.S. It might almost be rendered "Lord Spirit".
J.T. It seems a blend, as it were, of the Lord and the Spirit, an instrumental thought to make effective what is presented objectively. We need authority for that. It runs on in the types, particularly to Deuteronomy, where Moses is hardly presented as directly acting for Jehovah, but rather on his own account. It is "the words of Moses", but then, speaking thus he is king in Jeshurun, recognised among an upright people. His authority is there, only greatly modified. It is "the Lord the Spirit" for the effectuation of the covenant in a modified authority, but still authority, the *Lord* being there. It seems to point to the fact that the Lord is a quickening Spirit. The last Adam is a quickening Spirit. The covenant is an objective thought, even the spirit of it, as in verse 6, but then it is alluded to as effecting something -- it quickens. The Lord the Spirit in the end of the chapter brings in the authority which is needed, but such authority as is typified in Moses.
C.C.C. Does this bear on the enjoyment of covenant conditions after the Supper, in contrast to the ministerial side of the service? You have been dealing with the lovability of the saints and that Christ in the character presented here, is seen in Moses in Deuteronomy.
J.T. I think so. This chapter contemplates the great general administration of the covenant, but it enters into the saints¬ position as assembled, and I believe that is where the Lord is seeking to help us. The Lord comes in in relation to the breaking of the bread. Whilst He is Head, that is not the first thought. The first thought is the will of God -- "by which will we have been sanctified". The Lord comes in in the breaking of bread in relation to what suggests Him as carrying out the will of God and
{410}
bringing us into it; for this we must be subject -- in accord with the will of God. There is no headship without the body, and the body requires the thought of the will of God. We are brought under rule, hence in view of the Lord coming in, room must be made in this sense, for the complete subjugation of everything to the Lord. All this enters into the truth of the bread. The covenant in this chapter does not deal with the bread at all, but with the cup. In it there is a conformation, bringing us into line with the Lord, so we are changed into the same image. That makes room for headship. He comes in Himself and we must leave with Him what He may do.
Ques. In what character does He come in in the breaking of the bread?
J.T. *He* comes in. That is the first thing. Those that came from Emmaus said He was known to them in the breaking of bread, but He vanished. The counterpart of that is that He comes in at Jerusalem amongst the brethren, but found conditions not quite right. It is useless talking of headship *there* -- there must be adjustment first, and this is a priestly service.
P.L. Does appearing in another form suggest that the Lord may take different forms according to the condition of the saints?
J.T. I think so; we must make provision for this -- His inscrutability in this respect. The form in @Mark 16 is a substantial change. What form was it? Who knows? It is what He was capable of, and the more spiritual we are the more we shall recognise this.
W.J.H. He presented Himself living during the forty days.
J.T. That is another thought; what did He have in mind in that? Then He assembled with them -- what is in that? We have to make room for the Lord to come in.
C.F.I. You would not expect each Lord's day morning meeting to take the same form?
{411}
J.T. No. The Lord comes in -- we must make room for Him, thus there is freshness.
J.C.S. It is the Person that comes in.
J.T. "It is the Lord" and we must make room for what He may do -- what He may think needful.
P.L. Does that not imply elasticity as to the character of a 'word' given?
J.T. Quite so, it is a question of being spiritual in the assembly. The difficulty is when the Lord comes in -- then we often fail; all was apparently in order until the Lord came in in @Luke 24: 36.
W.H.W. Would this chapter help us in the way of adjustment following on from what was said about @Luke 24, where it is said the disciples were troubled when the Lord came in?
J.T. I think it may be rightly linked with that. Our chapter is the continuation of the thought of adjustment. If He comes in, as He does, you may look for this sort of thing, the combination of authority with spiritual power, all to the end of effecting a change in us. Hence the importance of our accustoming ourselves to intentness of mind. The more we fix our minds on what is before us the more the transformation will take place. The Lord is objectively amongst us, but He is there to serve us, to effect the change into the same image, "even as by the Lord the Spirit".
A.M.H. Is this change something effected when together; our being brought to some apprehension of the Lord?
J.T. Yes. But it is also a great general thought and must not be restricted to the saints being together. Still we all with unveiled face "looking on the glory of the Lord" contemplates us as together. At any rate it enters into our position "as in assembly"; no time could be more appropriate.
J.M. Is the result similarity in transformation?
J.T. It involves what is presented to us. We are not beholding one another -- we are beholding the glory of
{412}
the Lord unitedly, and thus we are changed into the same image.
E.B. From glory to glory; will it be some form of glory seen in the Lord as He comes in?
J.T. The glory of the Lord is what shines in Him as effecting the new covenant. A change in the Lord is not spoken of, the change is in us.
W.H.W. Moses¬ face shone only. When the Lord comes in, the brethren's faces would all shine. It says the disciples were *glad* when they saw the Lord.
J.T. Quite so. The point here is what is in the Lord. "Looking on the glory of the Lord" -- it is very vivid, very clear.
R.G.L. Would "Lord" here suggest Jehovah, God of the covenant?
J.T. No. It is Christ. He is the Spirit of the covenant, being the Mediator of it.
Ques. Would that be the answer to the Lord's prayer in @John 17: "that they may behold my glory"?
J.T. @John 17 is not covenant glory. I do not think it is alluded to in that chapter. "That they may behold my glory which thou hast given me" -- it is family glory there.
C.F.I. The glory of the Lord -- the One who has made God known, is the One who has effectuated the covenant.
J.T. Yes. There is more in the declaration of God than what we have here, but it is on that line. The allusion is to the shining in Moses¬ face on which Israel could not look. We can unitedly look on the glory of our Mediator.
Rem. In my inquiry I was connecting it with @Exodus 34.
J.T. That is covenant glory, but @John 17 is not that. John's thought is on the highest plane -- it is the Father. The Father is not connected with the covenant -- it is God.
{413}
J.M. Might "from glory to glory" have reference to the variety of attributes of the Lord?
J.T. I think "from glory to glory" refers to change in us. We are capable of this -- change from one glory to another. Stephen's face shone like that of an angel. As he proceeded in his wonderful testimony other glories shone in him. When he kneeled down and prayed for his murderers he shone in his Master's glory on the cross. We should seek through exercise the capability of taking on glory.
E.B.McC. The new covenant is peculiarly effective in glorifying the saints.
J.T. That is how it is seen here. The apostle in writing would fill their minds and hearts with the richness of it. The parenthesis (verses 7 - 16) is to fill out the richness of it. We have the main facts in verses 1 - 6 and 17 to the end, but the richness and glory of the new covenant is outlined in the parenthesis. You have first the ministry of the Spirit subsisting in glory, (verse 8); and then, verse 9, the ministry of righteousness abounding in glory; then verse 10, the surpassing glory; and verse 11, that which *abides* subsists in glory. So we have peculiar richness in the sense of glory. The new covenant is abiding, subsisting by the Spirit.
P.L. The radiation of love is the glory.
J.T. Yes; what God is in this sense. What God is as seen in the death of Christ, and the effect of that in the saints so as to form a domain of glory. It is a wonderful chapter in that sense. @John 17 is the domain of family glory, leading up to eternity, involving our eternal portions. This refers to our position down here. This ministry is in spite of external conditions, and makes it possible for us to be introduced into eternal conditions.
Ques. Would we have the Lord as the Mediator of the covenant before us after His supper is partaken of?
J.T. It is the Lord first coming in by way of subjugation and adjustment, then the Mediator, making room for headship. This implies that the Lord, having
{414}
us in intelligent liberty, will lead us further on, to family and eternal relations.
P.L. Would the glory of Jehovah filling the tabernacle in @Exodus 40, and the glory filling the temple answer to the two thoughts?
J.T. That is what I understand. The glory entering the tabernacle is because the saints are seen typically as entirely subject, each in his place as anointed and functioning. God intended that in the public position the whole system should function, each one in his place, the whole thing typically being alive, each taking part as he should. There is no room for any other thing at all. God says, speaking reverently, I want it all for Myself. There is no need for Moses now, no need for anyone to tell us what to do. We have learned it. We are there in relation to one another in love, and each taking his part in the dignity of the anointing. In @2 Chronicles 5 there is no anointing mentioned. In @Exodus 40 there is no singing or service mentioned, but a great deal is made of the service in @2 Chronicles 5, where there are one hundred and twenty priests and the Levites all engaged, and they reach one perfect note -- Jehovah is good and His mercy endureth for ever. They are engaged with that, and then the glory enters, and the priests cannot minister. That does not mean that the persons are not to be there; it is that the official side is no longer needed. It is sonship now. The temple position is a question of the dignity of the saints in a personal sense. In the different woods employed we have typified the sons of God answering to the divine counsel. Thus the glory of Jehovah entered and filled the house of God. It finishes with the thought of God. I think we have there reached typically the eternal state of things. It is a question of the persons now, not officials, but the saints as in their family dignity. What our chapter teaches does not reach to the idea of Solomon's temple. We have to go to Ephesians for that, the heavenly side of the truth. Ephesians opens with the *place* of our blessings, and then
{415}
how we are predestinated to sonship through Jesus Christ to God Himself. God thus reaches His own thought. There is no need of official servants. It is the liberty and dignity of our relationship with God, and that is how it will be eternally.
W.J.H. Often we do not stay long enough to get the sense in our souls of the glory of the covenant.
J.T. That is so, I am sure. It is well worth our consideration -- the place Christ has when He comes in, and what He effects.
W.H.W. Joseph told his brethren to tell his father of all his glory in Egypt.
J.T. Glory is a great subject. It is intended to be productive. It appears, we may say, properly with Abraham -- the God of glory appeared to him. God is said to be the God of glory, also the Father of it; Christ is Lord of it; and the Spirit is the Spirit of glory. Thus it is wonderfully well in hand. The ministry of the new covenant is to the end that the saints as in assembly should be glorious.
Ques. Does beholding the glory of the Lord translate itself into the true knowledge of God in our souls?
J.T. Yes -- this section proceeds on that line. Chapters 4 and 5 are wonderfully rich in their unfoldings of God in Christ and His thoughts of love, involving new creation and eternal blessing. Divine glory presented to us is to take us out of the world. It effects emancipation. To illustrate that, when Israel in the wilderness (@Exodus 16) would go back into Egypt. Aaron spoke to them, setting forth the grace of God in the priest, and as a result "they turned toward the wilderness", instead of to Egypt, and the glory appeared. God as it were said, 'You are looking in this direction and I will hold you. My glory is greater than Egypt'. The glory of the covenant is liberating, it makes us free with God. It is perfect love that casts out fear! We are, through it, restful in the presence of God, but the family glory is inductive. It leads us into the domain of family love. We get to a
{416}
perfect state of things in glory. @John 17 is inductive. The Lord requests, "I desire that where *I* am *they* also may be with me, that they may behold my glory which thou hast given me, for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world".
P.L. You mean the emancipating glory is that we may go out, the transforming glory that we may go through, and the inductive family glory is that we may go in.
J.T. That is it, the ministry of David and Solomon is inward.
J.C.S. Would there be some priestly service similar to that of Aaron in connection with the new covenant?
J.T. I think the priestly grace of Christ enters into the assembly, "His left hand is under my head, and his right hand doth embrace me", as is said in Canticles. We can look for that -- the Lord supports us in that position both as to our minds and affections.
J.C.S. Where does the Minister of the sanctuary come in in this connection?
J.T. What we have before us leads on to that. So far, it is the Lord's service to us to bring us into accord with Himself, so that we take on the traits of glory. Two men appeared in glory, Scripture says, on the mount; so that He now has us in suitable dress, and I think we may link this on with Hebrews, the Minister of the sanctuary. He is now ready to carry on the service of God. He has the sanctuary too because the saints are the sanctuary. There is preparatory work, but the chief end is the service of God.
Ques. Does the ministry of the sanctuary follow on the ministry of the covenant?
J.T. Yes. In the latter service there is a change effected in us. The Lord can thus go on with us, with whatever He may desire. The Minister of the sanctuary refers to Aaron, as set over the service of God. It is an official thought; Son over God's house is also, corresponding, as to authority, with Moses.
{417}
Ques. While the Lord is personally in heaven, He comes to us by the Spirit?
J.T. It is by the Spirit. The Spirit is the medium. The medium is not angelic as in the Old Testament generally. Divine Persons come in Spirit-wise, and we have to be spiritual to understand that. Of course the Holy Spirit is always here. The Lord comes in and we discern it is the Lord -- we do not say it is the Spirit.
Rem. It is the same Person.
J.T. No; the Spirit is one Person, and the Lord is another. The Lord can impersonate Himself in the Spirit. The last Adam is also said to be "a quickening spirit". That is said by the Spirit.
P.L. "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father" is a testimony to the perfect unity in operation in divine Persons.
J.T. Yes, One of the Persons may be fully seen in Another, and yet Each retains His distinctness.
Ques. Does not that help us to keep clear of attaching the word "persons" to the Godhead, in the sense in which we would use the word in reference to man?
J.T. There is no other word to use that I know of.
Rem. As used to designate three men there would be three different wills, and I think we need to beware of attaching the word to the Godhead.
J.T. There is no other word to use. I think it is a perfect word; as applied it conveys what is true. You may say the word "person" is not applied to divine Beings as such in Scripture, but the personal pronoun is used constantly of each of the three divine Persons. One old doctrine taught that what we call Persons were three phases of the Deity, but this is utterly erroneous. There are Three distinct Persons, and nothing is plainer in the Scripture than that. There is nothing more definitely asserted in Scripture than the Trinity.
Ques. When we worship God, do we worship a Person in the Godhead, or the Godhead?
{418}
J.T. "To us there is one God, the Father" -- a most important expression. The other two Persons are subservient to One, and Deity is presented in Him -- the Father. We worship one God, the Father. But then in @1 Corinthians 12 and @Ephesians 4 we have the Spirit first, then the Lord, and after that God. We thus travel along with the Spirit and the Lord to God. In certain connections we cannot exclude the other two Persons; the three Persons are included in the one God. But as we are standing in relation to the Mediator, we do not address God as including Him; He is on our side as towards God. In this supremely important matter wisdom lies in following the teaching and example of the apostles. The early disciples persevered in *their* teaching. What is clear throughout Acts and the epistles is the economy into which the Godhead has come; that is, One of the Persons, as already shown from Paul's writings, occupies the place of God, the other two Persons take a mediatorial position in order to effect the divine thoughts. There is abundant evidence that in abstract Deity the three Persons are in equality; and further, that the Son and the Spirit as in the economy act severally *as God*. Thus the Scriptures fully assert Deity in all three Persons. This being accepted in our souls, we have liberty in our service God-ward to appropriate the Son and the Spirit in their gracious mediatorial service on our side, enabling us to approach and worship God. Hence @Ephesians 2: 18 says, "through him [Christ] we have both access by one Spirit to the Father"; there are other similar passages.
{419}
THE SPIRIT IN THE CORINTHIAN EPISTLES (5)
@2 Corinthians 1: 21, 22; @2 Corinthians 5: 5; @2 Corinthians 6: 6; @2 Corinthians 13: 14
J.T. The subject of the Spirit, as will be observed, is less pronounced in this epistle than in the first. It links on in this one with other main subjects. We have it introduced in chapter 1 by way of establishment, the apostle treating of the aspersions upon him as to veracity. In chapter 5 the Spirit is the earnest in relation to coming things, a house which is from heaven; and in chapter 6 as standing related to the practical ordinary life of the servant; and then the final allusion is to fellowship -- the fellowship of the Spirit. Fellowship is a main thought in the first letter, but here it is connected with the Spirit in a solitary setting. The Lord will help us, I am sure, to touch on these scriptures at this time profitably. The idea of confirmation is appropriate as regards the approaching end of our meetings here, that is, not only that which should be confirmed severally, but together. "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God" -- the apostle placing himself with the Corinthians in this allusion to the Spirit reminds us of the wisdom of merging, however distinguished any one may be in the service, for after all he comes in as established in Christ, and anointed, sealed, and possessing the earnest of the Spirit in his heart.
F.W.W. Is that seen in the way the apostle uses the words "us" and "with you"?
J.T. Yes; the apostle coming down to them, established with them by God in Christ. This would hardly fit in in the first epistle, because he is dealing with serious evil conditions, but now the recovery that has been effected enables him to speak in this way, linking himself on with them. This is always a becoming attitude for us, for those who may be distinguished by
{420}
their service. Our greatest privilege lies in our part with the saints, part with Christ, of course, in relation to them.
J.C.S. Would the servant disappear in a measure? The local tent set up by the apostle in Corinth would be anointed and the servant would disappear in the anointed vessel for the moment, do you think?
J.T. I think he would enjoy that thought. In the section that leads up to the work at Corinth, he allows himself to be taken on a certain way by the brethren -- he is amenable to *their* wish.
P.L. The word "preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus)" -- this links with this happy merging, "among you".
J.T. The preaching of the Son of God would certainly suggest to the preacher that he could readily merge with the saints, because it involves the calling of God. The preaching of the Son of God is seen here in a threefold way -- by Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus. They must have preached in different places at the same time or alternately. We must assume that there would be much simplicity in their service, and in their relations one with another, but the Son of God was preached and the thought of it would lift the saints up in their minds. The apostle begins the first letter by saying that God had called them into the fellowship of His Son: "by whom ye have been called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord", @1 Corinthians 1: 9. Even as in the fellowship the saints are dignified. Being established "in Christ" takes us outside of the world, and is the idea of status; "the fellowship of his Son" contemplates us as in the world, but in the fellowship, that is, held in the fellowship; shutting out the world and involving our loyalty to Christ and to one another.
E.E. Does the earnest of the Spirit, and the establishment connected with it, stand related to the promises given effect to in the Son of God?
{421}
J.T. I think so. I should like to dwell a little on this point of the fellowship, the distinction between it and "in Christ". As just mentioned, "in Christ" is an out-of-the-world status mentioned in @Romans 6, and in @Romans 12 we are said to be "one body in Christ", not yet "the body of Christ", but given that status of "in Christ" as a body of persons. Here, we are established in Christ. That is a further thought, the bearing of it is out-of-the-world, whereas the fellowship of God's Son contemplates us as in the world, but in spite of that maintained for God -- the fellowship of God's Son involving the security and dignity of the position. "In Christ" bears on the future, but it also gives lustre to us here.
C.F.I. Is the second epistle designed to raise the saints to the level that is proper to christianity?
J.T. It is; the level is the Son of God. It is not the fellowship of the Son of God, but the Son of God *preached* and what enters into that. One idea is the faithfulness of God; we are on that ground -- "yea is in him".
E.W.C. Would the fellowship require a corresponding faithfulness down here, to the status given us in Christ, apart from this world?
J.T. Quite so. It is a great thing to lay hold of the status -- the way things are worked out in Romans: "reckon yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus" (@Romans 6: 11); "the wages of sin is death; but the act of favour of God, eternal life in Christ Jesus", @Romans 6: 23. The early verses of chapter 8 speak of the position "in Christ" as affording liberty to our souls; and then "one body in Christ", @Romans 12: 5. The mind is let into that, the position we have as over against what is in the world.
C.F.I. Is there any distinction between "in Christ" and "in Christ Jesus"?
J.T. Not much, beyond that "Jesus" brings in the Person more; "in Christ" is the anointed position.
{422}
P.L. Would you attach in this epistle the thought of the Son of God more to levitical operations, and would "in Christ" here be more of the house of Aaron?
J.T. Well, quite so, the Son of God is the final testimony to men. Dignity and power are there, as bearing on service. The Son of God as "preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus) did not become yea and nay, but yea *is* in him". The full testimony of God, involving His faithfulness, is there, and all this enters into the minister's position. Finality is the line he is on. It is not a time of guessing, but a time of certainty. It is obvious that the Son of God is the final thought. He has in these last days "spoken to us in the person of the Son", @Hebrews 1: 2. It is the final thought, and the minister is final; he seeks to be that; there is a certainty about what he says.
A.S. So the thought "in Christ" would disclose the line in the apostle's mind. "If any one be in Christ, there is a new creation", @2 Corinthians 5: 17.
J.T. The whole bearing of it is towards the future -- towards heaven. It is a question of status, even the Corinthian babes are said to be "in Christ".
F.S. What about "establishes us ... in Christ"?
J.T. Establishment means that you are there from your side. The second letters are usually establishing letters. So it is in Peter's second letter. The things he brings forward, the mode by which the testimony has come to us, and by which it is made effective is through one quality coming from another quality, and another quality coming from that, and so on, @2 Peter 1: 5 - 11. So you are not dealing with mere abstract doctrine, but with substantialities. Establishment lies in substantiality, and so John presents the Spirit of God from that point of view, in the main, throughout his gospel. The anointing, the sealing, and the earnest are substantial -- all is very practical. The earnest, for instance, is said to be in our hearts -- you should know what is in your heart.
{423}
F.S. Something like the opening of John's epistle, "That which was from the beginning, that which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life", @1 John 1: 1.
J.T. Quite so.
P.L. Peter in that second epistle refers to "our beloved brother Paul" and what he has written, "according to the wisdom given to him", as set over against the untaught and ill-established.
J.T. Second letters are usually establishing. Joseph said to Pharaoh, "as regards the double repetition of the dream to Pharaoh, it is that the thing is established by God", @Genesis 41: 32.
Ques. Is the thought of establishment that one should have the thing confirmed livingly?
J.T. Yes, it is the truth substantiated that establishes you.
J.C.S. Did I understand you to say "in Christ" properly is always in a collective setting?
J.T. It is applied and entered into individually, as in @Romans 6, and @2 Corinthians 12, but culminates in the collective setting in @Ephesians 2. We are raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenly places in Christ.
P.L. In this epistle one man could speak of himself as "a man in Christ".
J.T. That is the full individual application, including the elevation attaching to it. He goes to the third heaven -- he goes "as far as", not "into", meaning that he could go thus far. He goes "into Paradise" but "as far as" the third heaven. It would seem as if that is the exaltation which is proper to those in Christ, the numeral *three* indicating that the full thought of heaven is reached. He went so far, as "a man in Christ". You could not conceive of that being predicated of babes in Christ, and yet the status "in Christ" attaches also to
{424}
them. Evidently we are to be in heaven as men "in Christ".
E.B.McC. Is it brought in here to elevate the Corinthians, to get them off the low ground they were on -- being associated with Paul in this way would have that effect, would it not?
J.T. Yes, I think it is drawing them on to his own ground. The tendency was to divert them from Paul, and he is here stressing common christian ground with them.
P.L. Would it be that he stoops to them when at their worst, and grades them as "babes in Christ"; and takes them over to his side when at their best, here in the expression "with you in Christ"? If we are patient and make the most of brethren at their worst, we can have the privilege of having part with them at their best.
J.T. Quite so. Generally our wisdom is to clothe the saints in their best garments, but hating those spotted by the flesh. Throughout this epistle the apostle identifies himself much with the Corinthians.
P.L. This epistle indicates the wealth accruing from the investment made by love in the first epistle.
A.S. He would have, as the end in view, the whole Ephesian position.
J.T. As he wrote he had been engaged in his great work at Ephesus, and he would have nothing less in his mind for the Corinthians than what had been reached there.
J.C.S. When things go badly in a locality there is a tendency to speak evil of it and rob the saints of their proper status. The apostle encourages us here to keep the full mind of God for His people in view in such circumstances.
J.T. Paul always spoke well of the Corinthians; "*Ye* are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men", @2 Corinthians 3: 2. He did not have the evil things written in his heart. The Holy Spirit would
{425}
never write evil things about the saints in one's heart -- He writes good things. "Known and read of all men" evidently alludes to the way Paul spoke of his beloved Corinthian converts.
W.H.U. Why was the Son of God preached in this particular way?
J.T. I think it was to establish certainty, the finality, the fixedness, of what is presented to the Corinthians. There was no variation in it, it was not "yea and nay", but "yea". What is presented in the Son of God is fixed, permanent. The apostle shows that he was not out of keeping with that. They were imputing duplicity of mind to him, whereas there was no duplicity whatever; it was the calculation of love that kept him from going to Corinth. That he stayed away because he loved them there is no question.
P.L. That was seen in perfection in his blessed Master in relation to the death of Lazarus.
J.T. Yes, He stayed away two days. The apostle says it was "to spare you". It was not that he did not have the means to come or anything like that, but he wanted to spare them. It enters into the anointing. In what he said in chapter 1 the allusion would be to that -- "he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts". It is the bundle of life -- all bound up in this, and God has done it. What is seen here should bring us very near to one another; those who are ministering in a distinct way, and those ministered to are bound up in this way by God Himself, and established thus. So that the minister carries the saints -- bound up with them, as one of them. God has set him in that way, and he loves to be there because the saints are our heritage in one way -- all our joy lies in relation to them. Paul loved the Corinthians in spite of their naughtiness.
E.B.McC. The anointing of God was shining out in the apostle in the love and dignity in which he
{426}
regarded them, and this, should have been in the Corinthians towards him.
J.T. There was very great disparity between them. Anyone comparing Paul with them would see the disparity in their way of doing things and his; but this anointing that he speaks of was calculated to bring them on to where he was.
Ques. Is it preparatory to the coming in of the glory to take possession? I was thinking of @Exodus 40 -- the anointing precedes the glory coming in.
J.T. That is right -- the anointing is needed so that the divine glory should be resident.
E.B.McC. What hinders our allowing the anointing to act in this way?
J.T. I think there is too much room for the natural. The anointing precludes all incongruities in us. We were speaking yesterday of chapter 6 of the first epistle, as to our bodies being brought to a high level as members of Christ, the temples of the Spirit. There should be nothing contrary to that. The anointing here is a question of holy dignity in the saints, and then the sealing is that we belong to Another. Thus you cannot belong to associations in this world. Then finally the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts is an inward possession, and satisfies us. It is a positive thought, and what is in our *hearts* should be felt.
Ques. Is the anointing a secret thing and the sealing a more public thing?
J.T. I think the anointing and the sealing are public. The anointing is dignity, God committing Himself to us for testimony. The sealing is ownership -- we are God's; we belong to God in this positive way by the seal. We have elsewhere "the seal of the living God", @Revelation 7: 2. The earnest is more private. It is, as it were, an *income* that maintains you in all this.
E.B.McC. So being sealed you would not join up with anything in this world for betterment.
{427}
J.T. That is a good point. Repudiation of the worldly combinations and claims marks one divinely sealed.
Rem. Both these are seen in Christ, the sealing and the anointing.
J.T. Quite so, that is @John 6, "him hath God the Father sealed", and in @Luke 4 the Lord speaks of His anointing.
J.C.S. As consistency with the anointing and sealing would deprive us of certain things here, is the earnest brought in to show that we would be abundantly recompensed?
J.T. The anointing and the sealing put the obligation upon us of conforming to them; the obligation may involve suffering; it is pretty certain to, but then the earnest is compensation -- the income that sustains us in the position taken up. It is the earnest of all that we are coming into. It is a tangible possession. You are not left without an abundant income to sustain you.
J.C.S. Does the earnest go with the status we have in Christ?
J.T. Yes, and to sustain us in the circumstances of suffering. The apostle brings in the Holy Spirit in chapter 6 in the midst of thirty-seven things mentioned -- an extraordinary combination of experiences he was constantly going through. "In the Holy Spirit" was the great dignifying element that characterised him in these experiences.
E.W.C. In chapter 5: 5 the apostle says, "he that has wrought us for this very thing is God". Does that refer to a full completed salvation resulting in mortality being swallowed up of life?
J.T. Yes. That is another thing. What we are speaking of here is the anointing and the sealing as effected by God. In chapter 5 the earnest stands in relation to the house from heaven, the great future. It does not say that it is in our hearts -- "he that has wrought us for this very thing is God". That is, when we enter on our house which is from heaven -- there is
{428}
no disparity between it and us; in the meantime the earnest of the Spirit maintains us in relation to that.
J.C.S. "In the Holy Spirit", chapter 6: 6. Is that the working out of spiritual power in Paul's difficulties?
J.T. Yes. It is wonderful what items he mentions: "in the Holy Spirit", "in long suffering", and so on. The Holy Spirit uses the word "in", it involves power. You can understand how that would enable him to go through all the experiences he mentions.
J.C.S. Suffering "in the Holy Spirit" would put him outside all that which marked him as a natural man, so in his service he would not be impeded by natural feelings.
J.T. You can see the danger of that at Philippi. The Spirit of God gives us actual facts in the historical part, and these show there were discrepancies. While the life of Jesus was seen in the doings of Paul in his mortal body, still the life of Paul could not be said to be the life of Jesus. There were discrepancies, as, for instance at Philippi, @Acts 16: 37, but the general thought is that in all his experiences the Holy Spirit had His place.
W.J.H. The great thing is to *realise* the presence of the Spirit of God -- not to regard Him theoretically.
J.T. The Lord is pressing that upon us.
W.J.H. At the end of the dispensation the Spirit will express Himself, "the Spirit and the bride say, Come" -- the Spirit having a real voice in the saints.
J.T. The persistent faithfulness of the Spirit is very remarkable. Even in a course that was questionable Paul refers to this: "the Holy Spirit testifies to me in every city, saying that bonds and tribulations await me", @Acts 20: 23.
E.B.McC. In our sufferings, love expresses itself through the Spirit.
J.T. Yes. God loves to see us go through them, and thus develop the life that is fragrant to Him. Referring again to chapter 5: 5, the setting there links on with the resurrection, only it is not treated as in the
{429}
first epistle, but from the standpoint of the believer's intelligent anticipations. "We know that if our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. For indeed in this we groan, ardently desiring to have put on our house which is from heaven; if indeed being also clothed we shall not be found naked. For indeed we who are in the tabernacle groan, being burdened; while yet we do not wish to be unclothed, but clothed, that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life. Now he that hath wrought us for this very thing is God, who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit". We are maintained in view of that by the earnest of the Spirit; that is, the earnest here is evidently in relation to our great anticipations of what is coming out of heaven, in which we shall have part.
W.H.U. Are there two thoughts connected with the earnest -- the earnest of the Spirit in this epistle and in the epistle to the Ephesians -- in the latter it is the earnest of the inheritance?
J.T. The idea of the earnest is the same, only the inheritance is mentioned there -- the full thought of God for us. As we have been noticing in the first chapter, it stands in relation to the anointing and the sealing; here in the fifth it is in relation to the anticipation of "a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens", a very great and glorious thought.
A.M.H. Does the earnest here connect the work of God, as giving assurance of the final issue?
J.T. That is how it stands. We are ready for this self-same thing. The work of God stands by itself, and the Spirit as the earnest maintains us in it, so that the hope is sure. The great richness in the allusions here to the future, to the eternal state of things, ought to appeal to us all, especially to the elder brethren. We have "a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens". It is not from the standpoint of 
{430}
@1 Corinthians 15; there it is what comes out of the grave, but here it is the building from God out of heaven.
S.F. Is this more the character of the house which we shall have eternally?
J.T. That is what is in mind -- a house from heaven characteristically; "a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens".
J.C.S. And the earnest of the Spirit is something of that in advance, so to speak; we get the thing in the earnest before it is literally realised.
J.T. Yes, that is how it stands; we shall thus be ready for the great and blessed change.
W.J.H. That would enable us to go through without being crushed in the groaning tabernacle.
Rem. We are rejoicing in anticipation, in our house which is from heaven, through having the Spirit.
J.T. "Now he that has wrought us for this very thing is God, who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit". The work of God fits us for what we are coming into and the Spirit enables us to anticipate it.
Ques. Does that link with the thought in Philippians, "if any way I arrive at the resurrection from among the dead", @Philippians 3: 11?
J.T. Yes, only Paul is there seeking to arrive at the resurrection from *among the dead*; the heavenly side of the truth he regards in that chapter as the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus. What is before us in our chapter corresponds with the latter.
W.J.H. Sometimes at the dissolution of a saint you get a wonderful evidence of victory and support of the Spirit of God, and sometimes the opposite, which is humbling.
J.T. When the former is the case there is practical testimony to the power of God. It is therefore of great importance to have this before us. We are all advancing in years, and if the testimony is to continue, we may expect to fall asleep. We are thus to be looking at the things that are unseen, which are eternal.
{431}
A.S. Peter would have the enjoyment of this, when speaking of the putting off of his tabernacle, that it was speedily to take place. Immediately he goes on to speak of the glory on the mount.
J.T. Yes. He is a fine example of what we are speaking of. The only reference in his ministry to the Son of God is in that passage. He *kept* the scene on the mount, we may say, as a treasure. He knew the Son of God, but it belonged to another to unfold that glorious title of Christ; and that was Paul. John deals with it, too. Peter in view of putting off his tabernacle brings in the glorious event. How bright and victorious he was as contemplating the putting off of his tabernacle!
Ques. The Morning Star was in his heart?
J.T. Yes, the great thing for us elder brethren is to keep the eternal state of things in mind, because dissolution will come if the testimony goes on. Peter knew his would come, but the allusion in @John 21 is to the death by which he should *glorify God*. This I am sure is what God looks for in the death of His saints -- that He is glorified.
Ques. Does the earnest enable us to understand that the glorified body will be an outward expression of what God works in us while in these mortal bodies?
J.T. Yes. The Spirit as the earnest brings in something of what the apostle speaks of, our house from heaven. We thus accept the present condition of our bodies. There are those who beautify them and become proud of them, but they are nevertheless bodies of humiliation. That is what they are called in Scripture and it is well to accept it. They are mortal and fragile. This epistle speaks of the treasure the bodies of christians contain, but they are earthen vessels, all the same.
S.F. Does what you have been saying suggest the completion of the work of God in us, fitting us for whatever position of glory He has assigned to us, what is eternal?
{432}
J.T. That is right, we are being fitted for glory. "He that has wrought us for this very thing is God". The work of God in us, is greater than our present constitution. We know that our present bodies are not in keeping with the work of God in us; it requires a house different from this -- a house from heaven. The Spirit as the earnest enables us to understand and to live in anticipation of the heavenly.
J.C.S. The house from heaven will clothe that work with what is commensurate with it.
J.T. Yes, and Philippians teaches that Christ will conform us to His body of glory. It is not Christ as here for the forty days, although the same in Person, but the condition is enhanced, it is His body of glory -- that is what we are to be conformed to.
Rem. The Thessalonians were waiting for God's Son from heaven. They would not be looking for death.
J.T. The attitude of mind of the believer is to wait for God's Son from heaven, but the dissolution of our mortal bodies is a certainty, if the testimony is to be continued. Paul, for instance, knew his would happen, and Peter his, and it is well for each of us to calculate spiritually as to his body. If we take account of what God is doing -- of the young being brought in, and the general trend, we may say that many of us will fall asleep. Not that one would dissipate the proper hope of the christian as to the Son of God coming from heaven; He will not delay when the time arrives, but He says that no one knows the hour, but the Father.
Ques. Contemplating his own death or martyrdom, would the apostle be thus able to say, "with Christ; which is far better"?
J.T. That is what he does say, but he also says that we await Christ from heaven to conform our bodies of humiliation to His body of glory. This hope is not to be weakened.
A.S. The Psalmist says, "I will walk before Jehovah in the land of the living". "Precious in the sight of
{433}
Jehovah is the death of his saints", @Psalm 116: 9, 15. I wondered if that would be in line with what the apostle speaks of -- departing to be with Christ, having the living in view?
J.T. Quite so. From the time of the first burial, what we have in Scripture is the hope of resurrection. As the Lord says, "that world and the resurrection", but He says those who are there are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection, which does not go so far as the idea of "our house ... from heaven" or "his body of glory". These latter expressions indicate the proper hope and expectation of christians.
W.J.H. Would you say another word as to the Lord's body in the forty days -- flesh and bone -- as distinguished from His body of glory?
J.T. The period of forty days is an educative matter. The Lord might have ascended at once, as He indicated to Mary, but He sojourned here on *their* account. Why should He not go up to heaven at once? It was on their account, to show them how He came in and went out amongst them in His condition as risen, and how He could change His form. I do not think that is contemplated in His body of glory. I think the change of form and other features of the forty days are to show us *what is possible spiritually*. Christ's present condition in glory expresses the full purpose of God for man. We are to be like Him as manifested.
S.F. Would you say a word as to the difference between the state described in the eighth verse and being clothed with the house from heaven?
J.T. In verse 8, "we are confident, I say, and pleased rather to be absent from the body and present with the Lord". He speaks there as he does in Philippians of disembodiment and what it implies -- "absent from the body and present with the Lord". He is pleased at the thought of it. It is not final, but temporary. The purpose of God requires that we are to be conformed to
{434}
the body of glory of Christ -- that is the full thought of divine counsel for man.
F.S. Is that involved in the term "Son of God"?
J.T. I think it is. He is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection", @Romans 1: 4. Sonship is declared in resurrection, but it goes on to the present condition -- He is now in His body of glory.
J.C.S. That seems a climax to all the ground we have covered, and it puts a touch of glory on it.
J.T. It does. One feels encouraged to speak of it in view of the elder brethren, and younger ones, too. It is just as well to calculate according to the facts presented to us "to number our days". It is well to have this before us always, and to understand the Spirit as the earnest in that connection; having a tangible hope and enjoyment beforehand of what is coming.
S.H.B. Is "the body of glory" defined in Scripture?
J.T. I do not know that it can be. I do not know that language can suffice to describe the body of glory of Christ. It is surpassing. On the mount of transfiguration, there is a suggestion of it, but what was seen there was for testimony here. Peter says they were "eye-witnesses of his majesty". That is hardly the eternal view.
C.H.H. Is the body of glory commensurate with the glory?
J.T. It is commensurate with God's full thought and purpose in man. One's idea is that there will be no discrepancy between us and that. Christ is entirely in keeping with the glory where He has gone, and so shall we be, for God has wrought us for it.
C.H.H. Is the earnest we have of that an encouragement on account of the outward man perishing?
J.T. It is, and it enables us to grasp something of the eternal purpose of God for us.
Ques. Why have we to wait for it?
J.T. That is a question for God to answer. He has His own calendar and things happen according to it.
{435}
@Revelation 10 says that the angel "swore by him that lives to the ages of ages, ... that there should be no longer delay". It is a question of the calendar. There is no delay when the time is reached. The Lord Himself says, "No one knows ... nor the Son, but the Father", @Mark 13: 32. It is kept in the secrets of the Father.
C.F.I. Will the manifestation before the judgment seat clear the way?
J.T. I think so. Our minds will then be entirely adjusted and brought to God's mind.
W.H.W. Is the idea here that we make room for the Spirit of God to bring this home to us so that the work may proceed? "He that has wrought us for this very thing is God". This work is to go on.
J.T. The work is to go on and we are to make room for it as you say. Now the last reference is to the fellowship. "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all". It is remarkable that we have the Trinity again here. The Corinthians are left with the thought of God brought in in this way. It would look as if the testimony of these two letters was on that principle -- *three*, the full thought of the Trinity entering into it, the witnesses Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus corresponding to it, so that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be established. There is a remarkable threefold testimony to christianity in these epistles. "Communion of the Holy Spirit" is remarkable. It is not "with" but "of" the Spirit. Indeed throughout these epistles it is characteristic, the fellowship *of* God's Son, and *of* Christ's death in the bread and the cup, and the fellowship *of* the Spirit. In John's epistle it is *with*.
J.C.S. Is it -- in this last passage -- that the Spirit gives character to it?
J.T. I think that is right, and He has part in it. The Son gives character to it -- dignity -- the Spirit pervades it, the great binding influence in our fellowship. The word *communion* here is the same as *fellowship* in
{436}
@1 Corinthians 1: 9. "In the Holy Spirit", chapter 6: 6, would govern all Paul's experiences. He would be seen in that way, which would imply the fellowship. It is not a human affair -- the Spirit of God is in it.
Ques. Is the idea of *fellowship* conveyed in the peace offering?
J.T. Yes. The peace offering includes not only the brethren, but divine Persons have part in it. In the verse we are considering, @2 Corinthians 13: 14, the three divine Persons are contemplated as affecting the saints in blessing.
E.C. Would there be the thought, in the fellowship of the Spirit, of participation in power in all the Spirit has for us?
J.T. Fellowship here means "common participation", not merely that we have the same thought one towards another, but there is a bond involving the idea of partnership and the Spirit is in it. It is *of* Him -- it is that kind of fellowship -- the fellowship of the Spirit.
{437}
TOGETHER IN ASSEMBLY
@Luke 24: 29 - 49; @John 20: 17 - 23
J.T. What is in mind is that we should consider together the assembly as convened, or saints as come together, to use scriptural language, "in assembly". The subject is before the Lord's people very much, and has been for many years, but we are all somewhat slow to follow what the Lord calls attention to. There is steady progress, I believe, in all the gatherings of the saints in the knowledge of the principles and customs that should govern us as together "in assembly". What is to be observed in @Luke 24 is that the saints as gathered were proceeding well, saying what was suitable, until the Lord came in and then they were confused, that is, I think they would set forth what often marks us in that part of the assembly service. The point at which the Lord enters is that which requires most attention; it is least understood. We get on fairly well with regard to the public side as the Colossians did. They were going on well as regards order, so much so that the apostle said he rejoiced in them, beholding their order and the firmness of their faith in Christ (@Colossians 2: 5). As regards the spiritual side there was defectiveness and so in this chapter: the saints were saying the right things, and the Lord came in while they were saying them, as if to show His approval, yet when He came in there was confusion. Luke's account in this chapter is lengthy and is occupied almost entirely with this matter, with the adjustment of the saints, and transferring them from what is visible, and from the state of unbelief, to the state not only of belief, but of spirituality. John, on the other hand, makes no allusion whatever to any confusion when the Lord stood in the midst of the company.
E.B.McC. That is to say, we can pick up order, what is outwardly seen, but when it comes to what is spiritual we break down -- is that the thought?
{438}
J.T. That is manifest here; being confounded and being frightened, it says, they "supposed they beheld a spirit". They were confused by the Lord coming in. There is nothing just like that today, for the Lord does not come in bodily, but still I believe what is seen here is the crux of the matter. There is very little discernment as to the Lord coming in and how matters stand when He comes in.
J.C.S. When you speak of Him coming in, just what point in the meeting have you in your mind?
J.T. As the Supper is celebrated. The word used by Luke and Paul as to that suggests an *action of mind* in the saints, that their minds are engaged intently in remembering Him, and the Lord seizes the opportunity to come in. Not at any time is there a greater opportunity than at the Lord's supper, because the intent of the Supper is to occupy us with Christ, to bring Him to our minds.
J.C.S. For calling Him to mind.
J.T. Yes. It is a word used only four times in the New Testament and three refer to this incident. See @Luke 22: 19; @1 Corinthians 11: 24, 25; @Hebrews 10: 3.
E.B.McC. When the two returned they found the eleven gathered, and that is what you mean by order; they were gathered and said, "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon". They were speaking of a risen Lord.
J.T. The facts are recorded as if they were approved. They returned "the same hour" we are told. The Lord had appeared to them in the breaking of bread, and they returned the same hour to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together and others with them; and they were saying, "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon", which would mean they were occupied with what entered into the dispensation, that is, it was to be marked by *grace*. The Lord first appeared to an erring one, that is, grace is to reign, and then the breaking of bread was also to mark the dispensation, it brought the
{439}
Lord in. The two related what had happened on the way and "how he was made known to them in the breaking of bread". These seem to be two features of the dispensation, the one involving the gospel and the other the assembly; grace was going to reign, and the Lord was to come in, and hence it would not be a dead, but a living state of things. It would be marked by definite divine incomings, not something fixed, with the same service according to date for every Sunday of the year; but the Lord coming in, so as to impart fresh impressions. That was what was marking them, as it says, "as they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst", as if He approved; but now He is there they are not equal to the great privilege and opportunity.
W.J.H. Does the forty days of the Lord's sojourn in resurrection indicate that that kind of thing would go on during the whole period?
J.T. I think that is the thought. The idea of the forty days is thus educative for the saints. It is preparatory to the heavenly side, to our part in it -- the intention being that we should be taught, that is, learn spiritually. There would be no need of the Lord staying here if it were not that education was needed, and the education now is in view of our spirituality. If spirituality is learned, there should be no confusion if the Lord comes in. We should be perfectly restful and responsive as He comes in.
Ques. Would the reference in the beginning of the Acts, "to whom also he presented himself living, after he had suffered" (@Acts 1: 3) be in line with what you are saying about the living state of things?
J.T. I think that is a good connection. He presented Himself as if to call attention to Himself as alive, and to intimate that christianity is to be a living state of things.
J.C.S. Breaking bread would bring that consciously to our souls -- He presents Himself alive.
J.T. That is the thought. John's gospel fills out the spiritual side in chapter 14, making it continuous, not only the immediate period after the Lord ascended, but
{440}
throughout the whole dispensation, even inclusive of remnant times, the last days. He makes it continuous that the Lord would find a way of coming in, even to one person, that is, if suitable conditions exist. If conditions for their presence exist, divine Persons will come in.
C.F.I. They were confounded because the Lord was there in a new way, and they did not recognise Him.
J.T. They were not sufficiently spiritual, that is the lesson.
Ques. Is the "fear of the Jews" in @John 20 a different character of fear from that referred to in @Luke 24?
J.T. It is. The "fear of the Jews" is a wholesome fear, whereas the fear here is an unwholesome one. The fear "of the Jews" means that we do not want the current Jewish element. The more spiritual we are the more we are in dread of the current and religious element.
A.M.H. What would help us toward this spirituality?
J.T. I suppose the first thing is faith. We should cultivate faith. As we go back in the chapter there were those who loved the Lord and had observed outwardly what was right -- that is the women. It says in the end of chapter 23, "having returned they prepared aromatic spices and ointments, and remained quiet on the sabbath, according to the commandment". They observed what was outwardly right, but they were unbelieving in that they did not believe what the Lord had said about His resurrection. That is the first right thing, faith to believe what the Lord has said, to reckon what He says is true; that is, I think, the first part of our instruction. They observed the commandment in remaining quiet on the sabbath, but then, they came to look for a dead Christ instead of a living One, and the chapter is occupied with meeting that situation, until we come to these two. The instruction is brought down to these two who had their backs to Jerusalem and yet they could converse about the Lord. The Lord deals with them first by the Scriptures and makes their hearts burn, and then He deals with them on purely spiritual lines; that
{441}
is to say, He entered in with them according to their constraint, and "as he was at table ... having taken the bread, he blessed, and having broken it, gave it to them. And their eyes were opened, and they recognised him. And he disappeared from them". That is a spiritual manifestation and they were now equal to it, they were affected by the spiritual touch, for they returned to Jerusalem at once.
Ques. Ought the fact that the Lord had appeared to the two going to Emmaus, and also to Simon, have been regarded by them not merely as evidence of the resurrection, but as calculated to awaken expectations in their hearts that He would appear to them collectively?
J.T. Just so. Taking up two particularly to teach them indicates how the Lord works; He takes up two or more so as to give a lead. The two He worked with here showed that they were taking in His way of teaching, for they were *learning*. They were not terrified and affrighted. It says, "He disappeared from them. And they said to one another, Was not our heart burning in us as he spoke to us?" They were learning and referred back to what happened before, but this spiritual touch with the Lord had led them further. "Rising up the same hour, they returned to Jerusalem". The education had a perfect effect upon them, and it pointed to one thing, Jerusalem was the centre. They must go back there. They retraced their steps intelligently after the Lord had been manifested to them in a spiritual way. The progressive education is manifest.
Ques. Have you in mind that this appearing to the two on the way to Emmaus is an individual appearing, indicating that the Lord would come to us as individuals, or is it something learned in the assembly?
J.T. The facts given point to the Lord's way of recovery, involving spiritual instruction, and this is generally on individual lines. But I think we should keep clearly in mind the Lord's way, that He would take up two as He took up twelve. He took up three for
{442}
special purposes, and now He takes up two. He took up Peter in a negative way and allowed Satan to tempt him, for a purpose. Now He allows two to go this path for a purpose, and walks a long way -- walks with them -- with their backs turned to Jerusalem, so that we have His education in two -- an important thing. The Lord takes up one or two or more for their own sakes, of course, but also to fit them for the education of others. These two proved to be a testimony in the assembly to the Lord's way of teaching us spiritually.
Rem. It is striking that they did not know Him, yet He walked a good way with them, but in the breaking of the bread they knew Him. That seems to be the point of their return to the company.
J.T. I think that is the lesson in it. The Lord uses the moment as if He knew they were aware of this feature of the instruction. They were impressionable spiritually. To make us spiritual is the most refined feature of God's work in us.
P.L. It is "one of them" in verse 18, but in verse 29 it says, "they constrained him", they have now drawn together in spiritual affinity in their determination to detain Christ. Is it a feature of spirituality that we must at all costs have the Lord -- for His own sake?
J.T. Yes. In verse 29 "they constrained him, saying, Stay with us". They have arrived at the mutual side which normally will always make room for the Lord.
Ques. Would you say more about the two giving a lead, how would it work out in local assemblies?
J.T. It is *testimony*. In these two there was adequate testimony. I think that is one thing that enters into it. Matthew makes more of it than Luke, but still you have in Luke two men speaking with Jesus on the mount, two men at the sepulchre, two men at the ascension. This is to give full testimony. If two brothers have the same thought in this sense the thing is established. It is an immense advantage if there are two or more exercised in the same way as to the truth and the testimony generally.
{443}
They confirm each other and the saints as a whole. But this is very different from special friendships, which develop partisan feeling.
P.L. When he wrote his epistle to the Colossian saints in regard to the great subject of spirituality, the beloved apostle says, "Paul, apostle of Christ Jesus, by God's will, and Timotheus", @Colossians 1: 1.
J.T. The principle of testimony is in two or three. Throughout Scripture God is pleased to give three, but two is adequate testimony. Abraham says to the man in hades, "They have Moses and the prophets", @Luke 16: 29. He did not say, "Moses and prophets and psalms", as the Lord said. Moses and the prophets are *adequate*.
W.J.H. As in our chapter two having experience livingly that Christ had risen would be a great asset to the company.
J.C.S. "Made known to them in the breaking of bread" -- is that where the spiritual side comes in?
J.T. Yes. "This do in remembrance of me", @1 Corinthians 11: 24. The mind is intently occupied recalling Him and the Lord comes in. As He comes in, the position in the assembly changes. He is with us now, and becomes the Leader in the service. Of course this is all spiritual. It is a question of our spiritual ability to grasp it, and to be available to the Lord for what He has in mind.
C.H.H. It says in verse 36 "as they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst". I wondered whether the testimony of the two, as it takes place in the assembly, brings in the Lord?
J.T. It tended to make conditions suitable; here there was no breaking of bread. Normally the breaking of bread occasions His coming in. Notice He is in *their* midst, not *the* midst, as in John; here it is in "their midst", as in @Matthew 18. Honour is paid to them. He is honouring them because of the conditions, as if He would say, That is acceptable to Me.
{444}
E.W.C. Would you gather from this scripture that the experience at Emmaus being put into words for the benefit of all, was instrumental to the Lord coming in spiritually?
J.T. Yes; what the two were saying, combined with what others were saying, made the conditions suitable *so far*.
F.H.N. If the hearts of two of the Lord's people were burning towards Him before we come to the breaking of bread, would that help the whole company?
J.T. It would, and that raises the question as to how we behave preceding the great occasion, particularly how we are in our houses; whether the anointing has a place in them.
E.B.McC. We may be like these two from Emmaus -- senseless and slow of heart. We have the word recorded which the apostle received from the glory, "*I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you", @1 Corinthians 11: 23. If we really held this in affection would it not move us to be in a suitable state?
J.T. I think we should come forth from "the dwellings of Jacob" for the great occasion, in dignity; the anointing attaching to us.
P.L. Is it like the wave loaves brought from Israel's tents?
J.T. Yes; that was typically a testimony to the state of the people in their houses. In that sense no one is to appear before God empty. You can understand that these two did not come empty. They were full of the impression they had received.
A.M.H. Why was it if these two persons were in line, there was confusion at the Lord's coming in?
J.T. I suppose the general spirituality was low. They spoke as they were impressed, no doubt, but then we cannot be always sure that we are leading the saints. It is no small thing to give a lead that will give character to the assembly. Whilst a lead may be given it is a
{445}
question whether the saints are leadable, or are merely members of a congregation.
J.C.S. Speaking of the Lord coming in, is it the same occasion in Luke as in John?
J.T. In Luke He comes in in relation to them "gathered", and what they were "saying" is mentioned. In John it is the *persons* that were there, and having received a message beforehand from the Lord by a qualified person, they were concerned lest a certain element should come in -- that is the Jews. If the two records refer to the same occasion, John's is abstract, connecting the disciples entirely with the work of God in them; and Luke gives their actual state.
E.E.S.L. Is it significant that in Luke, who alone gives the commemorative side of the supper, we have this expression that the Lord "was made known to them in the breaking of bread"?
J.T. It is very significant as bearing on the Lord coming to us. The record is of what happened. He was at table. It was an ordinary meal, but He seized the opportunity of breaking the bread to show Himself, and then vanished. It is an example of how He takes advantage of opportunities.
Ques. Would the apostle's word, "let a man prove himself, and thus eat" (@1 Corinthians 11: 28), be with a view to the adjustment necessary?
J.T. That is what it is intended to be. The apostle is dealing in @1 Corinthians 11 with public order, and he enjoins that each should examine himself and so eat. If there is that process there will be readiness for spiritual manifestations -- the divine incomings.
E.W.C. The instruction you have in mind is in view of the saints together in assembly, sisters being present, arriving at a spiritual state in the company which not merely includes the active part, but also those who are necessarily silent.
J.T. It is the state of the company that is the point. You may have two or more spiritual ones present, but
{446}
the general state of the company may affect the position and cause confusion. So that you get, for instance, the Lord apprehended by some spiritual brother, and he proceeds on that line; we are now moving in association with Christ, and the brother speaks to the Father or God in the sense that the Spirit of adoption is active, yet another brother will follow and address the Lord as if He were in heaven. Such an intrusion would interfere with the order of the service of God which the Lord would conduct in His assembly.
Ques. They supposed they saw a spirit. Do you think we sometimes fall back on supposition -- for instance, giving out an unsuitable hymn?
J.T. I am sure that is true very often. The secret of that is that we come with a purpose to do something and think it must be done. It may be we have a hymn in our minds. What I observe is that the hymn book is not much utilised -- certain hymns have an undue place in brothers¬ minds. If a brother gives thanks or mentions a hymn to the Father in an intelligent way it is confusion for another to follow with a thanksgiving or hymn to the Lord.
C.F.I. Where does room come in for the enjoyment of the thought of Christ personally?
J.T. In the Lord's supper there certainly should be abundant scope for those who love Him to address Him. The Lord should have His part as present among the saints. "Christ ... loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it", @Ephesians 5: 25. He comes to us in those affections. The Song of Solomon helps greatly, but as to us it is "my assembly". He will use it for God, and not for Himself only. John shows us throughout that Jesus was going "to the Father", and what He did for His own had in view to draw them into the current of His own mind, and the Father was before Him.
J.C.S. So if He comes in on our side as Head, from that point we would have the Father in view and not go back to covenant lines?
{447}
J.T. If the Spirit of adoption gives a lead in some brother, the thing is to follow that lead.
Ques. Do you think we give sufficient place to the thought of Christ in the midst of His people? Are not our thoughts very often taken up with Christ in heaven?
J.T. I think that is largely where the difficulty lies. We fail to discern the Lord coming in. As He comes in it is not a corporeal action of His, but a spiritual one, which is quite understandable. "The last Adam a quickening spirit", @1 Corinthians 15: 45. They thought they had seen a spirit, but "he opened their understanding". He is the last Adam "a quickening spirit", but this does not set aside the fact that He is a Man.
Rem. The Lord's coming in seems to involve leaving the covenant side.
J.T. He is there. It is a question of the lead that is given, the covenant is a great thought and He dwells upon it Himself. Mark says, "they all drank out of it" -- out of the cup (@Mark 14: 23); and then the Lord dwelt upon the covenant Himself, as if to impress them with it. This is one way we should be impressed. It is quite compatible with the Lord's presence to speak about the covenant; He is the Mediator of it, and hence it is right -- due to Him -- that we should speak to Him of it, and also to speak to God about it. Room should be made for this, including hymns bearing on the covenant.
C.F.I. This might continue after the Lord comes in.
J.T. Certainly.
E.B.McC. In giving to Him the broiled fish and a honeycomb, would they be ministering to Christ?
J.T. Yes. The Lord raises the question of what is there. Luke has the local company more in mind. He came into their midst, and asked "Have ye anything here to eat?" You cannot expect more than is in the local company. If brethren cannot go beyond the covenant the Lord will make the most of what they have. He is gracious and will help us according to our measure. Even if we are unable to go beyond the covenant, God
{448}
and Christ and the Spirit too can have part with us and there would be a good season; but the full thought in assembly service would not be reached.
W.H.U. Under these circumstances should we reach Christ as Head?
J.T. I think it is a question of a spiritual lead; if there are one or two there equal to it headship might be reached. These two from Emmaus had some spiritual understanding. They were there, and were speaking about a spiritual matter, and you would expect all would be ready for this, but apparently they were not. The general state occasioned the confusion; I do not think these two would lead in it.
W.H.U. Would the Lord coming in as Head give us an impression to move with Him as Firstborn?
J.T. I think so. As with us He impresses us with what is in His mind. John specially brings that before us. He gives at length in chapters 13 - 17 what the Lord did and said immediately before His death; this shows how He draws us to His side to impress us with His mind. We must not assume that headship applies immediately as He comes in. *Jesus Himself* stood in their midst. It was priestly service rather than headship they needed. The Lord acts according to what He finds as amongst us.
J.C.S. @John 20 takes us outside the local setting onto the spiritual and eternal line.
J.T. Yes, it does.
E.E.S.L. How far has what is historical a place in the breaking of bread?
J.T. The institution of the Lord's supper is a historical matter, but it has a continuous bearing. The Lord's death is a historical matter, but the love that is manifest in it remains in Him.
E.E.S.L. I thought that what was historical had a place, but that the memorial leads to fresh manifestations.
J.T. The records are for us and furnish authority for what we do publicly, but there must be the spiritual
{449}
condition. Luke shows how the spiritual education began and how it at least was seen in two persons; he shows that two persons were actually in the assembly, as spiritually educated. John says that the message was sent to the brethren by a qualified person, Mary, who herself was spiritually educated, and he shows that the spiritual element existed. I have no doubt it is to be taken abstractly, because Peter was not yet fully restored. God does speak abstractly, He is entitled to take account of His own work in us by itself, however small. That is John's side; he mentions the evidence of spirituality by saying, "the doors were shut ... for fear of the Jews", and that when the Lord came in they were glad -- they were not perturbed.
S.F. Would it be inward feelings in @John 20?
J.T. There is nothing said about their saying anything, whereas Luke makes a point of what they were saying before the Lord came in. John says they were glad, and the Lord said, "Peace be to you". And moreover John says, "Jesus came and stood in the midst". It is not *their midst* -- it is *the* midst. The assembly viewed from the purely spiritual standpoint is not local at all, it is universal. Jesus is standing in relation to the whole assembly.
W.H.W. Does the Lord in Luke's gospel suggest in showing His hands and *feet* that there is a further distance to go: but in John's gospel He shows them His hands and His *side*, suggesting perhaps what He has done and what is available for His people?
J.T. I think that is right. John conveys the love of Christ peculiarly. The hands are necessary to express affection, and His side testifies to His love shown in death. Spiritually the side suggests that the assembly came out of Christ -- it is "of Christ", as Eve was of Adam.
Rem. In John they were together as the result of what Mary had brought to them.
{450}
J.T. Undoubtedly, and the Lord came in. He sent the message with a view to His coming in. The character of the message indicates that the Lord intended to come to them as in family relationship with them, that they were spiritual and heavenly.
J.C.S. It has been said that the Lord does not come in until we leave the covenant.
J.T. I do not see what that is based on. He comes in, and is made known to us in the breaking of bread. I connect the Lord's incoming with the breaking of bread. But the cup is also for remembrance, and hence His coming in should be connected with it also. The position is somewhat transitional until the Lord is apprehended as Head; *all* being available to Him. We are thus ready for any impulse He may give.
Ques. Is the period after the breaking of bread a sensitive moment?
J.T. A most sensitive moment. The organism is in operation. We, being many, are one loaf. We need to be attentive. We are not to be restless as the emblems go round, but sitting in occupation with what is before us, including the saints in our affections, taking them all in. This gives occasion for spiritual power and enjoyment.
C.F.I. There would then be a peaceful state manifest, instead of being confused.
J.T. That is exactly what we get in John. He says, "Peace be to you", and then as they were glad He said, "Peace be to you" *again*, as if to consolidate the position.
E.W.C. Would you distinguish between the covenant on the ground of His shed blood and the covenant in the hand of the living Mediator?
J.T. There is a distinction. "This is my blood, that of the new covenant" alludes to His death, that is, it is that by which the covenant is attested, but in @2 Corinthians 3 it is the covenant made good to us. The blood is in the first epistle -- it is in the Lord's supper -- but in the second epistle the ministry is by "the Lord the Spirit". The latter effects a change to us. "*We* all,
{451}
looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit", @2 Corinthians 3: 18. It is not the blood there, it is the glory of the Lord, and the Lord effecting the thing. We are changed into the same image even as by the Lord the Spirit. It is important to distinguish between the blood as in the actual Supper, and the ministry of the covenant in the hands of the Mediator, but it is under the title "the Lord the Spirit". There is authority in it, yet He is "the Spirit".
E.W.C. The instruction of Luke is important for developing a spiritual state ready to move on further.
J.T. The adjustment in Luke is essential; and if we recognise the Spirit in our midst, whether as the Holy Spirit in the beginning of the meeting, or as the Spirit of adoption later, we shall be able in some little degree to rise to what we are in God's thought. It is in that way that we reach the assembly in the true spiritual sense.
J.C.S. Quickened together with Christ, is that the point of view?
J.T. That has to be recognised if we are to be consciously in association with Christ. The quickening involves power; by it I am enabled to hold myself as God regards me, as before Him.
Ques. Does "Peace be to you" help us to abstract ourselves?
J.T. Yes, to shut out extraneous thoughts, to help us fix our minds on one thing at a time.
J.C.S. In addressing God as "Abba, Father", what would be the subject matter of the address?
J.T. Well, I think God would like us to speak about Himself. As a rule we speak of Christ. Of course that is pleasing to God, but He would like us to speak about Himself also.
P.L. God is magnified and worshipped in the glory of His own counsels of love.
{452}
J.T. He would have us tell Him about Himself. When Nathan delivered Jehovah's message to David about Solomon, saying, "I will be his father, and he shall be my son" (@1 Chronicles 17: 13). David immediately goes into the house of the Lord and *sits*. Then he uses the most remarkable titles in speaking to God: Jehovah, Jehovah Elohim, God, Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, My God, that God, their God, God to Israel. All this shows how God Himself is regarded in the worship of the intelligent believer -- one who knows sonship.
P.L. I was thinking of Paul's prayer in that way -- so full of God.
J.T. Quite so, especially in Ephesians. @1 Chronicles 17 shows the richness of David's address, the variety of appellations he employed in his worship. As inside he speaks in the light of sonship, and he is restful in the presence of God.
Rem. When David brought the ark to Zion, he delivered a psalm to give thanks to Jehovah, through Asaph and his brethren.
J.T. @1 Chronicles 16 shows his great skill in using the psalms in the service of God. The psalm is a selection from several.
Rem. Magnifying what God Himself had done according to His own thoughts.
J.C.S. Will you say a word as to "my God" and "your God"?
J.T. That seems to be the ultimate thought in the Lord's mind in the message "my Father and your Father ... my God and your God". I suppose the Spirit of adoption is *urgent*. It cries "Abba, Father" -- a very remarkable thing. The Father is waiting for that cry. In @Romans 8 it is, "whereby we cry, Abba, Father". The two divine Persons who have so graciously come into a subservient position cry "Abba, Father". And the christian is to cry "Abba, Father". The Lord mentions the Father first to them in the message through Mary; and then "my God and your God", as if that is the *final*
{453}
thought. In @Revelation 3: 12, the Lord says to the overcomer in Philadelphia four times, "my God", as if pointing to our own times, to the thought of *God* being brought to us as the great Ultimate of all things. "Of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be glory for ever", @Romans 11: 36.
W.J.H. Does that signify the full knowledge of God?
J.T. It is God, as Christ knows Him. We touch the Absolute, at least in the sense that we are alongside the Lord as He says, "my God ... your God". He maintained a significant distinction in not saying "our God", but always "my God", but we are drawn into the current of His thoughts, and, therefore, in relation with God in His absoluteness.
P.L. You referred to @1 Chronicles 17: 25, "For thou, my God, hast revealed to thy servant that thou wilt build him a house; therefore hath thy servant found in his heart to pray before thee. And now, Jehovah, thou art that God". Is that the order we come in alongside Christ? First it is "my God", and then we come to know Him as "that God". So that the God of Israel is God to Israel. He is the God *of*, which is more the objective, and the God *to*, which is more what we are brought into.
J.T. Quite so. "That God" is an allusion to His absoluteness. In Solomon's prayer he recognised that whilst God comes in in relation to the created sphere, yet he says, "the heavens and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee", @2 Chronicles 6: 18. He is beyond the heavens in His absoluteness.
P.L. The title "that God" means 'The same'; see note to @2 Samuel 7: 28 in the New Translation.
{454}
GLORY THE END OF THE WORK OF OUR HANDS
@Ezra 5: 1 - 5; @Ezra 6: 6 - 12, 14; @Haggai 2: 1 - 9; @Zechariah 4: 6 - 9
I have in mind to show, by the Lord's help, that the present operations of God, the present service of Christ, and the gifts of the Spirit are all making for a final and glorious end, and that the saints here may be more assured as to the present outlook, and more assured as to the results of "the work of our hands", that our "labour is not in vain in the Lord".
These books from which I have read are calculated to help to the end I have in mind. They lead up to the thought I have expressed, that the end is sure and glorious; an eternal weight of glory indeed is spoken of as the portion of those who look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen. Infinite glory for God is in anticipation also. He is to be glorified in the assembly, in Christ Jesus, throughout all generations of the age of ages, that is, for eternity.
I wish to show that all this glory is brought within our range of intelligence, indeed, that from the outset God had in His mind a residence for it. This was indicated in the incoming of the glory to the tabernacle in the wilderness, and subsequently to the temple, its final residence; both types pointing to *the assembly*, a word which we never tire of, a word which, indeed, has a meaning which is peculiar to itself in the minds of intelligent believers in Christ. It is not intelligible to the unregenerate, for it is a treasury word, a word belonging peculiarly to the vocabulary of the spiritual, and in no sense does it convey so much as when we say it is the dwelling-place of God and of His glory.
So much is it the residence of God's glory, that it is said of the assembly, viewed as the heavenly city, that it comes down from God out of heaven, *having the glory*
{455}
*of God*. That is not a provisional matter. What we have now is provisional, what they had in the wilderness was, but what we get in @Revelation 21 is final. There is no thought of that city ever being deprived of the great honour of being the residence of the glory. And when we remember, dear brethren, that we ourselves are part of that great city, the thought comes with greater force, and it is so intended in these last days, for it is "the latter glory" of the house, which is greater than the former; it transcends all that preceded it, and it is now being completed; the investiture of the assembly with the glory is now in progress.
These are great thoughts and one would lay them on the minds of the brethren at the outset, and then seek to show how they are reached from our side. I have read from Ezra, specially to bring forward the importance of the prophetic ministry; that is stressed in @Ezra 5. The prophets of God prophesied, but they worked with the builders as well, they were practical men. I may have to tax your memories, but I hope everyone here has read this book of Ezra; it is a very priestly book; it links on with Chronicles and through Chronicles with the beginning of God's ways and operations on the earth, that is, it begins with Adam, for the first book of Chronicles begins thus. The second book links on with this book of Ezra, the closing paragraph being almost identical with the opening paragraph of this book, so we have a golden chain of testimony running right through.
In chapter 4 we get recovered saints, and when I say recovered saints, I include those of our own times, for one does not refer to Scripture as mere history; it should not be read except as bearing on the person who reads it, and those who hear it. That is the way to understand Scripture. These recovered saints were exclusive according to @Ezra 4, and there is a difference between exclusiveness, right in itself, and a prophetic condition amongst us. In chapter 4 the adversaries of Judah and
{456}
Benjamin propose to join with them in the work, but Zerubbabel and Joshua, the high priest, and the fathers of Judah and Benjamin said. No! This is an exclusive matter.
We must not be afraid of the word exclusive, because it is a very good word, one to be treasured, having its own significance in the minds of the spiritual. This chapter brings out that the brethren, as restored, were exclusive, they were exclusive in the sense that they would not accept unhallowed support. They would not have anything to do with any associations or fellowships that were not divinely accredited. That is a most important item in our position.
Exclusiveness in itself is a negative thought, and what you find in this fourth chapter is that the adversaries continued to harass the saints, and were successful in their efforts, showing that exclusiveness by itself is not sufficient; and so much did the enemy succeed that the work of God actually ceased. The adversaries wrote a letter to the king, saying everything bad they could about the people of God. If we are *merely* negative and people speak thus of us, they are pretty sure to incite successful opposition. We must have more than exclusiveness if we are to be effective in our service; there must be a positive side to the position or the enemy will have an advantage, and hence what you find here is that the work ceased. The enemy was successful in his great effort to blacken the people of God, by relating what the history of Jerusalem had been, what a rebellious city it had been, and how damaging to the kings, and so on: a long tale of accusation, with the result that the king was persuaded to authorise the adversaries of the people of God to prevent the work by force and power, which they did immediately.
Now, chapter 5 is over against this; it is a prophetic chapter, and that is why I read it, because the Lord, I believe, is encouraging us in regard to this kind of ministry. Prophecy brings God in, as I shall show
{457}
presently, from Haggai and Zechariah. What we see is the kind of ministry that was given and how effective it was. What we call *meetings for ministry* may often come very short of ministry that would set in motion the people of God. The intent of prophetic ministry is to set the people of God in spiritual motion. Someone will say, God is not moving, but then perhaps *you* are not moving and yet work to be done is by your hand; you cannot expect God to move if you do not move, if it is your responsibility to do so. If you should do something, do not say God is not doing it; God is saying *you* are not doing it. If the thing has to be done, *do it*. Do not talk sentimentally about waiting on God. Piety is most essential with us, but what we call piety may be merely judaism, and hence we need the word of exhortation, as here, when the prophetic word stirred up the leaders, and they began to move, the prophets of God helping them. The prophets of God do not start the work, they *prophesy*, and the responsible persons begin to do something, then the prophets of God work with them.
Resulting from this movement the whole of the machinery of government is now turned in their favour. It is an important matter, at the present time in this country, that if we are moving with God, if the prophetic ministry is current amongst us, and is affecting us, then God is moving, not only helping us, but moving in those who are in the position of public government. It is all under Him, "The king's heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water; he turneth it whithersoever he will". And what you find in this chapter is that prophetic ministry has its place, and the work is resumed. The adversary is not inactive, he would do something again. "But the eye of their God was upon the elders of the Jews", (verse 5). It does not say that in chapter 4, not that it was not true then, for He ever watches over His people; but God's eye specially regards what is beautiful, and what could be more attractive to Him at that time, than this movement of His people in resuming the
{458}
building of His house, with the prophets of God helping them? The prophets were practical men, and the work proceeded. What could be more delightful in such circumstances to the eye of God than that? There is more than exclusive conditions, there is prophetic ministry and responsible activity resulting from it and God honoured this. The facts speak for themselves. *The work went on*.
Now in chapter 5 there is another letter. This time the letter is couched in different language. It is not exactly traducive, it is somewhat fair and respectful to the Jews, enquiring of the king, and raising the whole question of the legality of what they were doing, a most important matter, and affording great advantage to the work of God. Every spiritual man is ready for the whole matter of the legality of our position to be raised. Every young christian here should understand that the position we are on is divinely accredited. You may not understand the word 'legal' in the sense in which I have been using it; it is a question of what is divinely accredited -- what is authorised in the Scriptures. Here a letter was written to Darius to inquire as to whether the Jews had authority for what they were doing. The letter said this building was going on, and that they were prospered in it; very different from the tone and wording of the other letter -- not that it was exactly meant to be friendly, but it was under the eye of God, and God would hinder the pen from writing anything that would permit the enemy to succeed. God is all-powerful, and we can understand that, in order that His work should not be damaged by it. He caused this letter in chapter 5 to be different. It stated the actual facts of the case. The account of the matter from the lips of the elders is sent to the king -- manifestly a great advantage to them. Now the question is, Are they authorised to continue this work? Is this a legal thing? Or are these men acting presumptuously?
This is an important matter, dear brethren, as bearing on the present time, and every spiritual man welcomes
{459}
the challenge as to the authority for what those returned from Babylon are doing today. Let others come with their questions. It is very fine to follow the history of the Lord in the gospels, especially when questioning time comes. The Lord, indeed, in Isaiah challenges anyone to come forward and contend with Him (chapter 50: 8), and we can count on Him now; the matter is His, and He will stand by His people, and make everything work in our favour -- even the powers that rule the world, as is manifest in what is before us. This letter raised the issue of the legality of this position and this work of the saints, and the answer is overwhelmingly in their favour. It is magnificent.
Read down chapter 6 and you will see how magnificently God turned the government, the powers that then were, in favour of His people. At times the enemy succeeds in turning public conditions against the saints, but God will not fail us as we turn to Him. But we must recognise His rights, if need be suffering for a little while (@1 Peter 5: 10). The prophets had spoken to these builders in the name of God, that the work should proceed. They understood that the authority of God entered into it and hence they had no question as to the rightness of the work that they were engaged in, but the matter is to be established publicly, and if the authorities seem to be against us, let us suffer a little. God honours suffering in this sense, He is on that line Himself; all that He is morally entered into the sufferings of Christ. God approaching man was on the line of suffering, and He looks for correspondence with this in His people. He speaks of those who make a covenant with Him by sacrifice (@Psalm 50: 5). These men, as actuated by the prophetic word, go on with the work. God is looking on them, but He is doing more than that, He is looking on the government, on Darius, for He can control him and the writer of the letter, and He does so. When the letter comes to Darius, he makes a search which reveals that the position at Jerusalem has full royal sanction,
{460}
that no one has the right to question it. Even if we suffer, we are justified if the position is established as legal.
Chapter 6 says, "Darius the king made a decree, and search was made in the house of the rolls ... in Babylon. And there was found at Achmetha, in the palace ... a roll, and therein was a record thus written: In the first year of Cyrus the king the same Cyrus the king made a decree concerning the house of God at Jerusalem", and so forth. That is to say, the decree of Cyrus was preserved, it was there. How significant of God's care, that it was preserved all those years! Many a time, perhaps, it had been pushed aside as nothing, but there it was, under "the eye of our God", and Darius the king is, himself, in perfect sympathy with all this. To whom is all this to be attributed? To God. So today, we can reckon on God affecting those in authority. Why not? It is the time in which the world is held in reconciliation, a time in which God is favourable to men.
God has directed us to pray for all who are in authority, and it is to be expected that, if they make a decree that is contrary to the testimony, and we suffer, God will come in. He will have to say to them, and perhaps we shall find that it was done in ignorance. Then the obvious thing, dear brethren, is to suffer. It is a day of small things in every sense, so that a little suffering has its place, and God honours it. These verses in chapter 6 show that the work of building the house of God went on. "Let the work of this house of God alone", Darius says; that is, let these brethren alone. The eye of our God is upon us as we move according to His will, and if He be for us, who against us? God is pleased with His people, and here says, through Darius, Let them alone, and, of course, they were let alone, for who could withstand God? This is a very fine position, and it serves what I have in mind. It indicates how we are to proceed to the end of this wonderful dispensation as workers with God, and to reach the end that He has in mind, that is His glory. It is worth going in for, but the way to it is
{461}
plainly marked out. It is not an armchair matter, it is a suffering matter, but the sufferings are linked with the glory.
When you come to Haggai, you have something of what these prophets were saying in their prophetic ministry, and we do well, if we seek to carry on a similar service, to observe the intelligence, the applicability of the messengers and their messages to the moment. Haggai's is a message. Zechariah, in his book, goes far beyond what was current at that time, but then we have not all that he prophesied. He also prophesied to meet weak current conditions, as did Haggai. Haggai's book is a very short one, but it tells us that the results of his service were remarkable and immediate. God would encourage us in prophetic ministry, that -- in every emergency some word may come to clear the vision, clear our perspective, so that the saints may proceed in the work of God. Hence we have the date of the message, as you will observe, the second year of Darius, the sixth month and the first day of the month; the year, the month, and the day; and then when it became effective, in the four-and-twentieth day of the sixth month in the second year of Darius (chapter 1: 15).
One would dwell a little upon this in view of these meetings that we are engaged in, and all meetings like them, that we may expect results, something from God. We talk about what is ministered and say, It was a good word. Very rightly spoken, if it is the truth, but then the next thing is, how long will it take to affect the brethren, how long before it brings them round to the mind of God? That you appraise the ministry is right, but then what about *you*? How long will it take you to come round to what God is saying to you? That is the next thing, because ministry is not merely to please our ears. The intent of it is to *move* us; whatever the end God has immediately in mind, it is to move us to that end; and hence everyone here is put under obligation by what I am saying, to inquire before God, as to how long
{462}
it will take him or her to come round to the point indicated in what is ministered. That is your obligation.
Some of you may have come here tonight to hear a certain person speak, thinking of the person, it may be, but God seizes the opportunity and puts obligation upon you, and you cannot escape it. It will be disaster if you turn it aside and make it a mere matter of attending a meeting and going home again. It is a question *now* of each one accepting what God has said to him and of determining that the result in him shall, by the Lord's help, be immediate.
Haggai tells us that it took twenty-three days for his message to take effect, and it was an excellent effect. It says in the thirteenth verse of the first chapter, "Then spake Haggai the Lord's messenger in the Lord's message unto the people, saying, I am with you, saith the Lord". That is not said in Ezra, it is said here, "And the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel, ... and the spirit of Joshua ... and the spirit of all the remnant of the people; and they came and did work in the house of the Lord of hosts, their God", and then you have the date. What a fine result that was! I am here tonight, I may say, simply with this end in view: to affect the saints toward God. God was working here with the message which came by the Lord's messenger, stirring up the spirits of the people. He is the Father of spirits, He is stirring up His people to go to the work; here the result was perfect and immediate.
Chapter 2 gives another date and another message, and this message includes what I have been saying, that an appeal is made now as to what the glory of the first house was, extending back to Solomon's time; as compared with what existed then, the latter house was very little; but the message goes on to say, "The word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, and my Spirit, remain among you". That is a wonderful word in remnant times. We are directed back to what God covenanted at the time the people came out of
{463}
Egypt and to the fact that as His Spirit was amongst them then, so He is now; also that the word God covenanted at Horeb remained with them. That is how the matter stands as to ourselves, dear brethren, and as we are moved we begin to look into what God has covenanted, not simply what He has spoken, but what He has covenanted. He has committed Himself to certain things, and if we are really exercised we shall begin in our prayers to mention these things to God, to call upon Him and remind Him of these things. In speaking of reminding Jehovah, I would allude to a word in Isaiah: "ye that put Jehovah in remembrance, keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth", @Isaiah 62: 6, 7. Think of God writing that in regard of Himself! He loves us to come forward with promises He has made, to plead them in our prayers, and then count upon Him to fulfil them -- for every promise is Yea and Amen in Christ -- and He would also encourage us to rely on His Spirit amongst us.
Some of you here, perhaps, have never realised that. You have heard of the Spirit of God, but never realised the great fact that He is amongst christians. The Lord says of Him, "he abides with you, and shall be in you". What a great fact this is! God would awaken us to these things: the terms of the new covenant (for that is the one we have part in), and the great fact and blessing of the presence of the Spirit of God. He is here with us, we have proved it these two or three days; that the Spirit of God is with us. We want you all to come into it; if you have not realised it, this word is for you, that the covenanted word and the Spirit are with us and remain with us. So that we have the means of proceeding with the work.
Then the prophet, the messenger of God, goes on to say, "For thus saith Jehovah of hosts; Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; and I will shake all
{464}
nations, and the desire of all nations shall come". At the present time the nations are in danger of being shaken, but they are being kept, thank God; and it is very largely on account of the prayers of the saints, I believe, that God is holding back forces of evil, so that this wonderful work we are engaged in may proceed. He will shake the nations and the *desire* of the nations will come, too; there will be the desire of the nations as we read of here, and it says, "I will fill this house with glory, saith Jehovah of hosts. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith Jehovah of hosts. The latter glory of this house shall be greater than the former". What an incentive!
We have been speaking about glory as emancipating us from the world; as attractive and setting us free in the presence of God, it is given here as an incentive to go on. We are told that the latter glory of the house is to exceed the former, and that is what we are going on to. To this end I have stressed this thought of the prophetic ministry, as that which governs the position initially, and then the need of readiness on the part of the saints to move, and as we move, there is glory after glory opening up to our minds, as incentives to go forward unfalteringly until the consummation.
In Zechariah we have the day of small things recognised. They are small, but nevertheless no one is to despise them, and the prophet sees in these "two sons of oil" what denotes the unlimited supply of spiritual power to go on with. The word is addressed to Zerubbabel who represents the responsible element and, of course, we are all responsible. When authority is failing in every direction and lawlessness lifting up its head with such power, the Spirit of God is asserting government -- in a small way, of course, but it exists as a testimony. Zerubbabel, the governor, represents it here. He is typical of the Lord being content to be with us in this day of small things; with us to govern us, and as things are right and orderly amongst us the work of God proceeds.
{465}
Zerubbabel, who laid the foundation, shall put on the top-stone. What a great thing, dear brethren, to be in the time of putting on the top-stone! Some may say they would like to have been at the laying of the foundation in apostolic times, and what a time it was! One would have liked to be there, but in a certain sense there is something even transcending in being at the putting on of the top-stone.
One would earnestly seek to energise the interest and sympathy of the brethren in this most important matter. The top-stone is about to be put on, and it is to be put on in keeping with the whole dispensation; it is by the hands of Zerubbabel; He who laid the foundation puts on the top-stone. "He shall bring forth the headstone with shoutings: Grace, grace unto it!"
That is what I had in mind, and it is, as I said, to encourage the brethren to proceed on these lines, for we are on sure ground. The legal position is established inwardly and outwardly. Let people come and challenge the position the saints are on; the more they do it, the more its legality is established, so we are on a sure footing. It is the sure foundation of God.
Let us put on the whole armour of God and go forward, and we shall reach the end, we shall see this great sight, the top-stone put on the assembly as being the residence of the glory for ever and ever, glory for us and glory to God throughout all generations of the age of ages.
{466}
UNITY AS LEADING TO INCREASE
@Ephesians 4: 1 - 16
I have read these verses in @Ephesians 4 to speak of unity. As you will observe, these verses treat of unity in its general bearing, for indeed the bearing of this epistle is more universal than local, and I have in mind to dwell on the universal setting of unity. That there should be such a thing is a victory achieved by God. In taking out a people from among the nations for His name, He unified them, so that they should be, not only theoretically, but practically one body, "one body in Christ".
As soon as the Holy Spirit came down, according to @Acts 2, He sat on each of the saints assembled, and they began to speak in the different dialects or languages represented in Jerusalem at that time, and the representation was large, not indeed of the nations as such, but of Jews and Jewish proselytes from among them, and they testified that what the saints were saying they understood, as spoken in the language in which they were born. What was said would establish a basis for practical unity as they returned to their respective countries, and as God wrought, there would be the existence of unity as the effect of the truth on their walk and ways. This was what was divinely intended as over against the deliberate scattering by God at Babel, where the race of mankind was scattered judicially throughout the whole earth. The principle of unity was to be introduced and it was to overthrow the confusion that had existed. Language ceased to be a barrier; and to the end that unity should be maintained, there were the gifts of tongues, so that divine things should continue to be ministered amongst the nations in an intelligible way.
What is to be observed from a practical point of view is that the first breach recorded was due to sectional feelings arising (@Acts 6). The Hellenists, that is, the Grecian Jews, complained that their widows were
{467}
neglected in the daily ministrations, not that their widows were any more interesting to heaven than the other widows, but they were of more interest to the other disciples who were from the part of the world indicated. I mention this, for indeed it is part of what I have in mind, that in dwelling for a little on this great thought of unity, we should keep before us the danger of disruption arising from sectional feeling.
Another illustration of sectional interference with the divine economy and unity is in the book of Numbers, chapter 16, where a great rebellion arose, two hundred and fifty of the princes of Israel being involved in it, and led by Korah, a Kohathite. He and his family of the Levites were stationed on the south side of the tabernacle as was also the tribe of Reuben, and the rebellion arose through the combination of this section of the Levites with certain of the tribe of Reuben, manifestly because they were adjacent to each other. Partisan feelings sprang up, arising from the contiguity of the tribe of Reuben to the Kohathites, the leading family in the tribe of Levi; the combination that arose was disastrous. So, dear brethren, there is always this danger of our being affected sectionally or nationally, or even in a continental sense, in a hemispherical sense, for a whole hemisphere may be affected because of mutual contiguity. The truth that is before us in this chapter implies that all this has to be watched, lest the work of God should in any way be marred, for His great thought is unity.
The Lord had this in mind in His prayer to His Father recorded by John, and by John only; He prayed for those who should believe on Him through the services of the apostles -- that they should be one. He also says, that the glory that the Father gave to Him He gave to those whom the Father gave Him, so that they might be one -- a very remarkable thing. He says to His Father, "The glory which thou hast given me I have given them, that they may be one, as we are one". What a standard of unity! The Lord saw that the conferring of glory
{468}
that He had received on the disciples was to promote the great thought of unity; that as we are glorified according to God, the state is present for unity according to Him.
In speaking thus, I am not referring to actual glorification, a condition which is still in prospect. There is glorification now, as the apostle Paul says, "whom he has justified, these also he has glorified". I believe God intends glorification to mark us in all our settings, but particularly in regard of unity, that we are together happily and freely as dignified and as glorified by God. It all lies in the Spirit; for the Spirit works in us in the sense of anointing, and sealing, and of the earnest; so that we are not small, or legal, or exacting, and the Jewish element is negated in us. What is required for unity is largeness of heart in spiritual formation and wealth. The smallness that naturally attaches to us is inimical to unity, it militates against it. It descends to the level of judaism, that is current religious and sectarian feeling.
As I was saying, this thought of sectionalism may spread. Take, for instance, the great ocean in which we are set, the Pacific; it is not very long since that some of us had to consider the idea of contiguity, as related to its shores, involving thousands of miles of distance between saints who are supposed to be neighbours. In truth, they are not neighbours, and yet the principle had to be recognised. The thought of neighbourhood is good, but it may become merely sectional, for this is a time of travel and reduction of distances, and what is intended to be a right principle may degenerate into sectionalism, tending to cleavage. In this sense we may think more of persons who are near to us, than of those further off, and we may flatter one another that things are better because of this contiguity; such feelings and thoughts are entirely inimical to the work of God, and to the great unity that properly belongs to us, which is inclusive of every saint on earth. When we arrive at the idea of
{469}
resurrection, all sectionalism disappears, and the great unity is realised. We never cross Jordan until we come to face death, for it is through death that we arrive at resurrection. As we do come to face Jordan, that is, death, there it is before us in all its rolling force, for Jordan overflows its banks in the time of harvest. When we arrive there, the Spirit of God says, The Ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth is going before you. This is no sectional thought.
The two and half tribes had taken up a section which, alas! proved disastrous in time, for in all these things, the sowing means reaping. They had taken up the section they had appraised and which they thought suited them best. They appropriated it and determined to have it, whatever Moses said. Happily they were amenable to the requirement to send forty thousand men, a fully representative number, to cross the Jordan; the unity of God's people was thus maintained in principle. They crossed over willingly and valiantly to fight the battles attendant upon taking possession of the inheritance, so that the unity was there, and it was a question of "the Lord of all the earth". God has nothing less than that in His mind, and I believe that the more we come to Jordan and understand the spiritual side of the position and the power of God operating in all Israel, as it were, in all the saints, sectionalism disappears. It is a question of the twelve tribes of Israel taking up their position in relation to the testimony of God as "the Lord of all the earth".
In view of all this, you will see how Colossians and Ephesians fit in. In Colossians it says, they had love for all the saints. They were universal in their thoughts, and their love was spiritual. These are two things that are striking in regard to these saints. The only mention of the Spirit is in relation to their love -- a very fine setting. It was *love in the Spirit*, and love in the Spirit, dear brethren, will never be sectional or preferential. If we have a "little sister" who needs attention, we are not to speak ill of her, but we will make the most of her and add
{470}
to her, wherever she is. The family relationship stands, however geographically apart these persons may be. It is therefore a question of making the most of what there may be. Those of us who travel about the world thankfully recognise how the work of God in some places prospers more than in others, and we are, of course, entitled to inquire why it is, but, nevertheless, the work of God is the work of God, and the "little sister" is entitled to every bit of affection and help we can give her.
Thus it is that the principle of the body requires that the uncomely parts should be taken care of, and greater honour conferred upon them, instead of detracting from any section. In comparing ourselves with other sections, we should make the most of every section of the work of God. God would have us to make the most of our brothers and sisters, of the gatherings large and small throughout the continents of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America; also, of course, the British Isles, these southern countries, and the West Indies. It is a question of the unity of the Spirit, what God is going on with. We are in it by profession, but we are to be in it in reality, as this chapter teaches us: "with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, bearing with one another in love; using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace". That is the first great statement. We must begin locally bearing with one another in love, and we may have to bear with a brother five thousand miles away. We may have to bear with his letters and with his influence. We are taxed, so to speak, in this way. It is a poor thing, dear brethren, so richly endowed as we are, if we cannot suffer from our brethren in profiting by them, because there is something of value in every brother. It may be something I need, and I do not want to be deprived of it.
On the other hand, there are conditions in the "little sister" which are to be enhanced, and we must see to it. If she be a door, for instance, we will "enclose her with boards of cedar"; if a wall, we will "build upon her a
{471}
turret of silver". If there be anything of the work of God, it is to be taken account of and furthered as much as possible, and if we have to suffer in the service, let us suffer. I do not know of anything more important, in this respect, than suffering. It comes in so many ways, and almost always the way out of every difficulty is by suffering. On this line we bear "with one another in love; using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace". Although these verses are well known amongst us, one does not hesitate to go over the ground. We are in the centre of three concentric circles in these verses, and thus they suggest a remarkable environment. There is something, and this is surrounded by something else, and the latter is surrounded by what is infinite. The first circle is the "one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling". What richness in that inner circle that should affect our spirits! We are set up in an immediate environment of the most precious and exalted thoughts and we are intended to absorb the effect of them.
The next is a circle of authority and, as understanding the inner one, we hail the outer one because it involves authority and power for protection. "One Lord, one faith, one baptism". It includes responsibility on our part. As in it we may have to think of persons whose possession of the Spirit is questionable; in such times as ours certainly, this second circle includes those whose christianity is very questionable; and what forbearance is needed in respect of that! There is the positive thing, the actual existence of a kingdom vested in Christ in heaven, and operated here on earth as under Him. It is a protection for us, but it calls for very great consideration and a good deal of suffering and humiliation, in order to get down to people who may indicate good evidence of their genuineness and yet they are not clear. Their christianity is cloudy, and I hardly know anything requiring so much grace as to serve such. But they are professedly in the realm of the Lord's authority, having
{472}
been baptised, and yet their christianity is doubtful. There may be some like that here. Your presence here is an encouragement for, so far, your face is in the right direction, and it is the business of those of us who love God and His people to serve you. In the kingdom the Lord exercises His grace and authority on your behalf, in spite of all these doubtful things, and His people are not to be behind Him. The responsibility of those who love God is to serve their brethren and rescue them from what hinders them, and that is involved in the second circle in which we are set.
The third one is infinite, you cannot fathom it, you cannot compass it. "One God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". He is universal. The universe exists by God. It is not something thrown out as an act of divine power, and allowed to work out itself. It is pervaded by God and bounded by God, and the christian is able to regard himself as in it intelligently, as by faith he apprehends that the worlds were framed by the word of God. People are often baffled as to what is beyond that -- and beyond that. The third is the final thought, and you cannot get beyond it. You cannot compass it. It is a question of God, and you thus rest as in it. It satisfies me that the universe is bounded by God, sustained by God, pervaded by God. A grain of wheat cast into the ground germinates by God. We look abroad, and whether it be the heavens or the earth, the working out is by God, "who is over all, and through all, and in us all". This epistle teaches that the dwelling-place of God is composed of the saints. He is not in us, simply, as in the universe. He is in us as in holy relationship with us. He is resident amongst the saints, they have become a habitation of God by the Spirit.
What an environment all that is! And the intent is that, as set up in it, we are to be absorbent, impressionable, and to take on what is presented, and the more we take on, the more united we are. Every way we look,
{473}
in this wonderful environment, we see unity promoted. To show the bearing of this, the Spirit of God quotes from @Psalm 68, a convenient scripture at this point. Quotations in the New Testament from the Old are intended, among other things, to help us in our meditations and in ministry, and we are struck with the skill in which passages are brought forward by the Spirit in the New Testament; and here is a passage brought forward, in view of this unity being set up in principle, so that there should be powerful ministry here; not simply that things are said and we converse about them, but that there should be a powerful ministry here superior to all opposing forces that exist; that is the idea of gift. Gift is superior to all the enemy can bring forward against it, and so it says that the Lord "ascended up on high", leading captivity captive and has given gifts to men. Further it says -- and this should touch our hearts -- "that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended into the lower parts of the earth". He has ascended far above all the heavens and being thus ascended He has given gifts. The gifts here are not simply given to the persons who have them, but the persons themselves are the gifts. That brings up the thought of suitability to the gift, that the person is in keeping with it, so that *he* may be spoken of as a gift from the ascended Christ. We can understand how careful the Lord was in regard to the twelve apostles, so that they should represent him, and also in regard to Paul and others. The gifts are representative of Him who has given them. If one is this in a characteristic way, it is most serious to discredit Him.
It will be observed that only four are mentioned here, and this is in accord with the universal unity I have been speaking of. It is worked out and maintained in ministry exercised by these four classifications of gifts. They are given in wisdom. The apostles came first as representative of the Lord's direct authority, so much so, that the doctrine of the apostles was that with which the saints
{474}
went on. They persevered in *their* teaching at the beginning, they understood the great place that the apostles had. The prophets are the second classification and they bring God to our souls; but in the apostles we have the authority of the Lord, wisely, for we need subjugation. In this sense there is a great difference between the ministry of Joshua and the ministry of David. With the former there was complete *extirpation* of the inhabitants of the land, but David does not do that, with him it is *subjugation*. Every one of us must come under that, and David set up garrisons so as to maintain his authority where he had effected subjugation; for us that implies the presence of the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God is this to us, the power to maintain the authority of the Lord in those subjugated.
Then the prophets, as I said, bring in God, and the presence of God is the answer to every question that may be raised against us. If God be with us, what can anybody say? Then, thirdly, under these circumstances, we have evangelists, those who enlarge the position. Now this further enlargement and increase of numbers, may cause trouble. I am not discrediting the numbers, for, after all, we are not very many, but I do think that during these days, God is showing just a little in a public way of what He has. He is pleased with His people as walking in the truth in any suitable way and would call attention to them. The brethren ought to be attractive to you, He would say. In response to this, young people say with Ruth, "thy people shall be my people". It is not a time for display of thousands as at Jerusalem, but it is a time for God to show just a little of what He has in His inheritance in the saints, and He would invite men to think as He does.
God looks for quality in us, and if there be formation by the gracious energy of the Spirit, the word is, "we ... exhort ... that ye would abound still more", @1 Thessalonians 4: 1. The first cleavage began with the increase of numbers; it says, as the numbers increased, that there
{475}
was complaint by the Hellenists because their widows, as they thought, were not being cared for sufficiently. We must have our eyes on these things, and if God is increasing us in a little way, it should not be marred. Inflation is a very baneful thing, and God does not like it at all. The idea is seen in the grain of mustard seed becoming a great tree. In this respect the feast of unleavened bread keeps us, if it is kept according to God; let the numbers increase, they can be trusted. If we have the reduction involved in the keeping of the feast of unleavened bread there is nothing to fear. The apostle says, let us keep it; there were a good many at Corinth, but they were leavened with pride, and so he insists that they keep the feast with the "unleavened bread of sincerity and truth". That is how the truth stands in @1 Corinthians 5.
Then there are shepherds and teachers which are really two gifts, as it were, in one man. The word "some" indicates the division. You will notice the commas dividing "some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers", one man embracing the last two. How beautiful it is that as the saints are brought in by the evangelist, the pastor or shepherd looks after each of them, ministering what is needed. He teaches, too, and there is hardly a thing that I know of more important at the present time, next to prophecy, than teaching. "My people", says God, through the prophet, "are destroyed for lack of knowledge", and the teacher, in line with the pastor, adjusts the minds of the saints by bringing in the truth in power so that the mind is regulated by it, and its unifying influence is felt. All that is involved in these four kinds of ministers, not that we have the apostles now, but this is what the Lord in His wisdom has provided for the maintenance and progress of the assembly; and so the passage says, "to the work of the ministry" -- the *work* of it. Let us not think that ministry is an easy matter. It is toil. The word translated "work" in @Numbers 4: 3 signifies positive toil.
{476}
Here we have "to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ; until we all arrive" -- that is, all saints on earth. Every true minister understands that; he is thinking of *all* the saints. "Until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ".
That is how it is to be. Not only that we love one another and are linked up together, but there is dignity amongst us in the knowledge of the Son of God, and we unitedly arrive at the great thought of the full-grown man, "in order that we may be no longer babes". The word is babes, not children, meaning persons who are easily influenced -- and oh! what destructive influences are abroad today! We have further that we should not be "carried about by every wind of *that* teaching which is in the sleight of men, in unprincipled cunning with a view to systematized error". Think of those words! Men are deliberately set to deceive the people of God; they are agents of the devil; and the antidote to all that is ministry leading up to full growth, so that we are not deceived nor carried about by every evil wind of teaching.
The culmination of the instruction is in "the whole body", showing that the universal thought runs right through. "The whole body, fitted together, and connected by every joint of supply, according to the working in its measure of each one part, works for itself the increase of the body to its self-building up in love". That is the triumph of God, that there is such a thing here, inclusive of all the true saints of God on earth. It is an organism in which love is active and the truth is held in love, not intellectually merely, but held in love. How important, therefore, that the truth should be ministered, and nothing but the truth; and so as ministered it is received into the hearts of the saints and held in love. Then there are the joints and the bands, so that there should be self-edification. In any town where there is not distinct ability, these organic conditions secure edification
{477}
in the meeting. We are thus set up on this line of unity, in independency of man. There is "not need that any one should teach you". There is ability amongst the saints, inherent ability in this sense, to edify one another. So that the whole body makes increase according to God.
That is all I have to say, and I commit it to you, dear brethren, as being, I believe, one of the most important things that I could bring before you at the present time.
{478}
LEADERSHIP AND THOSE LED
@Judges 7: 4 - 22
J.T. The subject in mind is *leadership*, not only to dwell on the leaders of God's people, but also God's people as led, and this book is aptly fitted to help us on this point, for the whole position of the testimony in this book is made to hinge on those who were put forward as leaders. It is said that God was with each judge.
The book begins with putting Judah forward; he occupies the early part of it, the outstanding leader from Judah being Othniel, son of Kenaz, as we read in chapter 3. It is said that the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, so that the thought of leadership in this book requires the Spirit; it contemplates men who are spiritual. In view of the leadership of Israel after Moses, Jehovah said of Joshua, "a man in whom is the Spirit", @Numbers 27: 18. And if leadership is to be successful, spirituality must exist in some measure, at least, in those who are led. This chapter helps particularly, for it shows how those who are led are spiritual, that is, they are those who surrender the mere natural enjoyment of God's creatures with a view to the testimony. They partake of God's creatures, but partake of them not merely for satisfaction, but in order to take part in the testimony. Another thought that appears in this book is that leaders *led*, and the idea of leading is peculiarly in Gideon, because it is not a question of what he said, but of what he *did*. It says here, "it shall be that, as I do, so shall ye do", hence spiritual leadership is in what the person does, as @Acts 1 says of the Lord Jesus -- "Jesus began both to do and to teach". Acts being the great book of precedent and exemplification of the truth in the leaders, this is significant.
P.L. To Timothy the apostle says, "use a little wine on account of thy stomach and thy frequent illnesses".
{479}
Do we have a leader in Paul, spiritual in his ways in Christ, but also recognising the creatures of God: that these are to be subordinated to the needs of the believer in his conflict for the testimony?
J.T. Very good -- "a little". Jacob directs his sons to take to Joseph a little of this and a little of that (@Genesis 43: 11). He keeps within limitations. A little is prescribed by the great servant for a young man, Timothy, but evidently he was capable of restraining himself.
P.L. So Jonathan with the honey on the end of his staff, he held the mercies of God only to strengthen him the more on the battlefield.
J.T. The means of acquiring it would indicate that the quantity used was little. Jonathan says, "With the end of the staff which is in my hand I tasted a little honey".
C.H.H. Is the point in what is *used*?
J.T. Quite so. Every creature of God is good and to be received with thanksgiving. They are sanctified by the word of God and prayer; the word "little" implies that you are able to control yourself in what you use, and you use it wisely and for your immediate help as in the testimony. Here the test is severe, and only three hundred out of ten thousand stood it. Twenty-two thousand had already failed in an easier test.
E.W.C. Would you say that both the battle and the supply are, in that way, thought of by these selected ones?
J.T. Everything is carefully foreseen and arranged by God in view of leadership, and our object now is to see what leadership is according to God, and the relation as to the intelligence between the leaders and those they lead. We cannot expect the latter to be anything more than those who lead them, and hence the importance of the exemplification of the truth in those who minister it. Undoubtedly the vessels are prepared beforehand, even as to ancestry, birth, environment, and physical constitution. All that is prearranged. You could not conceive for a moment that God would put gift or ability to lead
{480}
His people in one not prepared in all that was necessary for the vessel beforehand. So we get with Paul -- an *elect vessel* unto me, the Lord says. When we come to Gideon it is said that Jehovah *looked on him*, as if there was a foreshadowing of Christ, "Jehovah looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might", chapter 6: 14.
E.B.McC. Did he qualify through his lowliness, that he was little in his own eyes? He did not feel equal to what God was about to put upon him, but he was prepared for it.
J.T. That is how the facts stand. He was occupied, as we have often remarked, in threshing wheat, and doing so in small and awkward quarters, that is in the winepress, indicating that he was one who could accommodate himself to the circumstances afforded, whatever they might be in the service of God.
W.S.S. His estimate of himself was very small. He speaks of his thousand being the poorest in Manasseh and he the least in his father's house.
J.T. Excellent qualification in those whom God would use in His service.
P.L. Does it suggest the leader's right outlook, that all the fruit of conflict is to be returned in praise to God?
J.T. Yes. He discerns, before he is called into service, the trend of the enemy's workings and is doing what he can to nullify the enemy's efforts. The Midianites were destroying the food, and he was securing it from them.
P.L. So that a feature of leadership is to eliminate all side issues and concentrate on the vital question.
Rem. Is the leader governed by what Jehovah said to him? When Gideon said, "wherewith shall I save Israel?" Jehovah said, "I will certainly be with thee", and so Gideon on his own initiative decided as to the manner in which he would act.
J.T. Quite so, and whilst he, felt himself weak and small, God says, "Go in this thy might". That is the point, there was one there that God could use.
{481}
E.B.McC. He qualified in that way for selection, and thus was qualified to select others, God giving this means into his hand -- the test in our chapter.
J.T. He would be able to do what was to be done "as one man". That is the principle of unity, as you might say, the principle of all right collective action, that what he did would be the result of the unified relation between himself and those he led. What was done thus was, as it were, by one man.
P.L. So he would be "the man of Israel" in the Midianite's dream, not the man of Manasseh, his own tribe.
J.T. That is right, that is the title he gets. The passage reads, "And his fellow answered and said, This is nothing else save the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, the man of Israel: God hath given into his hand Midian and all the host" (verse 14). This shows how pronounced is the idea of "the man", one divinely selected; and as we carry that into the New Testament, it is Christ.
P.L. He has to carry out what belongs to the whole of Israel, at a time when those available are reduced to three hundred men. Is this very much the remnant position of these days?
J.T. That is the thought, and one would like particularly to show the relation between the leaders and the led, as in Christ, who is, of course, the Leader of His people, the one Man. He uses many, but the idea is to see that what is done is done by Him, it is what Jesus *began to do*; Acts begins there; a great book of precedents and examples of service, beginning with the thought of "which Jesus began both to do and to teach". *Doing* comes before the teaching.
E.S.W. Is that why the Lord Jesus selected twelve particularly, that they might be able to lead the spiritual, and thus enter into leadership?
J.T. I think so. There was the principle of selection, first of twelve, and then, less formally, of three for more
{482}
spiritual service, which is to govern all, so that the whole apostolic number should be in accord with Christ. It would be as "one man", for Christ really was doing all, but, as ascended, acting through them. Scripture says, "he has preached the glad tidings of peace to you who were afar off, and ... to those who were nigh". The preaching was His.
F.W.W. What are we to understand by the mode of selection in our chapter?
J.T. I think it is a test as to how we use God's creatures, whether we use them for the sake of support in the testimony, or whether we use them as a matter of enjoyment; whether the man, having means, acquired maybe by his own ability, or left to him, whether he holds all that for his own pleasure, or uses it to promote the testimony. The test was *how* the water was appropriated. The three hundred took it "as a dog lappeth". I suppose it would be a way opposite to the etiquette of the world, the ordinary self-satisfying way of partaking of God's creatures. This way would be despised by the cultured of the world.
F.W.W. Would you apply the principle of selection, as to invitations, for such meetings as we have just had?
J.T. Yes; there is nothing more marked in Scripture than the thought of selection. It is a great principle with God, and I believe it is carried out rightly in the way of invitations at a time like this, because you have to act wisely, and make the occasion such as is most likely to be useful. Large numbers may be in the way, and this chapter, I think, is a warning that we should not have numbers as a leading thought; although God will have His number and a great number, but what He will have will not be the result of promiscuous gathering; He will have just what He elected. That will involve quality, for all are to be like Christ. What is seen here is not sovereign selection, but the *persons qualified* by the evidence -- typically -- of spirituality. Jehovah says to Gideon, "Still the people are many; bring them down to the
{483}
water, and I will try them for thee there". He does not give any idea as to how He will do it. We have to see what God is doing. A most interesting thing in seeking to serve and lead the Lord's people in the right way is to watch what God is doing. He works with those whom He puts forward to lead His people. It is a question of *water* here, what they would *need*, a very ordinary thing, but God uses it, making the manner of the appropriation of it the test.
E.E.L. Is there a state necessary for God to commit Himself to?
J.T. That is what comes out. God is to do the testing. We are told of Him that He sits as a Refiner, *watching* those being tested. We are to learn from God as to this. He does not disclose to Gideon how He will do it. He says, "it shall be, that of whom I shall say unto thee, This shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I shall say unto thee, This shall not go with thee, the same shall not go. And he brought down the people to the water; and Jehovah said to Gideon, Every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a dog lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that boweth down on his knees to drink. And the number of them that lapped, with their hand to their mouth, were three hundred men; and all the rest of the people bowed down on their knees to drink water". That is, Gideon had to wait and see what God would do.
C.H.H. Does that imply the servant must have spiritual sensitiveness in waiting on God?
J.T. Yes. You can understand how Gideon would be in danger of trusting in the arm of the flesh, having primarily such a large army. It would tend to elate his flesh; and we are all capable of that, with large numbers of brethren and meetings in fellowship. It does not, however, say Gideon was affected in that way, nor is it indicated that Jehovah regarded *him* as in that danger. He says, "lest Israel vaunt themselves against me,
{484}
saying, Mine own hand hath saved me". He also says, "I will try them for thee". He is acting *with* Gideon. Thus God honours His servants, accrediting them with His own feelings. The first test is as to *fear*, as to how much courage the saints have -- those nominally in the testimony and in the conflict. Here twenty-two thousand went back.
E.E.L. What would you say about Gideon's repeated desire for signs for assurance? Zacharias inquired how he was to know, and the angel did not approve of this, but Gideon's request for signs was approved of.
J.T. Zacharias *prayed* for something and when God sent the word that it would come about, he did not believe it. It should rebuke us, that when we get our prayers answered, we are surprised. Here I think the desire for signs is weakness of faith, but God honours the faith that was there. Gideon needed to be assured, so God gives him the signs he asks for. The sign spoken of in our chapter was proposed by Jehovah. "Go thou with Phurah thy servant down to the camp; and thou shalt hear what they say", verse 10. It was God's proposal, which is very touching, for God knew the measure of His servant. He knew Gideon had faith and courage, but he needed this sign, and he got it. I do not know that any of us can go on without this gracious consideration. God knows our measure and considers for us, and comes down to where we are so that we might be assured in going on with the conflict.
P.L. On a later battlefield we have the Lord speaking by night to Paul, and saying, "Fear not, but speak and be not silent; because *I* am with thee, and no one shall set upon thee to injure thee; because I have much people in this city", @Acts 18: 9, 10. Is that the Lord graciously succouring the apostle?
J.T. Yes. He took account of Paul in that way as entering on the great service at Corinth. This proposal
{485}
of Jehovah's, to do the testing Himself, is very solemn, both for those who are leading and for those who are led.
E.S.W. Are we being constantly tested as to this, day by day?
J.T. That is how it works out. If God is doing it, it is a constant matter, and those serving His people are to have their eyes alert to see what God is doing, what He is effecting in His people.
P.L. Would you say that this reducing process is illustrated in @John 6: "Unless ye shall have eaten the flesh of the Son of man, and drunk his blood, ye have no life in yourselves"? The chapter begins with a great crowd, but in the end you have what corresponds with the three hundred, personified in Peter; he says, "Lord, to whom shall we go?" Have you the led there?
J.T. Yes. That chapter is a supreme test, the Lord's teaching as to His flesh being truly food, His blood truly drink. "Many therefore of his disciples having heard it said, This word is hard; who can hear it?" also "many of his disciples went away back and walked no more with him". Thus the Lord's inquiry, "Will *ye* also go away?" Peter's reply shows the apostles stood the test.
J.C.S. Is bowing down on the knees to drink suggestive of persons actuated by natural appetite?
J.T. That is what is meant, and leaning on natural support -- resting on their knees -- and not on faith. The others do not bow down, but lap with their hands to their mouths. They would take just sufficient to refresh them, and then go on.
Rem. It is a very humbling thing to go out to serve the Lord, and then turn back to one's own place.
J.T. Very humbling. You can picture the scene -- twenty-two thousand men turning back! What a scene that was! -- turning back as acknowledging that they were lacking in courage. They had not heart enough to go forward and sacrifice for the testimony. And then nine thousand seven hundred going back as unable to
{486}
appropriate the creatures of God on the principle of faith.
C.H.H. We see by this process the strengthening of the position instead of any weakening.
J.T. Yes. As coming to the idea of one man, that is the led are being brought into accord with the leader, and I think that is the idea, it is one man, all being under Christ. Thus it is what *He* is doing.
C.H.H. Are the moral and spiritual qualities seen in the leader, also in those led?
J.T. Yes. The three hundred do as Gideon does, they are near him and act as he acts.
P.L. I was thinking of Mark in this connection in 2 Timothy, would you say that he was brought in with the three hundred? It says, "Take Mark, and bring him with thyself, for he is serviceable to me for ministry", @2 Timothy 4: 11.
J.T. Yes; having at first failed, as governed by the natural, he comes into the line of true service. His gospel shows he came into what marked the three hundred.
J.C.S. "Look on me, and do likewise". Is that the language of a leader?
J.T. Exactly. The idea is not simply what I am saying; we may be able to say good things, but what marks me in the conflict?
J.C.S. So Paul could put himself forward on that line as a model.
J.T. The New Testament relative to this passage is @2 Corinthians 4. There Paul is set before the Corinthians as a true leader. In him is seen the life of Jesus; it is the one man, that is the idea that governs christianity, not ten thousand instructors, but one man. "I have espoused you unto one man", so Paul says of himself that he was always delivered unto death for Jesus¬ sake; he bore about in his body the dying of Jesus, that the life of Jesus might be manifested in his body; and he was always delivered to death to that end. He had in his heart the
{487}
precious treasure of the light of God shining in the face of Jesus, and as the vessel was broken, it shone out all the more. The connection between the passages is very apparent.
Ques. Would you say we have this in earthen vessels?
J.T. Quite so. Like the torches within pitchers in the hands of Gideon's men.
W.H.W. Is there a parallel case in the way the apostle worked among the Corinthians? He took up the work of a tent-maker and laboured with his hands so as not to be chargeable to anyone.
J.T. His point was that the power of Christ should be there, Christ speaking in him; it was Christ, the one Man.
J.C.S. Are those who assume leadership often robbed of their power by going down on their knees, as it were, to things here?
J.T. I think so, and they do not set a good example to others. The great thought is to get the led in accord with the leader, the one man. The life of Jesus is the garb in which the service is carried on.
W.S.S. Gideon's qualities as a leader come into evidence as he deals with Ephraim, chapter 8: 1 - 3. The benefit of the leadership is universal.
J.T. Just so. It shows you how you conciliate others and bring them on to the side of the truth.
J.J.J. This is the test of self-denial, which we may be equal to at the first, but as we grow older we tend to lapse back to self-indulgence.
J.T. Yes. We make excuse for old age, etc. It is said of Moses that his natural force was not abated, and the same of Caleb. The strength of Caleb was as it was in his youth, to go out and to come in.
E.B.McC. This material is really delivered unto death, that the power of God might be manifested in the three hundred, so they took courage and character from the leading of Gideon.
{488}
J.T. It is like *one man*, they are actuated by him, a remarkable figure, and, as already remarked, the book of Acts is intended to convey that to us. However many servants there may be, all is the work of Christ. As with Peter and Paul: Peter says, "going he preached to the spirits which are in prison", @1 Peter 3: 19. Christ is the Preacher. Paul says, "coming, he has preached the glad tidings of peace to you who were afar off", @Ephesians 2: 17. Peter says "going"; Paul says "coming".
S.H.B. It is what Christ has done through him, "from Jerusalem, and in a circuit round to Illyricum", @Romans 15: 19.
Rem. As regards leadership, Paul could say to the Philippians, "What ye have ... heard, and seen in me, these things do", @Philippians 4: 9.
Ques. Is it the same thought in @John 13 -- the Lord washing His disciples¬ feet?
J.T. Yes. The Lord says, "Do ye know what I have done to you?" It is the continuation of Christ.
J.C.S. Is the thought of leadership a universal one and not merely local?
J.T. It may work out locally, but its bearing is general. Christ is exalted as Leader (@Acts 5: 31), and His leadership is reflected now in others whom He raises up (see @Hebrews 13: 7, 17).
S.H.B. Does the sovereignty of God come in?
J.T. You may be sure that God foresaw what would happen, and how delightful it must have been to Him to see three hundred emerging out of this test. I do not know of anything more interesting than to look into Scripture and see what is pleasing to God. The creation represents potentialities, what God effected in the way of fundamental or basic things, but @Genesis 2 involves the *fulness* of that, that is the glory coming out. He said that what He did, as seen in @Genesis 1, was very good, but in chapter 2 it is the working out of that, the fulness of it, so that you have what is delightful to God: the creation of man in the sense of being formed, the garden, the river,
{489}
and the animals coming to Adam, and Eve being built and presented to Adam. God is pleased with all that, as the working out of potentialities, and that is going on all the time. History in this sense is constantly being made in heaven, as God's pleasure is worked out tangibly. The test in our chapter, to bring out the desired qualities in these three hundred, is in keeping with this; God put them there. The basic thought was there, but it is the working out of this in the test that is so pleasing to God. The fulness of the earth is the outcome of the basic thought. There was fruitfulness inherent in the earth. As it came forth from the waters, life was there.
D.S. Justification for this selection is seen in the fact that the three hundred were prepared to follow the matter to its conclusion.
J.T. Yes. "The number of them that lapped, with their hand to their mouth, were three hundred men; and all the rest of the people bowed down on their knees to drink water". There they are, under reproach spiritually; but Jehovah said to Gideon, "By the three hundred men that lapped will I save you, and give Midian into thy hand; and let all the people go every man to his place. And they took the victuals of the people in their hand, and their trumpets; and all the men of Israel he sent away, every man to his tent, but retained the three hundred men". The first lot *went* back. Now this nine thousand seven hundred men are sent away to their tents. How shameful that was! But the three hundred are standing out under the eye of God as answering to His test.
C.I. What character is suggested in Midian?
J.T. They are related outwardly to the people of God, and they are destroying their food. They are *very numerous*. You see the people teeming out of the 'churches', and perhaps we want some show like that, but the three hundred suggest the opposite to mere numbers with God; with Him quality, that is, spirituality, is required.
{490}
Ques. Would the test be universal?
J.T. Quite so; the primary number was comparatively large and the first test was simple, but this test was reserved, it was a secret matter. You would only see it as the persons are drinking the water, and God is there to apply it; He says, "I will try them for thee there". As He said to Moses, "I will stand before thee there upon the rock". That God was there is very solemn.
J.R.F. These three hundred who lapped are of interest to God, because God's things are paramount with them, rather than their own needs.
J.T. Yes. You may be sure that God would help them to do this. He knew they were capable of it, and so would help them.
J.C.S. Speaking of leadership, do you think that where the leaders are carrying a hard, legal spirit, those who are led would be formed on the same line?
J.T. Yes. You will notice here that all the men of Israel (verse 8), were sent away, each to his tent, but the three hundred were *retained*. There is something very beautiful in that, the Lord taking on those who answer to His test.
E.B.McC. Special meetings would illustrate that the power of God is seen. Is not the great need, as the apostle had in mind, that the power of God might be evidenced and not the power of man?
J.T. That is what Paul said exactly, that the excellency of the power should be of God.
W.H.W. Was the Lord thinking of what God had secured, when He said to His disciples, "Will *ye* also go away?"
J.T. I think so. It was Peter who answered, one of the twelve, one of a number that stood the test. Peter says, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God". It is a past experience; "we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of
{491}
God". That is what is needed in the conflict. The Lord says, "Have not I chosen you the twelve? and of you one is a devil". It is remarkable that this should be brought in, making it clear that Peter's confession did not cover Judas.
W.H.W. The land had rest forty years and Midian lifted up their heads no more; the wonderful result of these three hundred men was thus secured.
E.S.W. Would you say this is pursuing a matter to its conclusion? We are frequently satisfied with a victory without pursuing the principle involved to its complete end.
J.T. Thus the enemy would rob us. One has seen it over and over again. God gives a victory, but the enemy is ready to rob us of the result, and that is where watchfulness is so much needed after a victory, that the ground gained may be consolidated.
Ques. Our perspective is wrong sometimes. Here they say, "For Jehovah and for Gideon!" Is it not *entirely* a question of God's rights?
J.T. It is right to say, "The sword of Jehovah and of Gideon". It is Christ in figure. It says of Gideon, he divided the three hundred into three companies. Some of us have been speaking of the numeral three in the history of the testimony, in Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, and Joshua; and it is stamped on this incident: three hundred standing the test, and then the three hundred sub-divided into three companies. "He put a trumpet in every man's hand, and empty pitchers, and torches within the pitchers. And he said to them, Look on me, and do likewise, behold, when I come to the extremity of the camp, it shall be that, as I do, so shall ye do. And when I blow with a trumpet, I and all that are with me, ye also shall blow the trumpets around the whole camp, and shall say, For Jehovah and for Gideon!" That is a form of words that has to be accepted as right. In what the apostle says
{492}
in @2 Corinthians 4, 1 think he means that it is a question of the dying of Jesus. He is their Leader, not Paul. Jesus is the Leader, and Paul was conformed to the life of Jesus. "Delivered unto death", for Jesus was delivered unto death, and bearing about in his body the dying of Jesus was what marked Paul, so that the life of Jesus, as manifested in us, is the outcome of the acceptance of death. What is inside is light, as Paul says. It shines in our hearts for the shining forth of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. It is only as the pitchers are broken that this light shines.
C.I. In principle the life of Jesus would be seen in the leaders.
J.T. That is exactly the idea. So we are all brought to the thought of "one man".
E.B.McC. We are told here what is going on in the other camp. Gideon went down with his servant and heard a whispering. This man did not think the camp was safe. He had an idea that something would happen.
J.T. Quite so. There is usually something in the enemy's camp to disrupt his purpose. It is an ambush that God sets there. Where did this man get his thought? So with Rahab -- God had her in Jericho. This man was the undoing of the Midianite position.
P.L. So those sent back by David to Jerusalem when Absalom reigned.
J.T. Yes. Even on the cross, God ordered the same thing, the undoing of the devil's scheme is indicated in one man turning to Jesus: he says, "Remember me, Lord, when thou comest in thy kingdom". It is in principle the disruption of the whole position.
P.L. Is it the same thing in the centurion declaring Him Son of God?
J.T. It is. The centurion said, "In very deed this man was just". It was the disruption of the Roman Empire, for he was an officer representing that empire.
J.R.F. Pilate says twice, "Take ye him", while his wife says, Have nothing to do with this man.
{493}
J.T. In these instances the whole system of the world is disrupted: there is testimony to the power that will effect this.
P.L. Mordecai was sitting in the gate.
J.T. Exactly, and the queen was inside -- again the disruption of the enemy's designs. Haman was overthrown directly through Esther. In our chapter the overthrow of the whole Midianitish power is the outcome of what is heard in its camp. It says, "his fellow answered and said, This is nothing else save the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, the man of Israel". He was not loyal to his general! If some people were to hear what we are saying, they might say we are disloyal, but spiritually, what is going on today on God's part is the disruption of the world. Then another thing that comes out is what is said by the man who heard the dream: "God hath given into his hand Midian and all the host"; then we have what God gets: "And it came to pass when Gideon heard the telling of the dream and its interpretation, that he worshipped". What a fine triumph that was! As a result of what He places in the enemy's camp God is being worshipped!
Ques. Is that what God had secured before the victory?
J.T. Quite; God is getting something before the battle began.
Ques. Would that be the power in which he went forward?
J.T. Yes. He is a worshipper.
Ques. Does the barley bread suggest that one right thought in regard to Christ will upset the whole of the enemy's position?
J.T. That is so. It represents something irregular, but it has reference to a *whole* thought. It is a "cake". We must be governed by a whole thought.
P.L. Christendom is marked by partial thoughts, involving confusion.
{494}
J.T. Here it is a *cake* of barley bread. Barley seems to be the earliest cereal to come forward. Christ is to be apprehended as a whole thought. "Take, eat: this is my body". That is a whole thought, not His flesh in Matthew and Mark, but His body. It is the *one Man*. The Lord's supper is one Man, "my body", it is a whole thought. The loaf in the Lord's supper is Christ's body in which He died, but it also symbolises the saints as His body. The dream is to strengthen Gideon. Then the light in the pitchers and the trumpets sounding out are public testimony. "If also our gospel is veiled, it is veiled in those that are lost". There was the clear shining of light, and if it was veiled to anyone he was among "those that are lost". That is what is seen in @2 Corinthians 4.
