{1}
THE TESTIMONY (NO. 1)
@2 Timothy 1:8, @2 Timothy 2:1 - 13
J.T. We started yesterday with the thought of the testimony, and it seems to be on the minds of many that it should be taken up today. This epistle presents itself as particularly setting it forth. I shall be glad of any thought you may have on the testimony as spoken of here: "Be not thou therefore, ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner: but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel according to the power of God".
H.D'A.C. It is remarkable it should be called a testimony here, and that the encouragement should be given to Timothy.
J.T. I suppose the prominence given by the apostle to his own position, in this epistle, would suggest that he had specially in his mind the unfolding of the truth; it would suggest, that the practical way in which the testimony is unfolded in his ministry, was in his mind. That is the full church position; and the light set there in connection with his ministry. He couples "the testimony of our Lord", with "and of me his prisoner".
J.S.A. And then he also connects it with the gospel, of which he was the special exponent.
J.T. I think that being then a prisoner indicates the reception that the testimony received in the world. The apostolic position is a very important consideration in connection with the testimony. I think Paul represented the apostolic idea, and the opening up of the testimony, which was foreshadowed in Moses¬ ministry.
W.H. Would you say Moses presents to us the apostolic idea?
{2}
J.T. Yes.
Ques. What do you mean by the apostolic idea?
J.T. I think that the Lord had taken up Paul, and He would adhere to Paul; He would allow no conditions arising in the world to interfere with His choice: "that by me", the apostle says, "the preaching might be fully known". (@2 Timothy 4:17) That is, it must come out by the vessel divinely chosen.
Rem. You mean the apostle being a prisoner does not affect the testimony?
J.T. Paul's imprisonment shows the kind of reception which the testimony received.
Ques. Would it affect the testimony for the good of the testimony?
J.T. No doubt; but it shows the kind of reception the testimony had received. But then the Lord was not going to be affected by that.
J.S.A. That shows the necessity of the power of God to make good the testimony.
J.T. So that the two thoughts run through the epistle. The apostle, the one through whom the power is manifested, can say, "the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, that by me the preaching might be fully known". (@2 Timothy 4:17)
Ques. Why do you make the apostolic position so prominent?
J.T. Because I think that it is well to see that God has never receded from the position He took up. He took up a certain position in Paul's ministry, and He has never receded from that; and that position stands.
Ques. Do you mean that if we are to have the testimony that position must be recognised in our souls?
J.T. Yes. You have to make up your mind to that.
Ques. What do you understand by the testimony of the Lord?
{3}
J.T. I think it is the testimony connected with the Lord viewed in the official position, which involves His power. You are not to be ashamed of the testimony of *our Lord*, because we can reckon upon His power as support.
T.M.G. That is why it is the testimony of our Lord.
J.T. I think so. I think it is a great thing to make up your mind that God has taken up a certain position in the ministry of Paul which He proposes to maintain, and for that you require the strength of the Lord.
T.M.G. And the Lord alone is equal to that; and He will have that testimony carried out.
Ques. Does the testimony involve the whole church position?
J.T. I think that is exactly what it does. God has taken up a position here in the unfolding of His mind, and He is not going to recede from it. Now, the question is whether we are *prepared* for that; there is to be no surrender of it. That is the great point in the epistle, I think. There it is; the testimony of our Lord has been unfolded. It is not in this epistle a question of revelation.
H.D'A.C. It is not simply that *the Lord* is the testimony; the Lord is presented as the One who supports the testimony, and carries it on.
H.M. It speaks of the testimony of the Christ being formed among the Corinthians. Is there any difference in the thought there?
J.T. The Christ has reference, I think, to the Man whom God has chosen. The thought of "the Christ" depends on what Christ is as *Man*. It is God, as it were, making His choice. He has taken up that Man, and in that Man He unfolds His mind. It is not a question of His power, but of His choice. The Christ is God's choice. God has anointed that Man.
{4}
H.D'A.C. Yes; and all the thoughts of God for man are set forth in Him. Would you not connect it with "the promise of life in Christ Jesus" (@1 Timothy 1:1) which we read of at the beginning of the epistle?
J.T. I think so. God's Man has come into evidence; now God has found *everything* in that Man personally. He is so infinitely agreeable to God that He has anointed Him. The thought in anointing is that the anointed one is God's choice. "Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: for him hath God the Father sealed", (@John 6: 27). The Father has taken up that Man, and everything has now to be administered by Him; so that He is the anointed Vessel. I think it is in that way we have the "testimony of the Christ". (@1 Corinthians 1:6)
Ques. It is taken up in that Person?
J.T. Yes. The kings of the earth stand up and the rulers take counsel against the Lord and against His Anointed, @Psalm 2. It is the question of God's choice; but God says, "Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion. I will declare the decree: the Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee". (@Psalm 2:6,7). He has put that Man in the place of power and glory.
J.S.A. If I understand aright what you said about the testimony of the Christ, it has more reference to what He is as the anointed Man; but when it comes to the Lord it is more a question of power in carrying out all things.
J.T. I think that is it.
Rem. One can see the great necessity of it in Timothy; there had been a turning away, and power was needed to support the truth. In Corinthians it was really the testimony that the apostle presented to them to deliver them from man.
J.T. Yes. I think that, speaking generally,
{5}
where souls have to be delivered, from the political world around us, what effects that is the testimony of the Christ.
"Neither has the Lord chosen him", (@1 Samuel 16:8) was what the Spirit said to Samuel when each of the sons of Jesse were made to pass before him; but when David appears Jehovah says, "Arise, anoint him, for this is he". (@1 Samuel 16:12). It is an immense thing to see the Man whom God has chosen for the accomplishment of His designs. If you see the Lord's Anointed it will deliver you from all that is political here.
H.D'A.C. And David comes in after the man of the people's choice. Saul was descriptive of the people's choice, though God allowed the lot to fall upon him. He knew there was none who could, according to the people's idea, better represent what they wanted. He allowed Saul to come forward; and then He brings in the Man of His choice.
J.T. How ready our hearts are to light upon some man.
T.M.G. The first man proved to be a failure, and then God brought in another Man.
J.T. You have to consider the *kind* of man whom God has anointed.
T.M.G. A man of another order.
J.T. Yes; now David was that in principle.
Ques. Do you get the thought of that in Noah and the ark?
J.T. Yes; in a certain sense.
In regard to the anointing, if you see the Man that God has anointed it delivers you from all officialism. God has found. His Man, and He has anointed Him; He has taken Him up and anointed Him. The next thing the anointing involves is that He is in the place of authority; He is "both Lord and Christ;" and the thought of the Lord is introduced here that we might be assured of the power that supports Timothy. There are two things which come out in
{6}
connection with David; the complete overthrow of the Philistine power; the Philistine power is really the religious power, and then David gets the ark; he comes to Zion and he installs the ark there. The effect of the anointing was that David secured the testimony in its own place, and protected it.
Rem. There is a beautiful verse in @Psalm 89:19: "Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy one and saidst, I have laid help upon one that is mighty; I have exalted one chosen out of the people". That is looking forward to what you speak of.
J.S.A. Reference was made just now to politics. I remember a brother saying that the first verse of the New Testament had cleared him as to politics when he saw that the true Son of Abraham sat on the throne of David; and that anything you could set up in this world meanwhile would only make things worse.
H.D'A.C. It is very easy to get our eyes on the wrong man. Samuel mourned for Saul, but if Hannah's song had been before him he would not have looked to Saul. It is in Hannah's song we get the first mention of God's Anointed. She said: "The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces; out of heaven shall he thunder upon them; the Lord shall judge the ends of the earth, and he shall give strength unto his king and exalt the horn of his anointed". (@1 Samuel 2:10) That referred to the Christ. Samuel had to learn really who was God's Christ; that the Adam man came first in God's wisdom to show that a man who is the very cream, so to speak, of humanity, the best man that could be produced from amongst men, only brings in ruin when it comes to the crisis; when it comes to the test he fails. Then God brings out *His* man. Samuel had to learn that only David would do for God. We take a long time to get to Christ. We were very glad to get to Him as Saviour, but all our political thoughts are
{7}
very much in connection with men around us. Nothing delivers us from the politics of this world like a true thought of Christ. You will be ashamed that you ever touched politics when you get true thoughts of Christ. Men are not going to live down here through a man like themselves, a man of their own choosing; it must be through God's Christ. Only through the Man of God's choice can the nations be blessed.
J.S.A. There are many who keep clear of politics as regards actual facts, but who get under the spirit that is in the world; for instance, those who take part in voting.
Rem. Someone has said, very truly, that you cannot avoid in a certain way forming a judgment about things; but if your heart, as has been said, is set on another Man altogether, the Man of God's thoughts, and all that belongs to Him, you discover that His politics are entirely apart from everything here.
J.T. I think it is quite right to have a judgment as to what is going on in the world, because the elements that are active are simply what God is holding in abeyance. The world is still the sphere of God's government. It is extremely interesting to see how God comes in from time to time to modify things for the sake of the assembly. One has often observed how the spirit of lawlessness has been restrained for the sake of the assembly; and our prayers should be in that connection. Whilst you have a judgment of things, and you see the development of the antichristian system, and that all is about to be manifested, yet you are thinking; of Christ, and you are living in a world that is centred in God's Anointed. It is very interesting to see in @Acts 4 how the early saints recognised what God did. In the presence of the combined hostility against the Lord and against His Anointed they prayed to God;
{8}
the God that created the heavens and the earth and all that is in them. They were not restricted; they recognised the divine sovereignty of God, and they prayed, and the place where they were assembled was shaken.
J.S.A. And they also owned that nothing could be done except what God had ordered should be done.
L.M. How are you to become acquainted with things in the world? .
J.T. It would be a very bad result if what we are saying would encourage the saints to read the newspapers. The book of Revelation contemplates a knowledge of passing events. The number of the beast has to be counted, for instance.
H.D'A.C. You cannot help hearing of passing events. Why then go out of your way to get the knowledge of them if things are forced upon me I seek to contrast them. It is an immense thing to contrast the things that are forced upon you with *our* system, the system of God's Christ.
J.T. The man to whom God revealed His mind, and with whom God's testimony began, was a very unpatriotic man; he forsook his country, and his kindred, and his father's house; hence he declined all that which men aspire to in this world.
H.D'A.C. But he was a great politician for "he looked for a city which hath foundations". (@Hebrews 11:10)
J.T. And God answered that. As enlightened by God you have certain aspirations. Abraham looked for a city, and God proposes for *you* what *you* look for, that you get position in the divine system for what you may think you lose in abandoning the present order of things.
J.S.A. Man desires knowledge, power, and place. Well, the apostle says, "that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings". (@Philippians 3:10) There you have knowledge, power,
{9}
and place. God answers your prayers in *His* way, not in yours.
J.T. I think what Mr. C. referred to is very helpful, and that is, that the things about us being forced upon us enable us to take account of the contrast in what God presents; the contrast becomes very real to you.
Ques. Are the afflictions of the gospel part of the contrast.
J.T. I think the afflictions of the gospel indicated the kind of reception the gospel received in the world; so that Timothy is called upon to suffer evil along with the glad tidings. I think suffering is involved in the position we take up in relation to the testimony.
J.S.A. It is also interesting to see that the glad tidings is looked upon as if it were something that is going on in this world with the power of God behind it to carry it on; but the question is, Are we in fellowship with that?
H.D'A.C. To my mind, we ought to stand for the glad tidings, and to be imbued with it, and be impressed with it more than ever. Some may have the idea that there is no use going on with the gospel; but that should make us all the more eager to go on with it.
Rem. One reason would be that the glad tidings brings Christ into prominence.
H.D'A.C. Yes it does.
Ques. Would you point out what is meant by the testimony involving the whole church position.
J.T. Well, I think the testimony involves all that which has come out in the ministry of Paul. Peter received a commission from the Lord in receiving the keys of the kingdom; and the Lord entrusts light as to the church to Peter. He says, "On this rock I will build my assembly, and hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it". (@Matthew 16:18) And then He says
{10}
"I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens, and whatsoever thou mayest bind upon the earth shall be bound in the heavens, and whatsoever thou mayest loose on the earth shall be loosed in the heavens". (@Matthew 16:19) I think the Lord, after having introduced the idea of the church, immediately added that of the kingdom, to show that there would be a way made for the church; and in intimating a binding and a loosing, I think He intended to lift from the Gentiles the restrictions that God had placed upon them governmentally. He intended that those restrictions should be removed, so that the ground might be prepared for Paul's ministry. It is in Paul's ministry you have the church in its world-wide aspect, and I think that is what is in view here; the testimony here is established through the ministry of Paul.
Ques. When you speak of the restrictions that were placed on the Gentiles, what do you mean?
J.T. In calling out Israel, and separating them specially from the nations, there were certain restrictions placed upon the nations. They were "without God in the world", and had no title; they were strangers to the covenant of promise; they had nothing in connection with what God had instituted. Now, Peter removes these restrictions from off the Gentiles. By baptism I think he brought the Gentile under the wing of the Lord, so to speak. Peter had to be educated for it in the case of Cornelius, but he commanded baptism; he baptised them in the name of the Lord, and so he brought the Gentile under the wing of the Lord. Now, that makes room for the church.
J.S.A. Simeon in Luke, announced that the Lord was to be a light for the revelation of the Gentiles, and Peter is the one who is used to bring them into it.
J.T. In the apostle Paul's ministry you have
{11}
Paul unfolding all the mind of God in regard to Christ, and the church's place in God's counsels. Now, that involves a very great deal, because it involves the heavens and the earth as well as God's thoughts of blessing for all. God is not going to recede from His thought; that is His testimony.
Ques. How can a person be "ashamed of the testimony?"
Rem. What is referred to there is the opposition which the apostle met with.
T.E.W. It conveys this, that God had abandoned the earthly centre -- Jerusalem. A light, a voice, from heaven; all that indicates the transference of the centre from Jerusalem to heaven.
Rem. Someone asks, how anybody can be ashamed of the testimony. How are *we* not to be ashamed of it?
W.K. Do not be ashamed to identify yourself with it.
H.D'A.C. I think you should consider whether there is a single point you ought to be ashamed of. Take the whole testimony of Christ; there is nothing whatever shameful in it, in all its parts it is infinitely glorious. When you realise that, you can understand the injunction, "Be not therefore ashamed of the testimony".
Rem. The fact of the warning being given shows that the danger was present.
Rem. There is not a thing in this world which you should not blush at -- the whole system is wrong. We, get under the influence of things around, and hence we get ashamed of Christ.
T.M.G. "The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus; for he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain". (@2 Timothy 1:16)
L.M. How are we to know a man who is a prisoner for Him?
J.T. Well, prisoners for the testimony's sake were
{12}
always very scarce, and it is a question whether there are any today; but there is one thing sure, the gospel is in reproach; it is not bound now. It is very encouraging to see, in @Acts 7, that whilst Saul, the great adversary of the gospel, was binding men and women, the gospel went on.
L.M. We have come to a very bad pass if there are no prisoners now.
J.T. It is a question of how much we are identified with it; it is a question of how many are espousing it.
H.M. I notice you turn from the expression "testimony" to "gospel". Do you identify the two expressions in your mind?
H.D'A.C. They seem very closely connected. When you come to the gospel you think of God coming out in all that He is.
T.M.G. It is concerning His Son.
J.S.A. I think the words about the apostle's preaching in @Romans 16:25, are very interesting. "Now to him that is of power to establish you according to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery". (@Romans 16:25)
Ques. Do we need to know the heavenly position of the church in our souls, so as to realise the power of God?
J.T. I think it is a great thing to have before your soul the power of God; but before you can touch what is heavenly you have to see as to whether you are entitled to the earth. It is very weak to talk about the heavenly position if you do not see your title to live here.
Ques. What do you mean by title?
J.T. Well, the Lord has brought to light by the glad tidings, life and incorruptibility; that does not go beyond the present position. It is a question of the power of God. Now, the Lord established a title for man to live on earth, and unless you see that title it is very weak to talk about a title to heaven.
{13}
The question of life and death was raised on earth; that question was not raised in heaven it was raised on earth. The whole point is as to whether man can establish a title to life.
Ques. Do you mean because he had forfeited it himself?
J.T. Yes; man had forfeited his title to life; now the Lord is said to have annulled death, but before He annulled death He established a title to live.
Ques. Is that what the anointing comes in in connection with?
J.T. I think so. Whom would God anoint except a Man who has title to live?
J.S.A. There is an interesting verse of scripture that supports what you have been saying -- "In this was manifested the love of God towards us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him", (@1 John 4:9)
Ques. It is connected with new creation?
J.T. Surely: but has man a title to live on earth? That must be settled before the heavenly position can be taken up.
Ques. How has that title been made good to us?
J.T. It was first made good in Christ. The title to live must be established by Man. It is a wonderful proposition, to my mind. Man has brought in death; and he is perfectly helpless, unless MAN establishes a title to live.
We all know that the Lord when here was, as He is now, a divine Person; that is a cardinal truth of Christianity; One with the Father. On that side we can easily understand how everything should be accomplished; but the point was that He should become Man, and that being so what came out in Him as Man here was that He had a title to live; death had no claim upon Him.
{14}
Rem. No claim upon Him personally, for He was the righteous Man.
J.T. Yes, exactly. The idea was God and man. God formed His creature man, for Himself, and that creature was made to look up to God. God was to be the supreme object of affection for man.
T.M.G. Christ, loved righteousness and hated iniquity.
J.T. Man lost his place through disobedience; now what you see in Christ is the answer to all that; that is, in Christ, God had His full place; it was always a question of God with Him. We have to distinguish between the Lord's position as Son with the Father, and His position as Man before God..
Rem. We have the thought in the Lord's message to His disciples by Mary, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God". (@John 20:17)
J.T. It would have availed nothing for us if He had not died; but He had in view the establishment of eternal life for us. He was it; "in him was life, and the life was the light of men". (@John 1:4)
Rem. Where man failed in everything, Christ answered to God fully in His pathway before He entered into death.
J.T. Yes, so that manifestly death had no claim over Him. He went to the mount of transfiguration; He had proved His title as Man to go up to the highest place, and there Moses and Elias talk to Him of His decease, which He should, accomplish at Jerusalem. His title to be immune from death was perfectly evident, but they talk of His death. Now, that involves that He was a divine Person, because the overthrow of death involves that He was the Son of God. Now come to our side. "He that liveth and believeth on me shall never die". *You* cannot establish a title to live; but "he that liveth and *believeth in me* shall never die". (@John 11:26)
{15}
Ques. What time does that refer to? "He that liveth and believeth on me shall never perish". (@John 11:26)
J.T. I think it means that faith in *that Person* ensures title to live; the pressure of death is removed from your spirit. You are not in the Christian position if the pressure of death is not removed from your spirit.
L.M. I thought the Scripture quoted referred to the world to come.
J.T. The assembly is relieved of the pressure of, death. The title to the position on earth must be made clear before we can talk about the heavenly position.
H.M. "We know that we have passed from death unto life". (@1 John 3:14) I suppose that is the same thought?
J.T. I think so.
Ques. Do you mean that we have title to life here?
J.T. In the midst of this scene of death, we are in the full light of what Christ is.
Rem. We have no title to live here, in connection with men in this world.
J.T. Not as men in the flesh, but as believers in Christ; belief in *that* Man is discarding *this* man.
Rem. We have the promise of the things that now are and of those which are to come.
J.T. Yes, but "the life that I now live in the flesh" (@Galatians 2:20) is another matter.
J.S.A. If we have a title to live here there is also a sphere established in which we can live, which is not the sphere of the world without.
T.M.G. @Romans 6 makes that clear.
J.T. The Lord made the position clear: He had given His instructions to the disciples; and then we read, "These words spake Jesus and lifted up his eyes to heaven and said, Father, the hour is come". (@John 17:1) Now, *there* is the MAN, and He speaks *in all conscious relationship with His Father;* He is
{16}
the Servant; and then. He goes on to say, "thou has given him authority over all flesh" (that is the Lord's position) "that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him". (@John 17:2) I think we should be greatly exercised about that. The Lord has a universal position in regard to men, and it is to the end that He should give eternal life to as many as the Father has given Him.
Ques. I suppose you would say because He was a divine Person?
J.T. Yes; I think John presents the Lord as administrating things on the ground of His Person. Paul presents Him rather as the anointed Man, but John says, "the Father loves the Son and hath given all things into his hand". (@John 3:35)
Rem. As many as were ordained to eternal life believed.
Ques. That is the divine side of the truth; what is the human side?
J.T. By the human side, I suppose you mean that you *believe*. "But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name". (@John 20:31)
Ques. Is there something further brought before us in this Scripture than what we have been speaking about; that the Lord has abolished death?
J.T. He has abolished it, and brought life and incorruptibility to light through the glad tidings. Now, this refers to the state of things that God intends for us; that are brought to light in the glad tidings.
Rem. Life and incorruptibility can only be seen in one Man, but this life and incorruptibility came to light in the Lord before He ascended.
Rem. I think John, in the epistle, is pointing out that Christ is a real Man; "Jesus Christ come in flesh". He had been so real that the apostle says,
{17}
"We have seen the Lord". (@John 20:25) The thought in eternal life is to see that man is entitled to live.
H.D'A.C. "He asked life of thee, and thou gavest it him, even length of days for ever and ever". (@Psalm 21:4) Would not that be the title to live?
Ques. If it is life now, why do you say title to live? Do you connect it with this order of things?
J.T. Oh, no; it is *not* connected with this order of things, because, as has been pointed out, there is a sphere in which we can live; but evidently the *title* to live precedes that.
H.D'A.C. Connected with the promise of life in Christ Jesus at the beginning of the epistle.
J.S.A. If life came in in Christ and is set forth in Him, He must have a sphere in which that life can be lived in relation to Himself.
Ques. Is the title to live presented in the testimony?
J.T. It is in the Lord's name.
L.M. What do you mean by life -- life and incorruptibility?
Rem. Mr. Darby made a remark that eternal life was to enjoy the position God gives you.
J.T. What I have before me is that it is due to God that life should be introduced here *in man;* it was *lost* in man. Think what it was to God, that the man that He formed for Himself should have to disappear in death; and what it was to God to see a Man reinstating all that, reinstating all that God's thought was for man! The Father's commandment was life everlasting. That was established in the Lord publicly; the title that man should not die; that was a public testimony; there was no obvious reason why that Man should die; He had every title to live, and for this reason, that God had His true place with Him, in every possible respect. What obvious ground was there for that Man to die?
{18}
J.S.A. God has His rightful place. Mr. Wigram when asked what he understood by being "dead in trespasses and sins", replied that man has not one thought Godward.
H.D'A.C. I do not think you can get any right thoughts except as you see them in Christ. Christ sets forth what is in the mind of God for man.
J.T. Now, he goes on to say, "this is life eternal that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent". (@John 17:3) He was in the full light of God, and He says, "this is life eternal that they might know thee the only true God". Now, that had reference to what Satan had introduced into the world, that is, idolatry. Satan had introduced idolatry into the world; Abraham had been called out of it, and it was to Abraham that the blessing was promised.
Ques. Is not God's thought for every man now that he might have eternal life?
J.T. The point is that the Lord has established the fact of man living here in the light of God, as knowing God; so that He says, "This is life eternal that they might know thee the only true God;" but more; "and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent". Life and incorruptibility are available through Him to all those whom the Father has given Him.
J.B. What is the obedience that is referred to in the passage? "by the obedience of one many are made righteous". (@Romans 5:19)
J.T. The point there is the Lord's death. I think we have to get the two things together, that is to say, the knowledge of the true God, and the knowledge of the One that God sent. Do you see what I mean?
Rem. I see that we may look more exclusively at the Lord's death, and not take into account the pathway of the Lord in which every thought of God was answered as to Man.
{19}
Rem. The question of the relation between God and man is settled in the pathway of the Lord?
J.T. Yes, in principle, but then it must be settled vicariously. He did *not* settle it in His pathway *for us*. It is essential that we should see that the question was settled for us vicariously on the cross; we must see that. "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness even so must the Son of man be lifted up". (@John 3:14)
J.S.A. Unless the Lord had been as Man the perfect answer to God, how could He vicariously have gone into it on our behalf. I think it is of very great importance to see that all had to be made perfectly clear. He would have abode alone in that order of things unless He had gone into death.
{20}
THE TESTIMONY (NO. 2)
@Romans 8: 14 - 16, 28 - 30; @Ephesians 1: 1 - 6
J.S.A. As some here were not present yesterday it may be necessary to state what the subject was. The *testimony* was before us, and it was pointed out, that it had two characters; the first referring to earth, how men could be on earth in true relationship with God; and, the second, that it had to do with the place God has given to His people in connection with Christ in the heavenlies. We were dwelling more on the position as set forth in Romans; that is to say, man made perfectly clear in relation to God, able to live to God on this earth.
J.T. It was thought that the epistle to the Romans deals with the first side of the truth, that which refers to man here on earth, so that man is reinstated in relation with God; and that the epistle to the Ephesians treats of the relationships in which the same persons are set, as connected with God's eternal counsels.
J.S.A. And these two things, one might add, must be taken together to get a true idea of the testimony.
Rem. You would say it is not God's intention to reinstate man in the position originally lost by him?
J.T. No; but I think it is important to see that God intends to establish every thought that He had indicated as to man here on earth. He set forth certain thoughts in connection with Israel, and those thoughts must find their answer first of all, before the heavenly side can be taken up.
Rem. And that would involve righteousness and life on our side.
{21}
H.D'A.C. You do not mean that man is reinstated in innocence, that man is put on the earth without the knowledge of good and evil; that could not be.
J.T. No. God's thought was that He would not surrender the idea of man. Satan would have robbed Him of man, of that order of being, but God would not surrender His purpose.
J.S.A. I understand in using the word reinstate you mean that God should have *man* back in relationship with Himself.
J.T. You must have the thoughts of God indicated in the Old Testament in regard to man established; because they refer to what God had in His mind to bring in here. What took place in Eden involved that God was robbed of all that; but in Christ becoming man every thought that God had indicated in regard to man on earth is taken up, and in every way set forth.
H.D'A.C. Man was made in the image and likeness of God; and he had the right to the tree of life; he did not actually take of the tree of life; but he had the right to it before the fall.
J.T. There were no restrictions in regard to the tree of life. Man was to be here as God's glory. That was a very great idea; and that had to be set forth in man. It was due to God that it should be.
T.M.G. So that none of the thoughts that God has had with regard to man are lost, even though sin has come in and spoiled man in the first state. Is that your thought?
J.T. Yes; the Lord says, He restored that which He took not away.
J.A.M. Do I understand you to say that God has thoughts of man, as such; and then He has thoughts in regard to Israel, a people in relation to Himself; and that His thoughts in regard to both of them apply to earth?
{22}
J.T. Yes, I think so; and those thoughts are all taken up by Christ as Man and maintained in every possible way.
T.M.G. So that nothing is lost.
Ques. Would you say something on the second part of the question?
J.T. Well, the law indicated what God sought in Israel; but we know He did not secure, what He sought in them. Now, Christ magnified the law, and He made it honourable; and that was *here*. I should like, that we all might see, that what the law set forth in that way is to be continued here on earth, in the saints. Christ died in order to make if possible that it should be continued here. In the first part of @Romans 8 you have the kind of man that is suited for the earth; the righteous requirements of the law, we are told, are fulfilled in those who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Then, moreover, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ; that is to say, the Spirit of that Man, he is not of Him. So you have here as a result of the gospel a race of men who maintain righteousness. It is not an innocent race, but a race that is righteous; that is to say, they have the means of discharging every moral obligation, and they have also the Spirit of Christ. I should like that we might take hold of that.
Ques. What do you understand by the Spirit of Christ?
J.T. It is the Spirit of that Man. Then we get the other side later on in the chapter where it is the Spirit of God's Son.
T.M.G. Is that the Ephesian side -- the purpose side?
J.T. Yes.
R.L. You could not speak of Adam being either righteous or holy as man; he was innocent.
J.T. Whereas of Christ it was said, "he loved
{23}
righteousness". In that, way you learn the kind of man suited for God.
H.D'A.C. God had intended to have a man in His image and likeness. The first man was not, of course, the complete thought. God made man upright, but that does not go so far as a righteous man.
J.S.A. When Adam was set forth, everything, the whole environment, was right; but it is a greater thing to have what is suitable to God in the midst of an environment that is all wrong.
J.T. That brought out exactly what Christ was. An environment of violence and corruption brought out what Christ was. It was not simply that He *fulfilled* righteousness, but He *loved* it.
T.M.G. God had that Man always before Him.
J.T. Yes. I think He had the order of life that is to be before God in His mind before the order that appeared in Adam existed.
J.S.A. That is perfectly true. That is connected more with the ultimate purpose of God; but having Adam and certain characteristics that are connected with Adam -- they must be made good.
H.D'A.C. The spirit of things is brought before us in @Romans 8, and that leads on to Ephesians.
J.T. Quite so. So we have the spirit of life, the Spirit of Christ, and the Spirit of God's Son. I would like the simple thought of what man is for God, as seen in Christ, to be rightly understood; and that it is God's thought that it should be continued here.
Ques. How far would that go at present?
J.T. It is seen in the early part of @Romans 8, in that the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in us who walk by the Spirit; and then we have the Spirit of Christ. What a thing it is to have the Spirit of Christ!
Rem. You would say that is to have the character of that Man.
{24}
J.T. The character is worked out from it. But see what kind of man it is that has the Spirit of Christ.
Rem. Meek and lowly.
J.S.A. Our brother is emphasising that there is a distinct thought in the *spirit* of a man. It is not quite the same thing as the *character* of a man; it is more what you might call the particular energy in that man.
H.D'A.C. You get the *elements* of new creation in @Romans 8, bat you get *new creation* in Ephesians.
T.M.G. The Spirit of Christ would produce the character.
J.S.A. What we have had before us is that there must be a right understanding of what man is here *for* God, and living *to* God, before one can properly appreciate the higher order of things that comes out in Ephesians and that shows the importance of the epistle to the Romans being understood, if we are to appreciate truly the line of purpose.
J.T. The whole testimony as regards the earth is witnessed to. God made the earth definitely to be inhabited, and now He has brought in the kind of man that is to inhabit it. So that we therefore anticipate the order of man that is to prevail in the millennial world.
H.D'A.C. An order of man really free from what governed us when under the power of sin and death. Man was always gravitating downwards, but the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus is brought in, and a complete change is brought about. So that man is attracted upwards towards God.
J.T. Directly you get the spirit of sonship another scene is suggested; because where must sons go to? to what position do they belong?
Ques. You mean that is the kind of man that inhabits heaven?
J.T. God is leading many sons to *glory*, but God
{25}
brings man in *here* in testimony, so that Satan gains nothing. Every divine thought is secured; Satan has gained nothing. God is free now to go on with His eternal purpose, having first secured every thought He gave expression to in regard to *the earth*, and *man on* it.
T.M.G. As to the purpose side, Satan has nothing there?
J.T. No, nothing; he never touched that.
J.S.A. I think what you have been saying is very important. The two lines are distinct in that way. You must have the first absolutely made good before you can enter into the other.
J.T. What I understand by the millennium is this; it is the intensification of responsibility; responsibility is intensified; and it is put into the hands of Christ; and everything is maintained by Him intact. That shows His perfection in carrying out every divine thought in regard to the earth; hence the thought of the Son of man is the prominent idea.
Ques. How is responsibility intensified?
J.T. Ten is the numeral of responsibility, and it is multiplied by one hundred.
T.E.W. I think, in a certain sense, men will never be more responsible than they are at this moment.
J.T. To what man did God ever commit a dispensation that was to endure for a thousand years? Take Noah, and Abraham, and David; they had certain responsibilities, but of very short duration. Now, in the millennium there is a thousand years; and the whole question of human responsibility is settled, and terminated.
H.D'A.C. There is Christ in the millennium with all that is needed to fulfil the responsibilities.
J.T. Then, when you come to the other side -- the Ephesians¬ side -- it is also set forth in Christ.
{26}
He is the expression of the man who is to be before God eternally. It is to be *man*, but man in the relationship of *son*. When you come to Ephesians, He is the "Beloved;" that is what He is *to God*. God has taken us into favour in the Beloved; and I do not think we shall ever get on to Ephesian ground until we have the thought of the Beloved.
Ques. Is it the same thought as in Colossians, where it says "the Son of his love?"
J.T. I think "the Beloved" is a stronger expression as regards affection. In @Acts 20 we have "the blood of his own", but here it is the Beloved. There was not another. I think the key to the apprehension of God's purpose is affection. It is because of "his *great* love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved); and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus". (@Ephesians 2:4,5)
Rem. To get the apprehension of it is to apprehend God's love.
J.T. We have to see the place that Christ has Godward. I think the term "Son" or "Son of God", applying to the Lord, refers to the unique place He has personally as the One through whom everything is effected. But, then, we must think of what He is *to God*.
Ques. What do you understand as to quickening in Ephesians; "quickened with Christ?"
J.T. I think it includes the whole divine thought as to us; it is not a question as to what is local. I take it to be anticipative, as including the whole work of God.
H.D'A.C. The whole work of God, in time, in regard to the church looked upon as carried into effect by one stroke of His power.
{27}
BAPTISM AND FELLOWSHIP
@Exodus 2
J.T. What makes the history of Moses so interesting, especially in connection with young Christians, is that it connects the faith of the parents with the decision of the child afterwards. It shows that the decision of the child afterwards was in keeping with the parents¬ faith.
Rem. They saw he was a goodly child.
J.T. Yes; I think there was some reflection of Christ in him that faith saw.
Rem. Something that would indicate to them that he was God-given.
J.T. The Spirit's comment on the passage in the New Testament helps us greatly; "By faith, Moses when he was born, was hid three months of his parents, because they saw he was a proper child; and they were not afraid of the king's commandment. By faith, Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season". (@Hebrews 11:23 - 25) That is, his decision when he came to years of understanding was in keeping with the faith of his parents.
Rem. Therefore it becomes very helpful for all, but especially for young Christians; it is a great thing to come to a decision.
J.T. I think the greatest initial difficulty that Christians have is to come to a point of decision, especially if worldly circumstances are favourable, as in Moses¬ case.
Rem. To choose between the people of God and the pleasures of sin.
J.T. Yes; Moses deliberately made up his mind to abandon a position that was in every way to his advantage as a man in this world.
{28}
T.M.G. He might have been a great man in Pharaoh's palace.
J.S.A. It sometimes comes in in a subtle way; some might think they would do better, perhaps, if they remained in favourable circumstances, instead of identifying themselves with the reproach of Christ.
J.T. Yes; and in Moses¬ case the reproach was regarded in its true light; it was esteemed greater riches than the treasures in Egypt. He esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt.
Rem. Why is the only alternative to the reproach of Christ, the pleasures of sin?
J.T. There is no middle ground. Young people regard many things in the world as harmless; but they are not really harmless. Any pleasure in connection with the world is sinful.
Rem. I suppose the great aim in the world is to supply pleasure, so that souls may be ensnared. If the pleasure side of the world was eliminated there would not be much to go in for; and whilst certain things may be regarded as innocent pleasures, yet they form part of the world-system, and it is a question therefore as to judging the system. It is not exactly to determine whether this or that is harmless, but to determine to what system it is attached.
T.M.G. What do you understand by the world-system?
J.T. I think the present world-system began with Babel; @Genesis 9. It is a system in which the greatness of man necessarily figures; and I think the book of Exodus contemplates that it began directly under wicked influence. Pharaoh was a wicked influence; he was actuated by murderous intent for personal motives; the command to destroy the male children was wicked; and the question is therefore whether
{29}
we are enabled to determine what the system is that is under such an influence as that. The king had arisen who "knew not Joseph". Christ is disregarded by the influences that dominate the world.
J.S.A. Are not young people apt to think of the pleasures of sin as something absolutely wicked; but what is sin? It is following my own will; it may be what appears to be quite harmless, but the question is whether it is according to God's order of things.
J.T. The question is, whether it is connected with a lawless system.
T.M.G. The will of man in contrast to the will of God.
Rem. But faith will renounce the whole system, not merely this thing or that thing.
J.T. That is the thought. It was impossible that the children should be overlooked in the world's system, because the enemy made a point of retaining the children. Pharaoh at the outset sought to have the males destroyed; and at the end he would have fain retained the children.
J.S.A. I think that is very important, because it shows how very strongly Satan is working to get hold of the young.
Rem. A single person may have the mind of God.
J.T. A *parent* is in a better position to judge as to God's mind than any other person, because the interest in the heart of the parent is but a reflection of what is in God's heart, and therefore when you have children, the exercises you get if you are with God are to enable you to realise what God had to endure with man.
Rem. It is most interesting to me to see the way the faith of the parents comes out in @Hebrews 11.
J.T. Yes, it is the parents in that chapter: the
{30}
Spirit takes account there of the father and mother, whereas the mother only is spoken of in @Exodus 2.
Rem. They recognised God's claim or God's intent, for their child; they would not recognise the authority of Pharaoh or the enemy.
J.T. They did not fear it. That is a great point for a parent: "they were not afraid of the king's commandment". (@Hebrews 11:23) When you transfer that to Christianity, the point is that all power is vested in the Lord; and it is in the light of that you are not afraid of the king's command.
J.S.A. It is quite within the bounds of possibility that we might reach a crisis when the State would interfere, and it might be a question of choice between the king's command and the Lord.
Rem. They were not afraid of the king's command here; they hid Moses three months.
J.T. The king's command required that the children should be given up. I think what has been called attention to is very important, because as time goes on the ruling powers will come more and more under the influence of evil; the anti-christian spirit is now creeping into the governments that were regarded as the best; and it works out in the claim to educate the children. As claiming title to see after the education of the children you may depend upon it the enemy has something in view. No government will claim today the right to teach the grown-up people. Every man, they say, has the right to his own opinions; that is recognised everywhere; but, then, what about the education of the children?
Rem. I suppose as God's authority is publicly set aside, the power of the authority from beneath would become more marked.
J.T. Exactly; we can be thankful where the power of God is recognised; but then, the enemy is at work, and is gradually introducing principles that
{31}
will nullify it. We have to decide whether we will submit to the king's command or the Lord, and I think we can well afford to do the latter, because the Lord has all power. I think we ought to baptise our children in the light of the Lord having a right to them, and power to save them.
J.S.A. It is a good thing to have such a sense of the greatness of Christianity that we impress upon our children the fact that the Lord is greater than all else.
Rem. Will you say a little more about the baptism of our children.
J.T. Well, there are a good many sides to it, but this is one, that the Lord has all power. You have confidence in baptising your children, because you can reckon on His support, and that is a very great point. The apostle says "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house". (@Acts 16:31) Now, I think it will be observed, as a rule, that only the first part of that text is used for the preaching of the gospel; the second part is not introduced, whereas the jailer acted upon the second part: he was baptised, he and all his straightway; he rejoiced with all his house, having believed in God. He believed the full gospel.
T.M.G. What is there in Moses being placed in the basket by the riverside?
J.T. Another side of baptism is that you do not accept your child on the ground of nature: on the ground of nature your children are entitled to nothing but death.
Rem. What are we to understand by not accepting our children on the ground of nature?
J.T. You regard them as divinely given, but then God looks for faith in you, and faith recognises distinctly that they can only be accepted on the ground of death.
T.M.G. Is not that the point in Hannah's bringing
{32}
her child to Eli and offering the sacrifice? Is there anything of that in the case of Moses being practically delivered to death?
J.T. I think that was the idea; however little the mother may have understood it, God allowed it to take that form, so that we might have spiritual instruction in it; the child was virtually drawn out of death.
Rem. There is evidently much significance in the fact, as his name means drawn out of water.
J.T. Another thing, you introduce your children into the positive system of things; they are baptised to the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. I think it is important to see that you own the Lord's authority and give them up to Him, but they are introduced into the full light of the revelation of God.
Rem. People often refer too much to the negative side and not enough to the positive.
J.T. Look what you have been brought to! In baptising your child you impress upon it that it has been brought into the full light of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
Rem. I suppose if we were more in the true light of it as parents we should impress the child more with it.
Rem. The responsibility rests with the parents as well as the child in connection with baptism.
J.T. I think all the responsibility rests with the parents until the child becomes responsible. It is said of Moses that when he came to years, he refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter. It seems to me that in the case of the Lord in childhood we have indicated the period of responsibility in regard to children. I think that until the age of twelve the Spirit of God holds the parent specially responsible for the child.
{33}
Luke gives us the history of the Lord from the outset. What He was as a Babe is recorded, what He was at twelve years old, and then what He was at thirty years. The Spirit records all these things The allusion to *twelve* has a meaning,
Rem. What would you say Moses gained by turning his back on Pharaoh's court.
J.T. The comment of the Spirit on it shows that he esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt.
Rem. Would you say he gained very great distinction in God's system?
J.T. Moses deliberately weighed one thing against another, and he chose affliction with God's people.
Rem. I suppose seeing the end really helped him as to his decision: "he endured as seeing him who is invisible". (@Hebrews 11:27)
J.T. Yes. I think people may see in Moses on the one hand what baptism involves; it is connected with the parents; it is a question of the faith of the parents, and all the activity that follows. You can understand how exercised his mother must have been, and how God answered her faith in giving him back to her to nurse. On the other hand, when the time came Moses made his decision, and I think then he came into fellowship; that was his decision.
T.M.G. He associated himself with the people of God.
J.T. Yes, that is what fellowship means. It means a deliberate committal of oneself to the people of God.
Ques. Does not the commission of Moses¬ sister show how God was honouring the parents¬ faith?
J.T. It all indicates how faith in your parents, or in those who are interested in you, acts for you; children have very little apprehension of the exercises of parent's faith in regard to them.
Ques. Is it not important for young people to
{34}
realise the great compensation in being identified with God?
J.T. I think so, and to be identified with the people of God; because you will notice Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the *people, of God;* that is simply the Old Testament way of showing how the believer comes into fellowship.
Ques. Would you say at the age of responsibility the question would arise in a child's mind in regard to having to choose for himself; he has arrived at a point when his parents are no longer able to choose for him, and he sees in the Christian circle a place of salvation in contrast to the world?
J.T. Yes, it becomes a question of what kind of society I am going to have. It refers, I think, to the exercises that go on in the soul of the believer. Think of Moses surrounded with all the magnificence of the court of the king: well, he heard about the people of God; he knew about them, and he deliberately commits himself to them.
Ques. Did he not look on to the future? He had respect to the recompense of the reward?
J.T. Yes.
Rem. It is an important point to arrive at when we have to decide whether we will accept the reproach of Christ.
J.T. It is remarkable how intelligent people were in those days with comparatively little light. Moses had an idea of an end in view, and of God's people, being under reproach. Well, the gospel sets out all that to us, so that young believers might see what there is for them *now*, and what there is in the *end*.
Rem. The difficulty is that many among the people of God in an outward way have not taken up the reproach, and I suppose they do not get the compensation.
J.S.A. It was not simply the reproach of Christ,
{35}
but it was with the people themselves he was identified. In connection with that I was thinking of the New Testament scripture: "Be not thou ashamed of the testimony of our Lord nor of me his prisoner". (@2 Timothy 1:8) You have there the two things: you have the reproach, and you identify yourself with the persons who are in the truth.
Rem. That is where the reproach lies.
J.S.A. Suppose a young person says, Well, I accept what you say. The answer is, Very well, then take your place with it.
T.M.G. Onesiphorus was "not ashamed of my chain, but sought me out diligently and found me", (@2 Timothy 1:16,17) Paul says.
Rem. I suppose when our children reach what you speak of as the age of responsibility we might look for some confession from them as to their faith in Christ.
J.T. That is what we should expect.
Ques. A good deal depends on the way they are trained, so that they might be prepared for the path?
Ques. And then I suppose they would come more immediately under the Lord's dominion?
J.T. Yes, they are under your dominion up till that time.
J.A.M. They may come to responsibility then, but your responsibility does not cease.
J.T. Their responsibility does not cancel yours.
Rem. Up to that age the Lord's discipline is exercised through the parents, but after that age they would come more immediately under the Lord's discipline.
J.T. Yes; you recognise that the Lord will take charge of the child, and that in due time he will receive the Holy Spirit.
Ques. Would you say it was the Spirit's seal to the faith of the parent
{36}
J.T. Well, I do not think the Spirit seals the faith of the parent; there must be faith in the child before the child gets the Spirit.
Rem. The faith of the parent is acknowledged by God: take for instance that verse -- "train up a child the way he should go". (@Proverbs 22:6)
J.T. I think so. Every time you think of your child you say that which is born of the flesh is flesh; that is, you are made to feel that, so that if God does not operate in the child there is nothing for Him.
Ques. Abraham said, "Oh, that Ishmael might live before thee". (@Genesis 17:18) Is not that the desire that governs every parent?
J.T. Ishmael was the wrong man; he was the man after the flesh. Isaac was the child of promise.
Rem. I suppose we would be very glad indeed if our children were to live before the Lord.
J.T. Oh, but you want them to live in the light of Another. You do not want them to live here in nature; what you cherish for yourself you cherish for your child, and that is, that they should live in the light of Christ. That is the only life worth living.
Ques. Do I understand that it was a want of faith in Abraham when he prayed that?
J.T. I think so.
Rem. Being baptised in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit covers the whole ground.
Rem. Cast out the bond-woman and her son.
T.M.G. When Isaac gets his rightful place Ishmael goes out.
J.T. It is said about Abraham in commendation of him that he commanded his house and his children after him. He ruled his house.
Ques. Do you mean that his character would come out in his true children?
J.T. I think that what Noah failed in comes out
{37}
in Abraham. God did not commit government to Abraham, but Abraham recognised that the testimony as to government was there, and he answered to it. I suppose, if we come into fellowship, if we commit ourselves to the reproach of the people of God, that God takes us up and uses us.
Rem. But Moses had to retire; it seemed for a time as if he was not of much use.
J.T. What you see is that if the parent does his part of discipline, God will do the rest. He will see to the discipline of the servant. You cannot send your son to college that he might be made a servant of Christ. God takes him up and makes a servant of him.
Ques. I suppose the education commences early when they come into fellowship.
J.T. I think so; they come to see what the mind of God is; God has a people here, and the children's energies now, if truly identified with them, are bent on the prosperity of that people. You may try to do right things and do them in the wrong way; but Moses had the right idea in slaying the Egyptian.
Ques. When we speak of coming into fellowship do you look at it as the answer really to the Spirit's, work in them?
J.T. Oh, yes; there is a definite decision; the Holy Spirit gives you that. What is it that leads you to love the Lord's people? That is the work of the Spirit.
Rem. I thought it was really the Spirit who brings into fellowship.
J.T. Fellowship is your putting your hand out; you commit yourself to a partnership. No one can bring you in.
Rem. That is important; we cannot bring into fellowship in a sense.
{38}
J.T. You cannot bring your children into fellowship. Your responsibility in regard to your children does not come into the assembly at all. It is a great mistake to think that a father should have any responsibility over his children there. The Lord is supreme directly you come into the assembly.
J.S.A. It is a great thing for parents to so understand the greatness of the assembly, that we, by our lives impress on our children, that it is the greatest thing; then it is a question of the Spirit making that good to the child.
J.T. Yes, and the child must remember that he has to put his hand out, so to speak, and identify himself with that position.
Rem. I suppose there comes a moment in the history of every true child of God when he has to choose Christ or the world.
J.T. I think so; and another thing comes in there, that is, what we come to. I fear that it is, in most cases, just coming into the meeting. We come into fellowship, but it is Christian fellowship, or it is nothing. What does that introduce you into? It is that you have to do with a new order of things. The system itself is moral; it is not a system for sight; it is a *faith* system.
T.M.G. It is another sphere.
J.T. I think it is; but it is a faith system.
T.M.G. It is not merely what the eye rests on.
J.T. You can see the saints.
T.M.G. You might see the saints and not the place.
J.T. Yes, and the saints may fail, but the system is immutable.
Rem. You might be in fellowship and not break bread.
J.T. I think so, but everyone who has intelligence would break bread. The breaking of bread is the symbol of fellowship.
{39}
Rem. The breaking of bread does not bring you into fellowship?
T.M.G. You might be breaking bread and not be In fellowship.
Ques. What qualifies you for fellowship?
J.T. Well, the saints have to decide as to fellowship, because on your coming in whatever may be attached to you is attached to them now; and you should see that consistency with the death of Christ is the test. I would like to dwell upon the faith system because if your soul gets into that nothing can shake you; because that is unshakeable.
J.S.A. I remember a time when placed in certain circumstances I looked to the brethren around me in whom I had confidence, only to be disappointed; and I remember going home one night and saying, Well, can it be worth while going on with them. It was only for a moment, however. The system abides. Nothing else will keep you.
J.T. I think what you see in Moses is, that if you are true, when you come into fellowship, the Lord will take you up. You see that the people of God require help; there never has been a time when they did not. Moses saw that, and he undertook to help them. He did not act according to God's mind, but still the Spirit recognises it in due time. It is remarkable that in @Acts 7 He charges the people with rejecting Moses in this connection.
Before Moses learned his lesson, he says, as it were, 'I am going to deliver the people'. He had to learn that *God* was going to do it, although through him.
T.M.G. Is not that what every servant has to learn?
J.T. A young man is liable to say, 'I am going to do it;' but Moses had to learn that God would deliver His people. God says to him at Horeb, "I am come down to deliver them". (@Exodus 3:8)
{40}
Ques. What light has a soul as to the Lord in coming into fellowship?
J.T. It would be hard to say. You can hardly say what has drawn you to the people of God, but there is something there that draws you. You see how Ruth was drawn and she said, "thy people shall be my people". (@Ruth 1:16)
Rem. That was the outgoing of affection. It would not do to make it merely an outward thing. It would be the activity of affection, no doubt.
{41}
THE SPIRIT AS POWER IN THE BELIEVER
@Romans 8
J.T. I think it might be noted that the epistle to the Romans does not take us beyond what might be called the ministry of Moses; that is, it agrees with that which the ministry of Moses represents. Moses received his commission at mount Horeb, and what was introduced at mount Horeb may be taken to represent the great end in his ministry; that is, the establishment of the service of God here. The people were to serve God at that mountain; and the end of his ministry was to bring that about. The epistle to the Romans qualifies for it in an *individual* way. The epistles to the Corinthians, especially the first, show the *collective* side; but neither of those epistles take us out of the wilderness. I think, that taken together, those epistles contemplate what the ministry of Moses typified. I think it helps us greatly to have the types in view when considering New Testament scriptures.
T.M.G. When you say the service of God, what are we to understand?
J.T. According to Hebrews, our consciences are purged to the end that we might serve the living God. It has reference to our approach to God, and our having to say to Him according to the order that was established in connection with the tabernacle.
Rem. "Let my son go that he may serve me". (@Exodus 4:23) "Israel is my son". (@Exodus 4:22)
J.T. Yes; that was the message to Pharaoh, not directly to Israel. The message to Pharaoh was, "Let my son go", because the point was to appeal to Pharaoh's heart. They had that place in God's purpose, of course; but they were to serve God at mount Horeb. That was where Moses received his
{42}
commission, and I think a man's ministry should rise to the height of his commission. Moses did not take the people into the land, but what he did was to establish an order of service to Jehovah at mount Horeb.
J.McF. Does that correspond with @Luke 1:72 - 75: "to perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant; the oath which he sware to our father Abraham, that he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies might serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life". (@Luke 1:72 - 75)
J.T. I think that is a very appropriate scripture to quote in regard to it. It shows the great end God has in view in delivering us. It is a very important thing to connect the ministry of any servant with his commission, and the circumstances under which he receives it.
W.K. "To serve" in @Luke 1 has reference to approach to God.
J.T. It is a very great end to have in view, and that it should take place in the wilderness, where things are contrary. Now, @Romans 6, I think, corresponds with Marah; that is, the wilderness is definitely accepted in the soul; and there is really no progress until that takes place. The soul bows to the will of God, because the wilderness is the sphere of the divine government. The flesh, in us is not to escape the judgment of God any more than the Egyptians. The bitter waters become sweet as we see that Christ has been into them.
T.M.G. Is that the acceptance of death as our own portion?
J.T. Yes. The waters, as has often been pointed out, being similar to those of the Red Sea, typify death as God's judgment. Christ has been into death on account of what we are, and hence death
{43}
is our portion because of the flesh in us. If the bitter waters of Marah are accepted, we are never disappointed at anything: no circumstances or combination of circumstances will disappoint us.
Ques. Is it the acceptance of death here?
J.T. Yes. We may accept the gospel and regard ourselves justified, and still continue to live on in the flesh; the bitter waters are not drunk; but this is not acceptable to God.
Ques. What enables one to accept Marah?
J.T. Well, I think it is seeing the divine end in view. It is not man in the flesh that God intends to bless. The soul is led to see that God intends to conform us to the image of Christ. The foundation of everything that comes in afterwards in our history is really laid in our souls as we receive the gospel, and the gospel is really the presentation of Christ to the soul. So that the Deliverer is presented, and we are to be formed after that order of man.
Rem. And that Man has died and is risen again.
J.T. If Christ is rightly apprehended in your soul you love Him, and you do not wish to be diverted from Him. What is written of Ruth may be applicable to us; she would die where Naomi died.
Rem. You want to be identified with Him, whether in death or in life.
J.T. Yes. Then chapter 7 takes up another chapter in our history; it treats of our relation to the law. Chapter 8 is the brazen serpent and the springing well. Rahab had light, not only as to what represents the resurrection of Christ, but she had light as to the power of the Spirit; she told the spies what the Lord had done to the Egyptians, and what the people had done to the two kings of the Amorites that were on the other side of Jordan, to Sihon and Og.
Ques. What do Sihon and Og stand for?
J.T. Og was a very big man, and he had a very
{44}
large bed; it is remarkable that it is recorded of him that his bed was nine cubits long and four cubits wide, and when the Spirit records that, you may depend upon it that it has reference to the kind of man he was; he was slothful, and it is just slothfulness and absence of exercise that hinders us. I have no doubt, that the spiritual apprehension of this chapter enables us to apprehend what is represented by what is recorded. A bed is a place where there is no exercise, Og was a slothful man, and a very big man, and it is only in the power of the Spirit you can overcome that. It is really what we are after the flesh. We have not to go very far to find a *big* man; doubtless it is what we are in our own eyes after the flesh.
Rem. It takes the power of the Spirit to overthrow such a man.
J.T. Just so; that is how the power of the Spirit is brought into evidence; it is by the overthrow of such a man as that. He would be a man utterly insensible of the rights of others. Conflict with him comes in directly after the springing well is recognised. You come to a point in the history of your soul when you recognise that all power is in the Spirit, so that there is no power in the flesh.
J.McF. Where do you find such a man as Og?
J.T. We have not far to go; you have not to go outside yourself; I mean if you take account of yourself after the flesh.
Rem. Mr. Stoney said he once thought that the flesh was stronger than the Spirit.
J.T. Take a man like Saul of Tarsus; see what he must have been in his own eyes; and the same applies to us all naturally. But Paul says: "no longer live I, but Christ liveth in me;" (@Galatians 2:20) there was the overthrow of Og.
Rem. It was Christ that was in evidence; Saul of Tarsus was no longer in evidence.
{45}
J.T. Quite so. Oneself is often one's greatest obstacle in advancing spiritually.
Ques. How do you distinguish between this and Canaan?
J.T. The teaching of this chapter refers to Christians as we are in the flesh; but we are in the light of the condemnation of sin in the flesh, and we have the Holy Spirit. Now, that is a divinely given state; it is of God that it should be so; that while here in the flesh we should have God's Spirit, and know that sin is condemned in the flesh, and that we are entitled to the inheritance; that is what I call spiritual territory, but it is short of Canaan.
Ques. That would answer to the plains of Moab?
J.T. That is what it is.
T.M.G. Canaan is new creation.
J.T. Quite so.
W.L. Romans is the solution of the question of man's responsibility; but it does not bring us into the domain of the purpose of God.
J.T. It is a territory for the saints to *pass through*, but not to *live* in; it is right so long as you are passing on, but if you live in it you are short of divine purpose; and, as living there, there is nothing to regulate you, because the law at Sinai did not really go beyond the brazen serpent; and the next law that was formulated in Deuteronomy was not intended for the territory on which it was formulated; it was for Canaan, It was given on the plains of Moab, but it was not for that territory. If you live in Moab you have to formulate a code of your own.
Ques. Is it not our great danger, to settle down there?
T.M.G. The two and a half tribes stopped short of the purpose of God for them.
J.T. The plains of Moab as a typical territory represents us as here in the flesh, but as having the Spirit on the ground of the condemnation of
{46}
sin in the flesh in the death of Christ. Canaan represents what is entirely spiritual, and is outside flesh and blood conditions,
Rem. In that state there are exercises, and there is movement.
J.T. That is the point; you are free of the flesh, and you move on. But the great danger after the brazen serpent, is the Moabite. Now, the Moabite is an unconverted, or worldly Christian relative. No one is more liable to draw you into the world than an unconverted or worldly relative. The Moabite had a link with Israel after the flesh.
Ques. Would you say here that though you have not reached the purpose of God, you are in the light of it?
J.T. This chapter sets you in the full *light* of the purpose of God, but not yet in Canaan.
Ques. If there is exercise and movement, you are moving on to it.
J.T. Yes; but, as I said, the danger is the Moabitish influence.
Ques. You would say this is a state that applies to us so long as we are down here; we may go on in our souls to the purpose of God; but this is true of us as men in the flesh.
J.T. You may enter into Canaan in the power of the Spirit on special occasions. This Moab is divinely given territory which we must not surrender, but the point is that it should be *influenced from Canaan*, and *not* Canaan influenced *from it*. The two and a half tribes went over into Canaan from the plains of Moab; but their hearts were in Moab for their families were there.
T.M.G. I suppose that would apply to Christians having the truth and not living in the power of it?
J.T. One who has Canaan in his heart does not *in heart* live anywhere else; that is his home. But he has to attend to his family duties, and that is
{47}
very blessed, too, because it is divinely given territory. As head of your house your Canaan experience gives colour to all that you do. So that, instead of your influencing the assembly from Moab, you influence Moab from the assembly.
Rem. Your affections and interests are all centred in Canaan, and all your relationships here are influenced accordingly.
J.T. But if you have to come to the meeting and attend to assembly, affairs as a matter of *duty*, and if you are glad when it is over that you may get back to your family, you are living in Moab.
T.M.G. That is what the two and a half tribes did.
J.T. If you go to the meeting simply as a matter of duty, because you have light, and you think you ought to go, and yet you are glad when you are free, and that you can go home; that is living in Moab. I am not disparaging your going for that reason, because it is well that you *do* go. It was well that the two and a half tribes did go over to fight, but they were really living in Moab. In that case your influence in the assembly cannot be heavenly, and when you go home you want some kind of an outward sign that you belong to the heavenly.
Ques. Is that the altar of Ed, @Joshua 22:34?
J.T. Yes. Canaan is the home sphere, so that it is the greatest sphere; the family and business, are minor spheres, though ordained of God, but they are influenced by what you enjoy in Canaan. When the kingdom was established in David and Solomon, they ruled over all that territory, and much more, and that was right; but, then, they *lived* in Jerusalem.
Rem. The influence in Canaan is the influence of divine Persons.
J.T. Yes; and the dignity of your place with Christ in the heavenlies.
{48}
Rem. The point is, do we really take delight in that?
J.T. It should be the chief and constant thought of your heart, because it is there that eternal joys are begun; it is there you touch the eternal order of things -- the heavenly joys.
T.M.G. Mr. Stoney used to say we taste the joys of home before we go home.
J.T. So that @Romans 8 opens up wonderful light as to us. It is not the final thought for us; it prepares us for that.
Ques. In what way do you connect what you have touched on with what you said last night in regard to the husband?
J.T. Well, I connect the marriage thought with the covenant. We are to be to another, to Him who is raised from the dead, that we might bring forth fruit to God. God endeavoured to put His thoughts into form with Israel; but when He does a thing the second time He does it permanently. The first is for testing, showing His disposition, that if He could have used Israel He would have done so; that was His disposition. Hence He took up the place of a husband to Israel; there was affection, and He remembered it, @Jeremiah 2. He made a covenant with them, and took the place of husband towards them, but the prophets show how far Israel deflected. Hence God has to form new marriage relations, and those relations are in resurrection.
Now, another thought comes up in the following chapter, and that is, that God intended, that certain principles should be maintained in the wilderness in Israel. Moses sums it up in the book of Deuteronomy, saying, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart". (@Deuteronomy 6:5) God intended that that should have taken place in the wilderness; but it fell to the ground. Well, He returns to that thought here in @Romans 8; and where it fell to the ground in
{49}
connection with the first order, it is secured in the second; the righteous requirements of the law are fulfilled in those who do not walk according to flesh, but according to Spirit.
T.M.G. So that it is really man here according to God.
J.T. And then it must be remembered that this chapter treats of the Spirit. It is a sort of treatise on the Spirit. It affords light as to what the Spirit is to us; and the effect of that is that you are independent of the flesh.
Ques. Why is the Spirit so prominent, and so often mentioned? It is often said the Spirit is never an object.
J.T. It is in this chapter. In chapter 7 you have learned what the flesh is, but you have no power to overcome it. Here you *have* the power.
Ques. Is it that you turn to the Spirit instead of to the flesh?
J.T. Yes; we turn to the Spirit. But, as I said at the beginning, we must remember that this is the ministry of Moses; that is to say, the well was dug in @Numbers 21, "at the direction of the lawgiver". The authority of the Lord is always in evidence in Romans.
T.M.G. Yes, because it is man here, and what man ought to be.
J.T. So that whilst you recognise the Spirit, it is in connection with the Lord. If you read down the chapter you will see that the Spirit supports you in everything; we get there what the Spirit is for the believer.
Ques. In the last verse of chapter 7 it says, "I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then with the mind I myself serve the law of God, but with the flesh, the law of sin". (@Romans 7:25) Is that connected with the brazen serpent aspect; the soul apprehends
{50}
Christ Jesus in that way as the One who had put an end to the flesh?
J.T. Yes. The serpent was lifted up upon a pole so that it could be seen; hence it is Christ presented as the Deliverer from the state in which you were. Then the opening verses of chapter 8 introduce the bearing of the brazen serpent. "What the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh". It is the impotency of the law. What it could not do, God did, for sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, He condemned sin in the flesh.
Ques. You would connect the last verse of chapter 7 with the third verse of chapter 8.
J.T. Quite so. So that after sin is condemned in the flesh, it is something that you need not notice any more. The flesh may suggest many things in you, as it will; as the apostle says here, "it serves the law of sin;" but if God has condemned it, you need not take any notice of it.
Rem. You need not recognise it.
J.T. If God has condemned it *you* are entitled to condemn it.
Rem. And then you would get the good of the Spirit.
J.T. Quite so. But before the death of Christ you could not take the ground that God had condemned sin in the flesh, because God was owning man in the flesh, and it was in that connection that the flesh had such power. We have very little conception of what the early believers had to suffer from those who had formerly been owned of God.
Ques. Well, then, the flesh is the state; but what about the *mind* of the flesh?
J.T. That is the energising thing. But many people are greatly harassed in their souls, because they do not take account of the flesh as a condemned thing. You are not under any obligation to it at all;
{51}
it is there, but it has no legal claim on you any more; God has condemned it; He has condemned sin in it.
W.L. We are not responsible for what it is, but for what it does.
J.T. This chapter, as I said, is a full statement as to the value of the Holy Spirit indwelling the believer. It is not a question of the Spirit in the assembly exactly, but the Spirit indwelling the believer.
Rem. It is not exactly Isaac having his place, as in Galatians?
J.T. The point here is that you give the Spirit His place, and if you do, Christ will have His place.
Rem. And it is as under the Lord that the Spirit gets His place.
J.T. Whilst you are here in flesh and blood you are always under the authority of the Lord. You could not reach the first part of chapter 7 without the Spirit and the knowledge of the condemnation of sin in the flesh; because the earlier verses of that chapter show the end to be reached; that is, we are to be to Another, even to Him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God. The teaching of chapter 7 requires the Spirit. It has often been pointed out that chapter 7 in its structure is similar to a psalm; that is to say, the end to be reached is stated, and then the road by which it is reached.
Ques. Do you get eternal life here; it says in verse 13, "if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live?"
J.T. I do not think life in this chapter goes beyond what you realise of the Spirit in the wilderness; you do not reach the sphere in this chapter; the earlier chapters indicate there is such a sphere. Eternal life is *in Christ*; that is outside of the flesh altogether; but then you require power to reach that, and this chapter shows the power. But verse
{52}
13 is life in view of righteousness, not eternal life. In @John 4 the Spirit leads to everlasting life; whereas the point here is that the thoughts of God which He had given expression to in the wilderness should be maintained in the wilderness by Christians.
Rem. John starts on this ground.
J.T. Yes, and He takes you into Canaan at once; he says, "whosoever believeth on him should not perish but have everlasting life". (@John 3:16) That is Canaan. The Son of man was lifted up in order that the believer should not perish but have everlasting life.
T.M.G. I suppose through all this truth of Romans, God would have what He required here on earth?
J.T. That is the idea exactly. It is the testimony to every thought of God as regards the earth; that is the epistle to the Romans.
I think the service of God underlies chapter 7; the covenant is there. But the first epistle to the Corinthians runs parallel to this as to the company. It is the individual side here. The epistle to the Romans treats of the individual believer in his relations with God, and everything is adjusted; but then there is a parallel truth in Corinthians which contemplates, not individual believers, but the saints viewed as the assembly. With this the Supper is connected; it is connected with the service of God. It contemplates that in which our wills are set aside.
T.M.G. I think that distinction is very interesting.
J.T. Corinthians, contemplates the assembly of God as distinct from Jew and Gentile: it is not the assembly in Canaan as in Colossians and Ephesians.
{53}
THE BREAD OF LIFE
@John 6:26 - 71
J.T. It is important, that we should see that food is essential to entering into eternal life. The moral constitution has to be built up and sustained, and the food that will do this is supplied here. What man is naturally, as God's creature, suggests what he is spiritually. God having opened up His mind as to man in the third chapter of John, the following chapters are intended to meet him in the varied elements (so to speak) of his constitution. Man has affections. @John 4, I think, meets that side; the affections are taken account of. Men had ample opportunity to satisfy themselves in the world if there, were satisfaction to be found there. The woman of Samaria shows that there was no satisfaction there; and hence the Lord proposes that which would satisfy permanently, for the living water would become a fountain within her springing up into everlasting life. Then, I think, chapter 5 sets forth man's weakness, and the weakness of the law in meeting his need. So that that chapter shows us the *power*, side; and also it opens up the sphere of life; the believer is passed from death into life. But such an one requires spiritual food, and chapter 6 supplies this. The question raised is as to what we feed upon, so as to have eternal life as an enjoyed blessing now.
Ques. Does chapter 6 contemplate the wilderness?
J.T. Yes, it contemplates wilderness conditions, but the thought is that we might pass out of wilderness conditions, and for that, food is essential. So the subject is opened up in this way. The crowd really followed Him because of the loaves and fishes. It was a question of food; hence the Lord says,
{54}
"Labour not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life; which the Son of man shall give unto you". Bear in mind that the Lord adds at the close, "the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit and they are life". We have to be prepared for spiritual thoughts in a very exalted degree in this chapter.
Rem. There is a peculiar significance in the fact that the Father has set His seal on this One.
J.T. I think so. He is sealed here in view of giving "the food which abides unto life eternal"; (@John 6:27)
Rem. That is very important to have in mind, that the divine seal was upon that blessed One who in His humiliation was to become the food to sustain the life of His people.
Ques. Is this food in contrast to the manna?
J.T. Yes, it is. Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness and are *dead*, but here is food that you eat and you *live*. There is a remarkable similarity, however, in one respect between the manna and this food, in that both come down from heaven; but the manna was for sustenance for the wilderness; this food is for sustenance for eternal life.
Ques. I would like something to be said with regard to the way John introduces the brazen serpent here as in view of Canaan; What is the distinction, or what does Canaan convey to your mind? If eternal life is not for heaven, what does Canaan convey to your mind?
J.T. Well, it has, on the one hand, reference to the entire sphere to which the purpose of God applies, and according to the book of Joshua and the epistle to the Ephesians, that would include heaven or the heavenlies; but whilst the heavenly side is necessarily the greatest, Canaan also includes the whole millennial order of things. On the other hand, it has reference to a *spiritual* order of things existing during the
{55}
Christian period, and that for the moment is the most important. Types have more reference to the present time than they have to the world to come; they are more intended to show how we as believers now enter into the good of divine things. So that Canaan, in that sense, would be the spiritual sphere which lies outside of the conditions established in connection with man in flesh and blood. It is a sphere and order of things wholly spiritual, and really lies outside of the distinctions that belong to us as in the flesh. Eternal life is also really outside of the relationships which belong to us here as in flesh and blood. It is practically enjoyed in the circle of the saints viewed as born of God.
Ques. But that spiritual order belongs to the present?
J.T. Yes. It is a spiritual order of things into which we enter, and it is outside the relationships we stand in here, but it has an influence upon those relationships, and gives character to them.
Ques. Is that what was meant when it was said that it was an out-of-the-world order of things?
J.T. Yes; I think so.
Ques. Do you mean that Canaan would typify fully the sphere of heavenly blessing and eternal life? What is the distinction between the sphere of eternal life?
J.T. Well, it has been well described as being indicated in the Lord's sojourn here between His resurrection, and ascension. That was an out-of-the- world condition of things.
Ques. You refer to the forty days?
J.T. Yes. The Lord was outside the sphere of the world clearly; "the world sees me no more" (and neither did it), "but ye see me". (@John 14:9) Now, I think that in some sense conveys the idea of the platform, so to speak, on which eternal life stands; it is outside of the world, and necessitates resurrection.
{56}
But this chapter shows that it does not necessarily refer to the time when we shall be raised literally. The Lord says, "He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life eternal, and I will raise him up at the last day", (@John 6:54). So that the chapter contemplates eternal life *now*.
Ques. He gives it now in a spiritual way?
J.T. Yes. I think it is very important to remember that Christianity is established as a provisional state of things. It is not final; nor is it a perfect state of things. It is a provisional state of things pending the coming of the Lord, when we shall have the final state of things.
Ques. How would you distinguish between the thought of eternal life and the purely heavenly state of things?
J.T. I was thinking only today, that if you take the most exalted personage in the land, there is one thing in which he is on a common platform with everybody, the lowest as well as the highest, and that one thing is life. In order that this should be sustained he has to eat, sleep, etc. But then, whilst he is compelled to do certain things in common with everybody else, his exalted rank, and all that goes with it, necessarily give character to every detail that he has in common with all others. Well now that is how I understand the manner in which we have what is common to every family that comes into the blessing of God. Whether in the present age or coming age, *all* have eternal life. This is undeniable. But *we* have something more excellent than they; we have a heavenly place in Christ, which is peculiar to ourselves, and that is what we boast in specially, and therefore this gives character in us to what we may have in common with all others. The dignity of the position, and the relationship that goes with the position, tend to give colour to what we enjoy in common with all other families.
{57}
Rem. Then if such an exalted privilege is ours, our walk, in every detail, should be affected by it.
J.T. Quite so. You remember that when the Israelites passed over Jordan, twelve stones were taken out of Jordan and placed in Gilgal. Those twelve stones represented the twelve tribes, but in the subsequent development of things, the tribe of Levi was taken apart from the other twelve and given an inheritance. They had the Lord God of Israel, they were to dwell in cities, and they had the priesthood and the offerings as their inheritance. Typically they had a heavenly position in contrast to the others. But they were on common ground. There was something they had in common with all the other tribes at Gilgal; they were represented in the twelve stones. Now, I think that indicates our portion; that whilst abstractly you must place eternal life by itself, and think of it by itself, yet when you come to the entrance into it, it is enjoyed along with the relationships that are special to us, and these relationships, being greater, must give character to the lesser.
Ques. You are referring to sonship?
J.T. Yes, and our position in the heavenlies. If the king entered into the poorest house in the realm, he would carry into it his kingly dignity. I would use that as illustrating eternal life, but only to show that there is something really greater, although depending on it; for obviously everything depends on life; and that greater thing gives character to all we enjoy, whatever it be. But in one sense nothing can be morally greater than eternal life, for the introduction of it where death had been is the great triumph of God. Besides, in @Psalm 133, it is specially called "the blessing". @Romans 6:23, reads: "the act of favour of God, eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord". (@Romans 6:23)
Rem. It is helpful to see that eternal life is God's
{58}
thought for every family, but then there is the special place, and you connect that with sonship.
Ques. The heavenlies are in heaven?
J.T. Well, the heavenlies in Scripture are more the sphere of rule and light, but they include "the third heaven", which would he the most exalted. The assembly comes down from God out of *heaven*.
Ques. Will you explain what you mean by Christianity being provisional?
J.T. Well, it is an order of things established here by God in view of the maintenance of the testimony until the coming of the Lord. It is not the final state of things.
Rem. It fills up the interval between the rejection of Christ and His appearing, but He takes His seat on the Father's throne now. The house of God is a provisional thing here, whereas the Father's house is a permanent thing.
Ques. I suppose what is effected in us during the present time is everlasting?
J.T. The work of God in our souls is abiding; and we have access to what is eternal. Eternal life is eternal, and we have access to it by the power of the Spirit. In one sense we may say it is within the reach of the spiritual. The apostle Paul entered into it a great deal more than we do; but with all that the present conditions are provisional.
Ques. I suppose when what is final and perfect is come, there will be no need for testimony?
J.T. Quite so; the tabernacle, in one respect, contemplated a provisional state of things, it was movable. The temple indicates a permanent state of things.
Ques. Do you consider eternal life as heavenly life?
J.T. Well, you have to take account of it by itself, because the blessing is enjoyed in your soul at the same time as you enjoyed the special relationships
{59}
with the Father and the Son in which we are set. Eternal life in our souls has reference to our knowledge of the true God; of God revealed here in Christ, and of the Man who came out here to do God's will. The moral thought underlying @John 17:3 is of immense importance to lay hold of.
Rem. "God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". (@John 3:16) *God* is presented to the soul in His love.
J.T. God is to be rightly apprehended in man's soul, and the result is to be that men turn from idols to serve the living and true God, and wait for His Son from heaven. What a great thing it is to have in your soul light as to the true God in the midst of an idolatrous world!
Rem. I am afraid we are very defective as to the revelation of the true God.
Ques. "As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father;" is that the key to the thought?
J.T. One word in John's writings that helps us in the understanding of his gospel is the word *sent*.
Ques. Do you mean to convey by that that the Lord was here as man?
J.T. Yes, in a world where all is lawless He was here carrying out God's will, and in that position the idea of God is brought to man. He has revealed God to us. But then He is also the eternal life. That is what He was as man before God.
Ques. I suppose if we had been brought up in the midst of idolatry we should have understood the knowledge of the true God better?
J.T. I think that is important. We have not seen the moral thought in the true God and the true Man, but if you do see it, it is a safeguard in the midst of the world; it keeps you. Take @Psalm 119; only fully *seen* in Christ, but it gives us the experience of a man who has learned to love the law. The whole
{60}
of the Psalm is, devoted to the expression of the exercises of a man who has learned to love God's law; and when that point is reached in the soul then you can go *up:* so the songs of degrees follow. It is morally due to God that His will should be carried out down here where He has been dishonoured.
Rem. I have been struck with that word *sent* in the gospel of John, which you emphasise.
J.T. The force of it really is that the Lord was here carrying out the will of God. He was sent by God. He loved the law, but then when you come to the gospel of John it goes far beyond that, because it meant the carrying out of the divine purpose. John says, the Father sent the Son that we might live through Him.
Ques. "He whom God has sent speaks the words of God", (@John 3:34). How do you understand that?
J.T. It is the idea of apostleship. Apostleship is that the person has been with God, and as with Him he is sent out to communicate God's mind. The Lord was that in an infinite way; He spoke only the words of God.
Rem. What you have said makes that very clear: "He gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. And I know that his commandment is life everlasting", (@John 12:49).
J.T. Yes, that is very beautiful; that is His last word to the Jews. I think that passage opens up the point of the gospel very largely; that is, as taken in connection with what the apostle says at the end of chapter 20, "these are written ... that believing ye might have life through his name". (@John 20:31)
What has been suggested already is important to take account of; that He was sealed as Son of man; "him hath God the Father sealed". There was one marked off by the Spirit to give food to the world. Joseph was the preserver of life in the world. Now, the Lord is here sealed by God for
{61}
that purpose, so that the world, instead of remaining under death, might live; hence the point of view is very wide. It is not the life of the saints simply, it is the life of the *world*.
Rem. He is spoken of here as the bread of life and the bread of God.
J.T. Another point in the chapter to recognise is that the Lord emphasises that He *came down* from heaven. There is a similarity in that respect, in regard to the manna, for both came from heaven. "Man did eat angels¬ food", (@Psalm 78:25); the food of those who are marked by obedience. It is a food that gives you a constitution which enables you to carry out God's will in the wilderness. But the bread here in @John 6 is to enable us to enter into eternal life, but this food has to be appropriated. The Lord has opened up the position, and He gave His flesh for the life of the world. The title to eternal life has been made good for man, and the bread provided; but all has to be appropriated. This is our side.
Ques. So that although eternal life is for the world, only those who eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink His blood have it?
J.T. It is limited to those who appropriate it, although available for all.
Rem. I suppose @John 6:53 makes that plain: "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you".
Rem. This bread would not be applicable to the time to come.
J.T. No; it is in view of the scene of death. It contemplates that we are in the scene of death, and that the only way out of it into life is by eating this bread.
Rem. It gives us the moral constitution of an overcomer.
J.T. It gives power to pass out of the natural
{62}
into the spiritual. It is all very well to have the light of eternal life, but it requires power to pass over into it, and the eating of this food gives you strength. Often it has been pointed out, that there are two tenses of the verb *to eat* in verses 53 and 54: that is, the past and the present. "Eats", verse 54, is present and continuous.
Rem. "I will raise him up at the last day". I always think of this chapter when one of the saints dies. You have the comforting thought that the last day *is* the last day, and the Lord will raise you up then. It shows how the Lord has charged Himself as to us. The Father has given us to Him, and He takes charge of us to the very end.
Ques. What about the drinking?
J.T. Well, it is an allusion to what man requires for sustenance.
Rem. "He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in me and I in him", (@John 6:56)
J.T. I think that means the soul's appropriation of the Lord's death in its full bearing. It involves the end of what I am as a man born after the flesh.
Ques. Has the Spirit of God any place in connection with this appropriation?
J.T. The Spirit underlies all the teaching from chapter 4. The Spirit enables us to go down.
Ques. In what way? Would the Spirit keep Christ before your soul as that on which you feed?
J.T. We are in a world where everybody is seeking to get up.
Rem. That is the tendency at the present time, and we are affected by it.
J.T. Yes, it is the spirit of the world to get to the top of the ladder. That is where the test comes; the Lord was going down. He never exalted Himself. "The bread of God is he who *comes down* out of heaven" (@John 6:33)
Ques. How many of us really wish to diminish,
{63}
to become less to play the losing game in this present world?
Rem. If this is not our food it is impossible for us to take such a course.
J.T. Under God's government we may prosper in things here; but the danger is of living in our prosperity. Of course, we have to live in righteousness in the world and "provide things honest", and all that; but the question is where one lives, and what are one's hopes and aspirations? What do we regard as life? "If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him". (@1 John 2:15) You see here that the Lord is going down, and He loses every advantage that a man could have in this world. That is a test for us if we are eating that food.
Ques. Is the thought of growth here?
J.T. I think this food is that by which we grow; and growth in Christianity signifies that you are more lowly, more simple, and you have more affection. That was what Christ was here. The gospels present to us what Christ was here; a Man among men; now, that is the divine thought; and God will never recede from it. That is what He looks for from believers in Christ.
Rem. Colossians speaks of kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering. The saints were to put on these.
J.T. If you do not feed on Christ you are afraid of death; the wise man sees the evil and hides himself. What I understand by hiding yourself is, that you feed on Christ, you accept His death, and therefore you are prepared for the evil. If dissolution overtakes you, you have already anticipated it.
Ques. Have not the affections a great part in all this appropriation?
J.T. Surely. Christ has gone over before you.
Rem. I suppose chapter 4 established the capacity for the enjoyment of it?
{64}
J.T. I think so, and then chapter 5 is power, lifting man outside the legal system.
Ques. Will you say a little on chapter 10? "I give unto them eternal life". (@John 10:28) In what way does He give eternal life?
J.T. *There* it is collective. It is to the flock. Eternal life was in God's mind for Israel, and it was made available for them in Christ; but they would not come to Him that they might have it. But the thought did not lapse, hence it was given to the sheep. The flock, given to Christ by the Father has it now instead of the nation. God granted to the Gentiles repentance unto life; and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed. Thus the blessing is now connected with the flock, composed of Jews and Gentiles. In chapter 7 we have the feast of tabernacles, and this is superseded by Christianity; that is, a glorified Christ, and believers on Him indwelt by the Holy Spirit here on earth. Then, in chapter 8, there is the thought of *following* Christ, as the Light of the world, and this is exemplified in chapter 9. This leads up to the flock in chapter 10, with whom, in a collective way, eternal life is connected.
{65}
GOD'S WAY LEADS TO THE GLORY
@Exodus 33:12 - 23
J.T. In suggesting this scripture my thought was that it answers to our brother's wish -- the consideration of the divine way as leading to the glory. God's way is in the sanctuary, and His way is in the sea; and I thought we might see from this section of Scripture, that is, beginning from chapter 20, that evidently His way is with the object in view of taking His people out of this world, and establishing them in connection with another system of things; that is the great end that God has before Him.
Rem. It is God's delight to have His people near Him; to gather them around Himself.
J.S.A. What is in view here is that He is carrying them up from where they were to the point where He would have them to be.
J.T. And He says, "My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest". It is a great thing to see that God begins in the securing of what is for His pleasure. In chapter 20 He asserts His rights. It is clear that unless God's rights are owned the thought of God's people moving out of this world, and being suited to God's world, cannot be brought in.
Ques. How would you describe His righteousness coming out in chapter 20?
J.T. Well, I think the law is the principle of it. It is the assertion of God's rights over us; these must be recognised. I think, when it *is* recognised then you have the unfolding of the divine way. God's divine way is in the sanctuary; and the sanctuary is unfolded in chapter 25.
Rem. You say the rights of God have to be first acknowledged.
{66}
J.T. I think so. Apart from that you never get any light.
W.K. What do you mean by the rights of God?
J.T. Well, He has a right to man's affections. "Thou shalt love the Lord with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength; and with all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself", (@Luke 10:27). I think God delights in seeing the saints loving one another. It seems to me that if these things were recognised there would sure to be light. God's way is made clear.
W.K. Yes; by God's rights you mean what is due or becoming to render to Him.
J.T. Yes. God was never fully recognised in His rights until Christ became Man. The law was never really answered to until Christ became Man; and He not only recognised the law, but He magnified it and made it honourable..
J.S.A. God never gave up His rights, though He was denied them until the Lord came.
J.T. I think it is consequent upon that we have the opening up of the divine secret. It is evident, that God must be recognised in man before He begins to unfold what is in His mind. There must be the full answer in man to what is of God. Christ answers to all that; He answers to the tabernacle.
Ques. You referred to two passages in @Psalm 77, "Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary;" (@Psalm 77:13) and, "Thy way is in the sea". (@Psalm 77:19) What does the first of these convey to us?
J.T. The first conveys to my mind what was communicated to Moses on the mount. Every divine thought was to find its fulfilment in Christ. But I think that before that takes place there was in Christ a full answer to what man should be for God. The Lord becomes Man; takes up everything due to God, and recognises it.
Ques. Would you say that what is set forth in
{67}
the type of Exodus is really the unfolding of what Christ is as Man?
J.T. If you have a Man who answers in every way to God's requirements, God has His Vessel. We know that Christ was the divine Vessel. If you have God's will answered to in every way here, you have the ark of the covenant.
J.S.A. Until you have the perfect answer in Christ to what God looks for in man, you cannot have the gospel in its full sense. You must have the Man that answers to God before you can have God's thought about man.
Ques. Would you say here that God proposes to go on with Moses after the breakdown, really on the ground of what is set forth in Christ?
J.T. Yes. We get the idea of the Mediator prior to this. Moses says, "Peradventure I shall make an atonement for your sin", (@Exodus 32:30) but we know he could not. Directly Christ becomes Man, God reveals His thoughts, and goes back to the beginning, what man should be first, what Adam should have been and then what Israel should be; all that must come before you could have the unfolding of God's thoughts to man.
Rem. It really needed Christ to come in, in that way, for God.
J.T. Yes; then Christ becomes the Vessel. God has His Vessel, so to speak; and having Christ, then all His thoughts become unfolded. I think the tabernacle is the unfolding in type of what God had in His mind for man. So that "Thy way is in the sanctuary" necessitates our inquiry as to all that is in the sanctuary, or the tabernacle.
J.S.A. I was thinking only this morning in reference to what you have just said, of the beginning of @Hebrews 9, where, you get a list of the things seen in the holiest of all; they really referred to God's ways in bringing the people along; the manna, and
{68}
the rod; they were there for God; He saw Christ in them.
I think, referring to what you were saying just now, that it would be impossible for God to make any complete revelation of His testimony until there was a complete answer to what God was. He could not set it forth completely in testimony. It might be figurative, but not complete; and therefore it is of immense importance to see what Christ was here for God.
J.T. Think of such a scripture as this; He was "heard because of his piety!" (@Hebrews 5:7)
Ques. How do you understand that?
J.T. He was heard on the ground of what He was as Man, and thus He was a pattern of the order of man that is pleasing to God.
Rem. "I knew that thou hearest me always", (@John 11:42) and "I do always those things that please him", (@John 8:29)
Rem. "He that doeth these things shall live by them". (@Romans 10:5) That was only true of the Lord, but it *was* true of Him.
J.T. Then you have the unfolding of the mind of God, that all must be effected through death. So the Lord goes up to the mount of transfiguration, and there the idea of the tabernacle was suggested. Peter thought of three tabernacles, but the cloud overshadowed them and the voice said, "This is my beloved Son, hear *him".* (@Luke 9:35) Now, Moses and Elias were there, and what they were speaking of was not what Moses had been hearing on mount Sinai. What they were speaking of was the means of accomplishing that, of effectuating it; that was His death. The mind of God was unfolded in the sanctuary, but how was that to be effectuated? What Moses and Elias were occupied with on the mount of glory was how it was to be effectuated; and that was by His decease. The Lord went down from the mount of
{69}
transfiguration to die, so that it all might be effectuated.
Rem. All that God was is declared in Christ now?
J.T. I think so. He went down to Jerusalem to die. They spake of His decease which He should accomplish at Jerusalem.
Rem. So that now it is not the same with us as it was with Moses; Moses only saw God's back parts.
J.T. Quite so; and that leads on to what I was speaking of as to the glory. We see the way that we shall reach the glory. The Lord *went down!*  they marvelled, they wondered at Him; even His disciples wondered to see the deliberation with which He went down to die. If you follow that way in your soul you reach the glory; because that is the way the Lord went to glory.
J.S.A. Will you explain a little more what it is to reach the glory. Do you mean to reach it in our souls?
J.T. I was thinking of Stephen; he saw into glory. The Lord's footsteps were there and Stephen followed after the Lord, and the result is, he says, "I see the glory of God".
S.L. "Thy way is in the sea". (@Psalm 77:19) Is that His death?
J.T. Yes, I think so. His path is in great waters; and I think Stephen went there; Stephen followed the Lord's footsteps.
Ques. Would you say that means that we must accept death for ourselves here, and in going that way morally we reach the glory?
J.T. Yes; and Stephen sees the glory of God in the face of Jesus. The question is, Who *appreciates* the glory? Only the man who accepts the will of God here.
Ques. In accepting the will of God do you mean
{70}
really accepting the One who has established the right to live here, and who has gone into death?
J.T. Yes; the apostle Paul says, "always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus"; (@2 Corinthians 4:10) that is, the *dying* of *that Man*. He had been speaking of the glory, and he says he saw in it the face of Jesus; these were his thoughts, and then he says, "always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus". (@2 Corinthians 4:10)
J.S.A. Would you say that you get His way in the Supper?
J.T. I think so. The bread is the symbol of the Lord's body. I never think of it thus without introducing into it the idea of God's will. He said, "Lo, I come to do thy will", (@Hebrews 10:9) and "a body hast thou prepared me". (@Hebrews 10:5) I do not see that the Supper could be enjoyed apart from that. The Lord's body is that in which God's will was carried out. Well, He died in that body,
Rem. It is a wonderful thought that the body of the believer can be presented as a living sacrifice. He carried out God's will here; and our bodies ought to be for the will of God too.
J.T. If that is so, there is room for the Spirit. The body of Christ is that in which you have the reproduction of Christ, and the idea of that reproduction is that there is that here which answers to God's mind.
Ques. Do we come into that here practically?
J.T. I think it is a great thing to accept it. I was thinking this morning that if you recognise the light you make room for the Spirit. Disregard your own feelings altogether; recognise the light. If you accept that as a principle, the next question is; are you going to be controlled by the light? If you are, you disallow your own will. We are one bread, for we are all made partakers of the same loaf.
{71}
Rem. It is not submission in a legal way; it is through the affections.
J.T. I think it is a great thing to recognise the light that is intended to govern any given position. If we recognise the light there is room made for the Spirit.
Ques. Does not light come to us in the gospel?.
J.T. It does.
Rem. God is light. If Christ is the revelation, if He is light and the light is the life of men, is not that the unfolding of what God is? The knowledge of God is light.
J.T. Yes, quite so. God was, so to say, placed under a necessity of removing lawlessness, and what gave the Lord peculiar pleasure was, that on the cross He removed the lawless man.
Ques. By the lawless man you mean the man who does his own will instead of the will of God.
J.T. Yes; "Lo, I come to do thy will". (@Hebrews 10:9) There was not another to do it. "Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven". (@Matthew 6:10) There was a Man here answering to God's will; and that Man removes the lawless man.
J.S.A. Mr. Raven made a very striking remark: he said, The lake of fire was a proof of the love of God. It means just that God being what He is. He must remove everything that is contrary to Himself.
Rem. The obedient Man comes in to remove the lawless man.
J.T. Therefore the lawless man cast out the only *law-abiding* Man that ever was on the earth. On the other hand, the Lord removed the lawless man vicariously. It was peculiarly delightful to Him that He was removing that which had so much grieved the heart of God.
J.S.A. It is not only the exposing of the lawless man, but the removal of him.
Rem. The Lord delighted to do God's will.
{72}
J.T. I think the body of Christ here is the answer to that. That Man is to be reproduced, and hence the bread in the Lord's supper represents the body of the Lord on the one hand, and on the other hand it is a symbol of our unity.
J.McF. This is certainly on a line with what was expressed at the beginning; that we should, in our affections, leave this world, and so to speak, enter into the blessedness of another world of which Christ is the centre, another order of things.
J.T. There has to be a recognition of the will of God before there is any movement on God's part. I think Saul of Tarsus represents the biggest man here on earth; in him there was the embodiment of the will of man acting against the will of God in testimony. God had been dealing patiently with Jerusalem, offering to send Christ back to them; but they refused this; and the Lord appears to Saul. Saul recognises Him, and he says, "Lord, what wilt thou have me do?" (@Acts 9:6) There is the recognition of the Lord, and I think that necessarily preceded the new movement.
Ques. Did not God move in reaching Saul of Tarsus?
J.T. But there was no movement of the testimony until that man's will was broken. In a sense Saul represented the nation. They will be dealt with in the future as Saul was. Compare @1 Timothy 1:12 - 16.
Ques. Was it not indicated, that there was to be a movement of the testimony in what the Lord said to Saul, that he was to be a witness unto all men of what he had seen and heard.
Rem. One has to recognise the rights of God; and if you recognise the rights of God, then you are reckoned righteous.
J.T. Yes.
J.S.A. Someone used to call them the *primary*
{73}
rights of God; and until they are acknowledged nothing can be right in you.
Ques. What is meant by "He that hath an ear let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches"? (@Revelation 2:7)
J.T. I think on the one hand there is the Lord's authority; that is, He sent the messages to the churches; of necessity they carried with them the authority of the Lord. But then there was also what the Spirit said to the churches.
Ques. Is the testimony connected with The kingdom aspect of things?
J.T. I think the kingdom effects it; but the testimony involves all that is in God's mind.
J.S.A. The testimony really, as I understand it, is connected with the fulfilment of God's purpose.
J.T. Moses said, "show me thy glory", (@Exodus 33:18) I think it is a wonderful desire to have, to see the glory.
Ques. What do you understand by "thy glory"?
J.T. I think Christ is the glory of God. Think of Christ as He is now before God! What shining of moral glory there is in Jesus!
Ques. What prompted Moses to ask that?
J.T. I think it was a very right desire. In the presence of the broken law, in the presence of the golden calf, where could the glory of God shine? It refers to the way God accomplishes His purpose. Moses saw it on the mount of transfiguration. Christ was going into death to carry out the will of God.
Ques. What do you mean by *moral glory*?
J.T. It is every attribute in God's nature and character being absolutely answered to; it has the full answer in Christ.
Rem. In Christ you have both the display and the response.
J.T. I think Christ is the glory of God. All that God is, found its answer there.
W.K. Yes, it shines forth there.
{74}
J.T. The psalmist says, "The heavens declare the glory of God;" (@Psalm 19:1) he saw there perfect order; there was nothing to interfere with the will of God. Well, what is in Christ is that brought down to earth. There is one Man in whom every thought of God is centred; and that Man goes up there. So Stephen "saw the, glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God". (@Acts 7:55)
In the next great rebellion of Israel the Lord says, "all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord;" (@Numbers 14:21) that is, that where the lawlessness of man was so manifested. His glory should be displayed. I think Moses would delight in that thought. In the next chapter, @Numbers 15, you have the burnt offering. It is very encouraging to see that in the presence of the rebellion of the people, God introduces the burnt offering; and the heavenly colour -- "the ribband of blue;" showing how He accomplishes His thoughts in Christ.
{75}
OUTSIDE THE CAMP
@Hebrews 13:10 - 16; @Exodus 20:24 - 26
My thought is to call attention, to the position becoming to those who love Christ at the present moment. Our position is determined by the position of Christ. Our love to Christ is tested practically by whether we are willing to respond to His movements; our love is continually put to the test by His movements. The movements of the Lord bring out whether we are loyal to Him in every respect, whether we are willing to be in correspondence to Him in every move.
Ruth was tested by the movements of Naomi, but she refused to return from following her. She would be in correspondence to Naomi whatever the circumstances might be. She says to Naomi, "Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God: where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried". (@Ruth 1:16,17) Now, as I understand it, genuine affection for Christ leads to complete correspondence to Christ whatever the circumstances may be. Our circumstances are such as put love to the test, as to whether it is Christ who is paramount with us or not. It is for this reason I desired to call attention to our position at the present time as determined by the position of Christ.
It is a very blessed thing, on the one hand, to know that God has determined our position in connection with His eternal purposes; it is all of God; we have had nothing to do with that. God has not allowed that to be left in our hands at all; it -is all of His eternal, sovereign decision. He has
{76}
determined, our position according to His eternal counsels, and He has determined it in relation to and in correspondence to Christ's position. It is a matter of His love, of course, but more important still, it is a question of His wisdom. Love is the spring of all with God, but wisdom is the handmaid of His love; so that in determining our position God has acted in wisdom as well as in love. Then, if God has acted in wisdom and love, He has acted rightly; all that God wills is infinitely *right*. God has given the assembly the most wonderful place conceivable, and that place, as determined by His wisdom, is infinitely right.
So it is a matter of God's wisdom, to have given us the place He has given us in His purpose in correspondence to Christ; and whatever He has done is done in love, but also in wisdom, and it is entirely right. If He has determined the place of the assembly as that which is to be united to Christ, as the companion of Christ in heavenly glory, it is right that it should be so, and right in God's sight. It has been determined in the wisdom of God that we should be the companions of Christ in heavenly glory, and that is according to His eternal purpose. If it had been left to men to choose their own portion, many believers might have preferred the millennial state of things for themselves. They might have preferred to have their portion on the renewed earth, with the pressure of death removed from their spirits, and surrounded with every blessing that earth could afford. But God has reserved some better things for us, beloved, in His wisdom, and because of His great love wherewith He loved us, He "even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved), and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: that in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches
{77}
of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus". (@Ephesians 2:5 - 7)
God has a purpose in giving us this place of elevation, and it is right that we should have it; it is according to His wisdom and according to His love that we should be the companions of Christ for ever in heavenly glory. He has taken us into favour in the Beloved; it does not even say who the Beloved is, as if to show the unique place that Christ has in the affections of the Father.
Then another point is, God has power to do everything He pleases. Love is His motive spring, and wisdom is the agent of His love, but God has also power to effect every counsel of His will. In Ephesians everything is on the ground of excess; it is according to the exceeding greatness of His power, "which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places". (@Ephesians 1:20) God has raised Him from the dead and set Him there according to the greatness of His power. The sense of this mighty power is so set before the soul of the apostle, that when he comes to speak of that power being towards us, he speaks of the purpose of God as already accomplished. What a solid basis we are on when we come to speak of the eternal purpose of God! It is outside of us; it is all of His mighty power.
But when we come to speak of our position in this world, that, is an entirely different matter; we *have* something to do with that. When the Lord came down to this earth He became the great regulator of everything; like the sun in the heavens, He became the controller of everything. He came into the midst of a world of lawlessness and departure from God, and He answered perfectly to God in every way. Every thought of God found an answer in Christ here as Man. That was not in heaven, but it was here. The great idea in testimony is to
{78}
bring out what is heavenly and to show its superiority over what is here. Christ is the ark of the testimony, and Moses got the light as to the ark on the mount; there was no contrariety up there; all was according to God there; and he received the tables of the testimony there. But Moses came down from the mount, and he brought with him the tables of the covenant; they were the record of the rights of God; they were the rights of God put into writing, but things had altered in the camp; a great change had come into the camp during the absence of Moses. Moses drew near to it, and he heard a sound of singing; there was a noise going up from the camp; the spirit of idolatry had laid hold of the camp. Now what will Moses do?
Moses had no power to bring that writing into the camp; there was no ark there to receive it, and he broke the tables there at the foot of the mount. It was his acknowledgment that he had no power to bring the tables of the covenant into the camp. Now think of Christ! What was it for Him to come into a scene like that; to come into a scene of lawlessness and idolatry, and to hold everything intact for God? What was it for Him to maintain everything for God; to maintain the law, and more, to magnify the law and make it honourable? He brought the law into the camp, and made it honourable there. That was the position of Christ here; in the midst of men the will of God was maintained intact, nothing was let go.
Now everything must be regulated by that; God's will has been perfectly expressed here among men, and the expression of that will here in a Man drew out every possible evidence of the hatred of men. Man -- the world, hates the expression of God's will; and the Lord Jesus met with opposition at every step of His path, but He maintained the divine will in every circumstance; He is the ark of the
{79}
covenant here. The ark of the covenant adjusts everything. Moses could not maintain the law in the face of what was there, he had to break the tables of the covenant; but the law is within the heart of Christ. Christ as Man here was the expression of God. Of course, He was "over all, God blessed forever", but I speak of Him as a Man here, and that Man was the perfect expression of the divine nature; there was the perfect answer to the will of God in a Man. Think of the moral power necessary in order that a Man should hold the position for God here, in the face of the opposition of the world and of men! Think of what it meant for Him to be here entirely for the will of God, and answering to God at every step of His path! But since that has been so, the ark of the covenant -- Christ in that character -- must regulate everything; He adjusts everything: we must follow the ark.
Moses took the tabernacle and pitched it afar off from the camp; that was a wonderful thing, a solemn thing for a man to do. Moses was a man of faith, and he acted for God, and when lawlessness and idolatry have come into the camp, he takes the tabernacle and pitches it without the camp, afar off from the camp. Now God honoured Moses in that act, and the cloudy pillar came down and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and Jehovah talked with Moses. The Lord spake "face to face with Moses, as a man speaketh to his friend". (@Exodus 33:11) What an honour to confer on a man, beloved friends!
In @Hebrews 13 we read that the Lord in order that He might sanctify the people with His own blood, suffered "without the gate"; He must go outside the camp. It is there, that we find Him. The action of Moses confirms the action of every one in the camp who loves God; "every one which sought the Lord went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was without the camp", (@Exodus 33:7)
{80}
There were some who worshipped in their tent doors, but a man's tent door is no place in which to worship God but those who sought Him went outside the camp. It was divine instinct in Moses which led him to pitch the tabernacle outside the camp, far off from the camp, and he gave it a name: he called it the "tent of meeting". What a provision for the people; what a provision for those who recognised the rights of Jehovah! Jehovah had a tent, and faith in Moses leads him to pitch it afar off from the idolatrous camp, and there it becomes the tent of meeting. Those who recognised God did not remain in their own tent doors, but they went forth to Jehovah.
There has been an action, for God of this character in our own day, and many have had their eyes opened to the divine movement in God's mercy. We have had to take account of the action of a man, or of men, as done in the recognition of what is due to God, and in following the divine movement, we have found that it means an immense increase of blessing for the people of God. In Moses¬ day the cloud of glory descended there, outside the camp, and the Lord spake with Moses, and Moses returns again into the camp. But there was one man who remained in the tabernacle; he departed not out of the tabernacle; he never left it. Moses was the one who set up the tent of meeting, but his servant Joshua, "a young man", departed not out of it. I think there you get the two offices of the Lord; He is both Apostle and Priest. We see the honour conferred on the Apostle, but there is the one, too, with power to lead the people in, and He never leaves the tabernacle. Thus we know Him spiritually today. I have no doubt we shall find both these things, if we are content to be led by the Lord.
Christ Himself deliberately suffered without the gate; the Lord did it that He might sanctify the
{81}
people with His own blood. He sets forth the path of sanctification for us. In His consideration for us, in His thoughts for us, He chooses to suffer in that way, outside the gate of Jerusalem. He was looking on to conditions such as we find at the present day; He knew what would come in, and He goes outside to suffer. God had no place in Israel; the death of Stephen proved that He had no place among them, and the Lord foresaw it, and He acted in view of it, and suffered without the gate, that the people might go outside to Him.
The atmosphere in the camp today is absolutely deadening; it is stifling to every spiritual instinct, and the Lord wants us outside; He died outside. There are conditions in the camp which are poisonous, and the Lord in His compassion for you would have you *outside;* outside with Him. The apostle calls upon us to go out to Him. "Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach". (@Hebrews 13:13) It cannot be anything but a condition of reproach in the eyes of the camp. Moses accepted the reproach, and more, he valued reproach; he had learnt to esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, for he saw what was invisible. Reproach is not only a duty if we consider for God, but it is treasure. The Spirit of God gives the name to what Moses accepted and appreciated, He calls it the "reproach of Christ". The position involves the reproach of Christ, but that is treasure.
Well, the ark of the covenant must regulate everything, and the result is that we "go forth". The apostle here says, "Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp". It is "unto him", as if the affections of the apostle were engaged with that One alone.
We might ask: How can we approach to God? What about the worship of God? How is it to be sustained? Is there not provision for the worship
{82}
of God in the camp? No; the camp does not truly afford the conditions for the worship of God now, since Jesus has died outside the gate. He could say, "The hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father". And again, "The hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth". (@John 4:21,23) It is the sanctified ones, those separated from the world, who worship the Father today; and Christ is the measure of the sanctification. "For their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also may be sanctified through the truth". (@John 17:19)
We need not fear, Christ is sufficient to maintain the worship of God; we have an altar. There has never yet been a time in the world when there was not an altar; the altar is the place of sacrifice. We are given an opportunity for sacrifice; that is the thought of an altar. There is a place where we can offer to God continually the sacrifice of praise, and where we can do good and communicate; these are sacrifices with which God is well pleased. It is well worth while, beloved friends, to please God; the great end in sacrifice is to please God. You might have very expensive things to offer, but the point is, do you seek to please God? The widow woman who cast two mites into the treasury was pleasing to God, for she cast in her all. So there is a place of sacrifice afforded to those who are apart from the camp, and their sacrifices are well-pleasing to God.
Now as to @Exodus 20, the thought of blessing is intimately connected with the recognition of the Lord. The altar is alluded to, and it is to be made of earth. There is nothing very showy about it, it is not conspicuous, so that you do not assume anything. Then, a further thing, you are not to go up by steps to God's altar, "that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon". It is an awful thing to be
{83}
discovered to be naked in connection with the things of God. To be naked is that your flesh is disclosed as acting in connection with God's holy things. That is obnoxious to God; the altar would be polluted by man's tool upon it, but I do not speak of that, but of the blessing that God brings in in connection with the place of His name. He says, "in all places where I shall make my name to be remembered I will come unto thee, and bless thee". Where does He make His name to be remembered? In the hearts of His saints. We have to look at these thoughts spiritually, everything is spiritual in divine things. The absence of steps or of hewn stone must be taken up spiritually, and so here again, when it is a question of His remembrance, that also must be looked at spiritually, as setting forth the place He has in the affections of His saints.
Here it says, "in all places"; it is not here the thought of the one place to which all the males in Israel were to come three times in the year, but in all places where I record my name, "I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee". What a comfort to us! What a provision for us! Even now we can come into this blessing; it is the great end that God has before Him with regard to us; He will come to us, and there He will bless us, "there will I bless thee".
May the Lord bless His word to every one of us!
{84}
THE ARK AND THE HIGH PRIEST
@Exodus 25:10 - 16; @Exodus 28:1 - 5; @Isaiah 42:1 - 8; @Hebrews 3:1
My thought is to show the connection between the ark and the high priest. I wish to dwell upon each separately, and in pointing out the contrast between them, to show also the connection that exists between them.
The ark, as most of us here know, has reference to Christ, and the high priest in Israel represented Christ. It is in that way that they become of such interest; indeed, it is thus that the Old Testament becomes of such interest to those who love Christ, I doubt whether any one reads the Scriptures with heart interest until he loves Christ; you may dwell upon the type, but your heart is engaged with the antitype, and I desire, beloved friends, that that may mark our meeting now; that whilst I seek to engage you for the moment with the types, your hearts, by the Spirit, may be engaged with the antitype; that is, with Christ. No type can exceed in interest the ark of the testimony, and in one point it is very like that of the high priest, for it represents Christ with something in His heart; the law of God; whereas that which the priest had in his heart was the saints. I wish you to bear this in mind for we have to take account of the Lord here in this world in connection with the will of God, and then we have to take account of Him in connection with the saints. The high priest had the saints in his heart; I refer to the breastplate as you will understand. That was one great feature of the high priest, that he represented Christ as having the saints¬ in His affections.
What I would point out as to the ark is that the
{85}
predominant feature of it is not exactly that it was heavenly; whereas the predominant feature of the priest was; the type suggests to us that the priest is heavenly. You will all remember that @Exodus 28 is taken up almost entirely with the description of the dress of the high priest; the colours referred to, by the Spirit, in the description of the dress convey to us the characteristics of Christ, as Man, in relation to, and as having to say to God, as approaching God, and the predominant colour is blue. There are other colours mentioned which have reference to the earthly side of Christ's official glory, but the predominant colour in the dress of the high priest is blue.
Now when you come to the ark, you are struck immediately with the fact that there is nothing said about colour at all. The point in the ark is, that it was made of shittim wood and it was overlaid with gold, and it was to contain the tables of the covenant. Now that is what I want to dwell upon. By the Lord's help, I desire to show you, that the Lord has to be taken account of here in this world as appearing amongst men, and as the One capable of taking up the revealed will of God and carrying it into effect. I desire, that our hearts might ponder that. The great thing in view was that the divine glory might be sustained here, but evidently the shittim wood has to be taken account of. Primarily the great thing that God had in view was to have a Man here through whom He might carry out all His will. Adam had failed in that, but God would wait, and He did wait. He waited for that which the shittim wood represented. One loves to think of God waiting for that. I desire to enlist your sympathy in that respect as to God; He had His mind set upon man, but God could wait. One great attribute in God, one might say, is that He can wait. God will wait; He will wait for the suitable material for the
{86}
effectuation of His purposes. He waited after the fall of Adam; He waited for the Man. Christ Jesus. I think of God taking Moses up to the mount; the law in principle was given to the camp below. He takes Moses up to the mount Sinai, and the first thing He speaks to Moses about is that which was in His heart; the first thing He speaks about to His servant is the ark of the testimony. It was that, that He had in His heart. He looked on to a Man here upon the earth, moving under His eye; every motive of that Man was Godward; every aspiration had God as its object; every movement of His heart had reference to God; that was a delight to God to unfold to Moses the ark. He says, "make an ark of shittim wood" and He gives the dimensions. It was a delight to God to dwell upon those dimensions, to dwell upon that wood, as representing that Man whose every movement of heart had God as its object. God speaks to us later through the prophets and He says "Behold my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved, in whom my soul has found its delight", (@Matthew 12:18). How do you take account of that? I take account of it as referring to Christ, and to what He was here for 30 years. That of which God had spoken to Moses, that material, those dimensions given in His instructions to Moses, all that, beloved friends, had taken form in a Man here on earth. Let us think of that. The wood of the ark speaks of the humanity of the Lord Jesus, and now God says "I will put my spirit upon him"; (@Matthew 12:18). He can put the gold upon that vessel.
If ever I hear of a brother undertaking to serve Christ, to serve God, I want to know his past history. God always takes up a man in reference to his past history. Every servant of God is set apart from his birth, and all the divine dealings have reference to the gold. What God has in His mind is the gold. He intends to set the gold before men, but before
{87}
you have the gold you must have the wood. If you have not the wood the gold would be discredited. Paul says God set him apart even from his mother's womb, and called him by His grace. Every servant is taken account of by God from his birth, and before God, as it were, puts the gold upon the vessel, there must be the wood.
As we look at Christ, it is important that we dwell upon what He was personally. I believe it is of the Spirit that the deity of the Lord should be put into evidence in every bit of ministry. The cherubim of glory over the mercy seat suggests to our hearts that there must be a guarding of that Person. He is what He was and what He ever will be as to His Person, but let us think of the wood; think of that Man here in this world where all was opposed, where there was such absence of sympathy, even from those akin to Him in the flesh. Mary says "thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing"; (@Luke 2:48) they had no idea who was there; but the Lord says, "wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business". (@Luke 2:49) As Man here, He was personally equal to that which He was to sustain in testimony; He was to be covered with the gold. God was to set there the full weight of the divine glory, and that was to be displayed in that Man. What food there is for our souls in Christ viewed in that light here in this world; moving about in a scene that was contrary to Him, every movement of His heart had reference to God.
That is the idea I have of the ark of the covenant. It is Christ in this world where everything is contrary, sustaining the full weight of the divine glory. I have often thought that we too little consider what it was for Christ to take up God's law; what power was required for it. We do well to consider the conditions into which Christ came, every part of the world and its whole power turned against Him. Now I say consider the power that was necessary to stand
{88}
against that, yet, not one iota of the divine will was surrendered for a moment; it was in His heart, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God!" (@Hebrews 10:7) "I delight to do thy will O my God!" (@Psalm 40:8) I say, what power was required. I have no doubt the wood, as typifying Christ's humanity, was divinely selected. It was most durable, and hence we have in it the suggestion of the power that was in Christ *inherently* in carrying out the will of God here upon the earth.
Well now, God says in the Prophet, "Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delighteth", (@Isaiah 42:1) I understand that to be the ark of the covenant; "my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delighteth". Now notice, He says, "I will put my spirit upon him". (@Matthew 12:18) That is what I understand to be the gold. "I will put my spirit upon him". You can all recall the remarkable incident of the Lord's reception of the Spirit in the gospel of Luke. He appears in baptism, and He comes up out of the water, and He is praying. There He is; the Man who delighted in the will of God, and He is dependent upon God here. The Spirit came upon Him and Jehovah says, "I will put my Spirit upon him", and then God says, "he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. He shall not strive nor cry; neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets", (@Matthew 12:18,19) God puts His Spirit upon Christ, and then you have the unfolding, in testimony, of God.
Now what was the result of that, beloved friends? I appeal to you who know the Scriptures. It is of all moment to know the Scriptures. If you read this prophet Isaiah you will find the great controversy is between God and idolatry, and now that He has a Servant, now that He has a Vessel, He puts His Spirit upon Him, and the conflict is on. I want you to understand that the conflict continues.
{89}
There are two great forces in the world, one is lawlessness, and the other is idolatry; they are linked together, and in the ministry of Christ God has taken issue with the lawlessness of man, and the idolatry of man! I want you to consider that. God found His servant in whom His soul delighted, and He put His Spirit upon Him. "He shall not fail nor be discouraged"; that is the ark of the covenant. "He shall not fail nor be discouraged till he have set judgment in the earth", (@Isaiah 42:4) that is Christ. God took public issue, in the ministry of Christ, with the lawlessness and the idolatry of man, and if you read the gospels in the light of these two thoughts, I think you will get great help from them. Then there is a third great issue which is obvious; and that is, the issue between life and death. That issue had been raised in the garden of Eden, the question of life. Is the question of life to be solved? I want you to bear in mind that God has found His vessel, and has put His Spirit upon Him, and that now the conflict is on. Think of Christ in that position; think of the tremendous power; the almighty power that was required to carry out the divine mind. Christ was anointed of the Spirit, and He is led of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil; that was in order that it might be brought into greater evidence who and what that Man was. He returned from the wilderness the victorious One. Think of the power of Christ here in subjection to God. He bound the strong man in the wilderness, and returned in that power, in that same Spirit into Galilee, and hence the glory is shown resplendently in that wonderful ministry before men; but the conflict was on. The question of God's rights in the heart of man had to be solved. He was the only God, the only object who deserved the adoration of man. The Lord undertook to make that evident. God had rights over man. He was the only true God. With
{90}
what delight the Lord Jesus brought that into evidence before men. Now, in this chapter God says "my glory will I not give to another", verse 8. You will have noticed the verse, "and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images". You remember when Moses came, down into the camp, the glory had been changed into the similitude of an ox that eateth grass, @Psalm 106:20. Such is the heart of man.
The Lord Jesus undertook in His ministry here to establish in this world, in the power of the Spirit the testimony of the true God. God could not suffer, He will not suffer, His glory to be given to another. What a solemn consideration for Christians; that the spirit of idolatry may find a place in our hearts. What does that mean? That means that God is deprived of His glory, and He will not suffer it. The Lord Jesus came into this world to set that aside, and you may depend upon it, that God will not suffer it. He established too the principle of righteousness, He established it here in Himself as Man-before God; He loved righteousness; He fulfilled it as a Man before God. Where every other had failed, He established the principle of righteousness. Where these two things are found in man, the establishment of the rights and glory of the true God, and the full absolute recognition of the righteousness which goes with it, that man is entitled to live. So the Lord Jesus has, in this world established His title to live before God. As Man personally, in the place He took here in this world, He has established His title to live before God.
I just add another word to that and it is, that, on the ground of that He dies. The Lord, personally established His title to live in the presence of God, but He died so as to establish a title for others, for men. He has annulled death and brought life and incorruptibility to light in the gospel. The apostle
{91}
John in his writings insists uniformly upon the sonship of Christ, and that everything must depend on the Son. He says, "he that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son of God has not life". (@1 John 5:12) Now what I understand by that is that everything is in that Person. The point is not that the persons who have life are sons, for John does not develop sonship in regard to the saints, but he does insist uniformly upon the sonship of Christ, and that everything depends upon that Person and that without that Person there is no life; he that has that Person has life.
When you come to the high priest you find the Scriptures enlarge upon his dress. You will remember the idea of the wardrobe in Scripture; Huldah was the keeper of the wardrobe. The idea of dress is extremely important and the Scriptures emphasise it. Now in the matter of the dress we are wearing we have to be brought into accord with the ark of the covenant and the high priest, and if I understand the epistle to the Romans, the point is to bring the saints into accord with the ark of the covenant. I think it is evident that everything must be made to depend upon doing the will of God, I mean upon a Man doing the will of God. Apart from that it is impossible that you can have unfolded the heavenly side of the truth. Now, the epistle to the Romans sets forth how the saints are brought into accord with Christ viewed as the ark, and I think the epistle to the Hebrews shows us how we are brought into accord with the high priest. I would ask you to consider the dress of the priest. The apostle calls upon the Hebrew Christians to "consider the Apostle and High Priest"; to consider Him well. One feels that a great cause of weakness and want of apprehension of divine things amongst us is due to the want of considering things.
We are called upon to consider the High Priest
{92}
of our profession. Our *title* to divine things is not made dependent upon our state, but our *enjoyment* of them is entirely dependent upon our state. Paul says, "Wherefore holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling" that is the light in which we are viewed. We are entitled to take account of ourselves in that light, as holy brethren, and as partakers of the heavenly calling.
In the epistle to the Romans, the point in regard to our position on earth is that "the righteous requirements of the law should be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to flesh, but according to Spirit", (@Romans 8:4). Now that is what I understand to correspond in the saints to the ark of the covenant. There is a great deal in that, a great deal more than you may think. The apostle speaking of himself, says, "I delight in the law of God after the inward man", (@Romans 7:22). Now that is exactly what Christ said. He delighted in the law. He loved it. The apostle says, I delight in it after the inner man and when you come to chapter 8 he not only delights in it, after the inner man, but he has a power to correspond with it in his ways. He says, "the righteous requirements of the law should be fulfilled in us who walk not according to flesh, but according to Spirit". (@Romans 8:4) That is for testimony here where the law was broken, but when you come to privilege, God would impress upon us that we have part in the heavenly calling. Look at the high priest, He wears the breast-plate. What do you understand by that? I understand by it that when Christ went into the presence of God, it was made evident, that He had the saints in His heart. He had the breastplate on. He had the saints in His affections. What did He do when He went to heaven? "Being by the right hand of God exalted and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this". (@Acts 2:33). What did He receive
{93}
the promise of the Spirit for? Why did He ask for the Spirit? It was because of the place the saints had in His affections. What did He have down here on earth in His heart? What He had in His heart here had reference to God, the law was in His heart. Now what is in Christ's heart up there? Do you not know it, beloved brethren? Your names are in His heart. One cannot press it too much. Every believer's name is in the heart of Christ up there. When down here, God's law was in His heart and He maintained it where everybody was breaking it. That is, as I say, the ark of the covenant, but up there nobody breaks it. Well, what has Christ in His heart up there? He has the saints in His heart. What encouragement! He has gone in, and the breastplate is there as He enters into the presence of God, and He asks from the Father the greatest possible gift the Father can give. He asked for the Holy Spirit and He imparted the Spirit to the saints below. Now that is our High Priest; but then that is not all. We have to consider the wonderful garments that He wears; the wonderful garments of glory and beauty, and it is from these that what is heavenly shines out. In carrying out the divine will the heavenly breaks in, so to speak.
The carrying out of the divine will here involved the cross, the lifting up of the Son of man. In @John 3 for instance, the blue shone; it came into evidence that the Man, who was all the time maintaining God's will, and delighting in it here, was heavenly. The light breaks in in the most marvellous way. Jesus said, "no man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven", (@John 3:13). What a shining of the blue that was. You recall there was a robe entirely of blue on the high priest, it was woven throughout, entirely of blue; presenting
{94}
to our hearts the heavenly character of Christ, the second Man out of heaven. As you proceed in the chapter, John the baptist recognises the blue. Nothing can exceed the moral greatness of John here; at no time does his moral greatness appear to such advantage as when He says, "He that cometh from above is above all", (@John 3:31) "He must increase but I must decrease". (@John 3:30) It is grand to see the man who was the greatest born of women, the greatest of the first order, disappear in the presence of the heavenly One.
Well, the Lord goes up, and He has the saints in His heart and He asks from the Father the promise of the Spirit, and He sheds it forth. The possession of the Holy Spirit by the saints constitutes them related to the High Priest, and if we are related to the High Priest the Lord can address us as His brethren. It is evident that to be consciously linked up with our High Priest, we must have the Spirit, and in the reception of the Spirit from a heavenly Christ we are constituted heavenly, no other family shall have the Spirit as we have Him. We have the Spirit in a peculiar way; the Spirit is given to us from the Christ in heaven, and the reception of the Spirit constitutes us members of the house of Aaron. We are thus clothed with garments of glory and beauty as Aaron's sons were. As I have already pointed out the greater part of @Exodus 28 is occupied with the description of the dress of Aaron, but when you come to the close of the chapter the sons of Aaron are also clothed with garments of glory and beauty. Beloved brethren, we are linked up with the High Priest, and thus Paul says in the epistle of the Hebrews that the sum of all he had been saying was this, "We have such an High Priest ... minister of the sanctuary and the true tabernacle which the Lord pitched and not man". (@Hebrews 8:1,2) The epistle of the Hebrews does not develop the priesthood in regard to us;
{95}
what it does develop is, the greatness and glory of our High Priest, in the strongest possible way, saying too, that "such an high priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and made higher than the heavens", (@Hebrews 7:26).
We are called upon to consider that Person, and I would close beloved brethren, with an appeal that we should distinguish in our minds between Christ viewed here in this world as carrying out the will of God, and Christ viewed as the Leader of the heavenly host. They are two distinct thoughts, they are combined in Christ, but they are entirely distinct, and they have to be maintained distinctly in our souls, I believe where we are defective is in not considering, and as I said, I would appeal to you to consider the High Priest as He is presented to us in the Scriptures, and as we understand Christ, we shall understand the nature of our calling.
{96}
THE NAME OF THE LORD
@Psalm 113
The Spirit of Christ gives character to the whole book of Psalms. You will find that the Psalms contain celebrations. A song is more strictly a celebration than a psalm. A psalm is usually the expression of experience, the medium through which the writer gives expression to experience, whereas a song is usually a celebration; in most cases songs are celebrations of victories. It occurs to me that each believer should have his own song, and each his own psalm; that is, on the one hand we ought to be able to celebrate what God has done *for* us, outside of ourselves, and also to give expression to what God has done *in* us. The former is a song, the latter a psalm. Perhaps among the people of God there is a great lack of songs and, psalms. An example of a song in @Isaiah 26: "In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah". What is the theme of it? "We have a strong city; salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks". (@Isaiah 26:1) Now, there is a celebration. The singers shall be in the light of what God has accomplished for them. He has established a city for them, and that city has walls, and the walls are divinely appointed. They are salvation; that is, salvation composes the walls. I take that to be a sort of indication of what the people of God had at the outset of Christianity: they had a strong city, and God had appointed walls to it. They were not simply taking refuge in it, they were celebrating its existence. They recognise the city, and they recognise that the walls are salvation; they take account of the existence of these things. I take that to be what should mark us in the light of Christianity. We recognise what God has established here on earth. In other words,
{97}
the city is supported by the kingdom. I hope you understand that. A city is a sphere of rule and influence, but it requires protection, and God has appointed protection; He has appointed salvation for walls.
Now, where is salvation? I refer to this to indicate how Christianity stands. The gospel was set in relation to the assembly, and the enemy took account of this and set to work to attack the city, for in order that the gospel might be obliterated and effaced the church must be destroyed. The position and importance of the city came to light in connection with David. The enemy sought to attack it. What did the Lord do? Have you ever in your history been attacked by the devil? If you have not, I will tell you why. You have never raised your colours. What I mean by raising your colours is that you are true to your baptism. You did not baptise yourself, but you are responsible to be true to your baptism. You are baptised to the name of the Lord, and that is in the light of the kingdom. Now you have to be true to that, and if you are true to that you hoist your colours. You give public notice that you are on the side of the Lord. Now, if you do that, you will be attacked by the world. The standard has never been raised yet but what it has been attacked. And now, what? The Lord undertakes to defend the colours you raise. The Lord has charged Himself with the protection and support of His standard; to raise it is *your* salvation.
To come to the Acts: the assembly was attacked. The apostles and believers had raised their standard. There were no half measures in those days, they took sides with the rejected Nazarene. Look at Peter's testimony: "This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner". (@Acts 4:11) What a courageous testimony! There the standard of Christ was raised up in presence
{98}
of the world, and the Lord defended that. The apostles were attacked mercilessly by the leaders of Israel. Saul came out boldly to attack every member of the assembly, to overthrow what God had established, but it was invulnerable. It seemed a critical moment; everything seemed to be going before the wind, but the Lord's voice is heard from heaven, and Saul is subdued. Have you ever been attacked? "Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be delivered". (@Acts 2:21) There is no possibility of final defeat. There were many prayers in those days. In @Acts 4 we are told that Peter and John, being let go, went to their own company. The whole world was against that tiny band, but they lifted up their voices with one accord to God, and the place was shaken. The power of God was there and surrounded them, so that they could not be crushed. So in chapter 9, when the very existence of the assembly and the gospel was threatened, the Lord's voice is heard out of heaven, and it brought down at one stroke the combined power of the world. That power, religiously and politically, was centred in Saul, but God had appointed salvation for walls, and He brought Saul down at one stroke. That ought to be the theme of our song. When attacked by the wicked one, how happy to turn to the Lord.
You remember how Paul speaks of the name of the Lord, saying, "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord", (@Romans 10:9). See how the apostle looks at things: "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth". Do you do that? In your business place, and in every circle outside of the sphere where the Spirit of God is, the influences are against you; now what are you to do as to these influences? Are you to succumb, and be quiet, or are you to speak? The elders of Israel commanded the apostles not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus. They did not enjoin them not to believe,
{99}
but not to speak or preach. Satan will let you alone if you keep your mouth closed. "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus"; (@Romans 10:9) that is raising the divine standard. When you confess Jesus as Lord you give notice to the world that power belongs to that Man. You give public notice that government is in the hands of Christ. What will happen? You set your face against the world, and there is conflict at once. Well, that is your moment of triumph. It is then you realise that the kingdom is not a myth, it is a reality. I beg of you to try it; put to the proof that Christ is Lord by giving forth that you are on His side. You shall be attacked, but you realise that the Lord is for you, and who can stand before Him, who brought down Saul, that man of power, at a stroke? As the result of his overthrow the assembly had rest; rest is secured behind those walls strong and high. The saints recognised the One who had power, and were edified and multiplied, @Acts 9:31. It was due to the Lord that they should sing this song: "In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah: We have a strong city; salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks". (@Isaiah 26:1)
The occasion of the singing in @Psalm 113, is not the city but "the name of the Lord". The Lord is not here on earth, but His name is here, and the psalmist is engaged with the name of the Lord. It is a great thing to get hold of the Lord's name; it represents His authority, everything done now by intelligent Christians is done in the name of the Lord. Now the Lord is in an official place, as the king is, and everything done in His interests here is done in His name, and this secures His support. Hence the preaching of the gospel is carried on in the Lord's name, and salvation is in His name. But now the psalmist is engaged with the name for its own sake. Do you cherish the name of the Lord?
{100}
When I think of it I think of the four gospels. I think of that marvellous pathway of Jesus, His many mighty works of power, His affection for His people, His unswerving devotion to the will of God. Put all these things together, as they are blended together by the Spirit of God, and you get the name of the Lord. It is fragrant; it is to be praised from the rising of the sun to the going down of the same; the whole sphere is to be filled with that glorious name. How do you regard that worthy name which is called upon you? Is it with you the occasion of praise?
I want to show a little what marked the Lord. Verse 4: "He is high above all nations". This is a great day for nations. It is not a day of universal empire, as in ancient times, but a day of great and mighty nations, possessing wealth and power, and vieing with each other. The Lord is above all, and more, His glory is above the heavens. Who is like unto the Lord who dwelleth on high? His glory is above the heavens. His name is to be praised from the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, and He has title to exalt Himself to dwell on high. He humbleth Himself to behold the things that are in heaven and in the earth. You may think yourself a tiny mite in the world, but the Lord humbleth Himself that He may behold *you*. Think of Him in the gospels. What minuteness of detail we get! The Lord takes account of poor needy ones. Think of Him taking account of Peter. He had humbled Himself to the position of a fisherman. He descended to that position; He did not come in connection with great wealth and renown; He came in connection with the lowest of people. He humbled Himself to be there. Ah! beloved friends, He did. He was near enough to that fisherman to ask him for his boat. He who could exalt Himself to dwell on high, whose glory is above the heavens,
{101}
He said to Peter: 'Simon, let me have your boat'. He would be near to Simon. Why did He want Simon's boat? The cattle of a thousand hills, and all the boats and the timber of them were His, but He wanted Simon. He humbled Himself to discover Himself to Simon. I cannot go into it, but the details are most interesting. "Let down your nets for a draught", He says. There was an immense draught of fishes; the nets brake, but the work was done. The Lord has accomplished His design. Peter says, "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord".
Now note this. The recognition of the Lord in your soul is the beginning of the end; you shall never be right with God nor with men until you recognise the Lord. It is the primary element in the soul of man. "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" Paul said. It is an age of lawlessness; young people are drawn into the sphere of lawlessness. "Depart from me", Peter said, "for I am a sinful man, O Lord". I say, how perfectly the Lord accomplished His design. Peter fell down at Jesus¬ knees. The Lord descends into Peter's boat, to become attractive to Peter. Peter recognises his sinful condition and the next character that appears is a leper. Peter was the leper. The Lord discovers Himself to Peter, and Peter is repentant, and as such is in the position of the leper; and the judgment that attaches to the leper is that he had no place in the camp; he is outside; but the Lord touches the leper, and he is cleansed.
This only serves as an illustration of how the Lord humbled Himself to behold the things in heaven and in the earth. "He raiseth up the poor out of the dust". That is where we are; man is in the dust. See His wonderful work, in other instances, in the gospels. "He raiseth up the poor out of the dust", and what does He do? He is waiting on you
{102}
to take you up out of the dust and give you a place among princes. It is a great thing to be illuminated in that way. He only can do that. He only can put you in the society of true nobility. I do not know how you take account of nobility, but there is no nobility on earth now, in God's account, that is not after the pattern of Christ. Nobility in God's account is seen in Christ; to be noble is to do the will of God, and he who does the will of God is signalised in some way by God. God ennobles you, God will never confer on us, in any official way, what we are not equal to morally. Christ was anointed, but He was equal to the anointing in His Person, He had proved Himself equal to it. He was entitled to it, entitled to the Messiahship on the ground of what He was personally. What the Lord proposes to do is to take you out of the dust and to ennoble you. Man is degraded to the dust on account of losing his position in regard to the will of God. The Lord removed vicariously all that lay on you in judgment; He removed it through His death, and what more? He intends to ennoble you. How is man ennobled. Jacob was ennobled. "Thy name shall be called no more, Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed". (@Genesis 32:28) In other words, Jacob was already a prince morally, and God changes his name; that is, God formally recognises what you are; "by the grace of God, I am what I am", (@1 Corinthians 15:10) said the apostle. Whatever you are, you are that by the grace of God, but God gives you credit for it, and ennobles you formally. He makes you a prince. Every Christian has the spirit of a prince. What a thing to be among princes! You are a prince, and you have ample means, and a heart to dispense them. You have all the wealth of God and ability to dispense it. Have you appreciation of this great dignity? There are many claimants of your soul. The world claims it
{103}
and the devil. There are many bidders: the Lord bids for it, and He has paid a price. He shows that He values it. "He raiseth up the poor out of the dust and lifteth the needy out of the dunghill; that he may set him with princes, even with the princes of his people". What a thing to be numbered among the princes of God!.
Then "He maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children". I believe the housekeeping spirit is very little known among the people of God. There are many phases of the Christian position in the world, warrior, priest, Levite, and so forth, but one thing God looks for; and a thing that every right minded man looks for in his wife, is the housekeeping spirit. God has a house down here. The Lord is the Man of the house. The Lord is in heaven, and what He looks for in us down here is the housekeeping spirit. We are set here in relation to one another. The greatest test to a man's faithfulness is to serve in the house of God, and the testimony in regard to Moses is, that he was faithful in all God's house. Moses possessed in a remarkable degree the spirit of the house-keeper. He was faithful in all God's house. Now, if you are a believer in Christ, you find how He acts for you; He raises you up from the dunghill, and sets you among princes; endows you in every possible way; gives you His Spirit; puts dignity on you, but the question arises, What are *you* to do? You are not taken up to heaven at once; if you obey your parents, and there is submission, you have the promise of long life here; you have the honour of being left here to carry on the testimony in Christ's absence. Well, the Lord sets you to housekeeping. That is a test to your spirit. To keep house, you have to set yourself in relation to the saints. You have to see that the saints are in order. And what is the stand-by? Love is the great stand-by. What a
{104}
thing for Christ to look down and see the reflection of Himself in our affection for one another! There is no possibility of going on in the light of the house apart from mutual affection.
Then you get multiplication: "to be a joyful mother of children". If there is affection and the housekeeping spirit, you are multiplied. If there are great additions, and large numbers of people brought in, and not a housekeeping spirit, what happens? You feel sad to see a large family without a housekeeping spirit. A disorderly family, and that a large family, is a moral blot; so, in the psalm, the housekeeping spirit is put before children. If there is not a housekeeping spirit, great additions are simply weakness and a moral blot. See the great additions in Christendom, but where is the housekeeping spirit? The idea of housekeeping precedes multiplication; but how happy where love is active, and then you get increase. In @Acts 2 you get one hundred and twenty together; there is, as yet, no multiplication, but there was loyalty of heart to Christ, and then children were added, three thousand of them. They were brought to a warm place, to a sphere of affection. The Lord had made the barren woman to bear children.
I trust the Lord will use the word to make us desire a housekeeping spirit that there may be multiplication.
{105}
"THEY MINISTERED TO THE LORD"
@Acts 13:1 - 3
I call attention to this scripture, beloved friends, desiring to give you my thoughts upon it, especially because it shows how the Christian economy shook itself clear of what one may call the legal trammels that held it within abnormal or restricted bounds at the outset. It is important to see that in the ordinary course of the development of the testimony there was a gradual cutting loose from earthly moorings, until it is seen enshrined in that which is living and abiding. The apostle, in writing to the Hebrews, refers to something similar in speaking of the purification of their consciences, that they might serve the living God; and the service of the living God necessarily implies a living order of things. Until it found itself, as it were, enshrined in that order, of things, there was movement. Movement always implies that the testimony had not found a resting place, so that there was gradual movement until the service of God, the living God, could find itself in connection with others who were sympathetic with it; and, as you can see, the assembly at Antioch was in sympathy with it. There the ministry of the Lord went on, as it says, they *ministered to the Lord*.
Now, beloved brethren, it is my thought and desire to dwell upon that. I wish to impress upon each one in a simple way, that that is what each of us is called to. The great thought that God has in leaving us here, instead of taking us to heaven, is that there might be a continuance of His service. It is a wonderful thing for God to establish that in which His service is protected, while the world power remains untouched. Now I say, that that is the great end God has in view in calling us out of the world,
{106}
leaving us actually in it, but free from it morally, so that there may be a continuance of divine service.
You will recall how, in addressing Pharaoh, the Lord habitually, in each message, reminds him that the object He had in view in delivering His people was, that they might serve Him. In fact, going back earlier in their history, you will remember that Moses received his commission at mount Horeb, and the Lord told him that the token of their deliverance should be that His people should serve Him there. They should serve Him at mount Horeb. Now mount Horeb is not in Canaan, as you know; mount Horeb is in the wilderness.
As far as I can remember, Pharaoh was not reminded of Canaan. He had nothing to do with that. He had to let the people go three days¬ journey into the wilderness. There was to be something established this side of Canaan. God spoke to them of the service which should have its commencement and its existence at mount Horeb. I want you to take note of that, beloved friends. I call attention to it because of this, that the thought of God is to establish His service here as a testimony, and to support it with a power adequate to maintain it as a witness in the eyes of the world. If He can establish the testimony here. He is sufficient to protect it; and, that testimony and power being established, He can formulate the law that governs the system; and if He can organise the system, He can both obtain the servants and the service in the presence of the world. That is a wonderful thing.
Now, in order that the service should be introduced, it was essential that the apostle and the high priest should be brought to light. We have to learn everything from the apostle. He brings out thoughts and develops them before us by the Spirit and enables us to understand them. Now in the book of Exodus, in chapter 6, you find that the
{107}
Spirit of God gives a list of the heads of the fathers of the tribes of Israel. That was what God had in His mind. He had the tribes in His mind. They were to be, as far as the mind and purpose of God then went, set up in Canaan. Each tribe was to have its own, place in the land that was promised to Abraham. In token of the fulfilment of His promises, He reveals Himself to Moses and the people by His new name of Jehovah, which signified that He was undertaking to fulfil His promises.
Well, now, the Spirit of God goes on to give the list of the fathers; and what you find is, that when He comes to Levi He stops. One would like to stop there. There are such things in the Scriptures as divine interruptions, but, as a rule, indeed always, they are pleasing to God. God stops, as you may remember, in giving the generations of Jacob earlier in the book of Genesis. "These are the generations of Jacob -- Joseph", (@Genesis 37:2), and no other generation is given. It is only when Jacob and his sons and their household are on the way to Egypt to see Joseph that the other generations are taken account of. In an earlier chapter you will find the generations of Esau, and there is no interruption. The course of the man of the flesh is pursued to its end. God allows the man of the flesh to pursue an uninterrupted course in this world, until he attains to the highest position. There were kings of the line of Esau before there were any kings of Israel.
Well, now, when you come to the heads of the fathers in @Exodus 6, you find that Levi is the great terminus. The families of Levi are given, and then we have, "These are that Moses and Aaron, to whom the Lord said", (@Exodus 6:26). The Spirit of God brings into prominence the apostle and the high priest. Having the apostle and the high priest, you have a guarantee for the deliverance of the people and the establishment of what was in God's
{108}
mind, and that is service. Now one can well understand the apostle saying to the Hebrew Christians, "Consider the apostle and high priest", (@Hebrews 3:1) as though we are to await the accomplishment of the promises to the fathers. In the meantime we are to consider the apostle and high priest of our confession, and I want you to consider the great High Priest, to consider Christ, dear friends. He has brought in a new system. See how the apostle puts it. He has come "by a greater and more perfect tabernacle", (@Hebrews 9:11). He has come in in connection with a divine tabernacle, and that is not of this creation, and it is in connection with that which is introduced that we get the service of God.
Next I want to show you, if I can, how the wisdom of the Lord influenced those who came under His teaching. You will remember that Moses received on the mount this communication about the building of the tabernacle, but he did not build it. He was not the constructor; he did not actually make the things. He received the pattern of the things, but there were two wise men in Israel, divinely endowed with wisdom, who put the tabernacle together.
When we come to the gospels, what I understand by them is this: they present to us Christ, who in divine dignity has come out from God to show us divine thoughts. All the divine thoughts are there, and they are unfolded in divine wisdom. Love lay behind everything that the Lord did, and all was in divine wisdom. What I understand by wisdom is that it is the handmaid of love. Love lay behind all the Lord's movements, and so we see divine wisdom. You can add nothing to it, and you can subtract nothing from it; everything is just as it ought to be -- it is divinely perfect. That is what I see in the gospels. Those who came under the Lord's influence received the spirit of the Lord's ministry, so that what you find is, that their movements
{109}
are generally in accord with it. In the Acts, whilst there is a full recognition of the Lord's authority, the Spirit of God presents their actions as they took place.
Now you are not to misunderstand me; the Lord's authority is fully recognised. God allows you to do things, and what you do proves just where you are spiritually, as He gives you light. Now, the proof of your soul being in the good of the light, is in your movements after you receive it. If you take the Lord's wonderful ministry, those who came under it were affected by it. You remember the Lord's word. He said, "Wisdom is justified of all her children", (@Luke 7:35). Not of one, but of *all*. Take the book of Acts. The gospels present to us the ministry of Christ. It is all wisdom. There is the love of God behind it, there is wisdom in the expression of it, and there is power in the fulfilment of it. The Acts present the same things that come out in Christ in the gospels. In other words, the book of the Acts is the justification of the gospels, because the Acts present the children of wisdom. The gospels present wisdom in a Person. The gospels present a Man, the Acts present the woman, the assembly. But it is the same thing. "Wisdom is justified of all her children". (@Luke 7:35) There is not a child of wisdom anywhere who does not justify wisdom. How do we justify wisdom? We justify it by movement in accordance with it.
Take the earlier chapters of the Acts. The Spirit of God presents to us what the disciples did. Not what the Lord told them to do, but what they *did*. It is a most interesting and extensive theme; I can only touch upon it. They were together with one accord in chapter one. They recognised the authority of the Scriptures. That was wise; the Lord recognised that too. They were in accord with the Lord. That was well; they had gathered that
{110}
from the Lord. And so with everything. They were in prayer. The Lord taught them that. They were found together; they had one mind. Well, the Lord brought that in. You know the great basis of unity is the unity between divine Persons. "I and my Father are one". (@John 10:30) The Lord introduced that, and they were one. They had learnt that from the Lord. They were morally according to wisdom. They were the justification of the gospels. They were the justification of the ministry of Christ. Was His ministry a failure? There was the justification of it. His mission was no failure; it was justified by these people. They justified what Christ did. What He introduced they justified.
There are many other things that one might mention. As you remember, they did not break bread during the time that the Lord was with them. They did not take the Lord's supper, so far as we know; but directly the Lord went to heaven they did. That was right. Nothing is said about the Lord's supper during the forty days of the Lord's sojourn amongst them.
The Spirit tells us that "they continued steadfastly in the apostles¬ doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers" (@Acts 2:42). Now that is remarkable. It reminds one of what you get in the last two chapters of Proverbs; there are weak things, but they are wise, and they know what to do. The children of wisdom recognised existing conditions. They took account of the fact that the whole world was lawless. There was one Man in whom God had vested authority -- Christ. That Man was no longer here, He was in Heaven, but He had delegated His authority to the apostles. They recognised that. We have not the apostles now, but we have the authority of their teaching. Now they recognise that, and it says that they continued in it, in the recognition of it. These are
{111}
very practical things. They continued in these things; they were essential to their safety. There was the lawless world around them, and they recognised that God had vested authority in a Man, and that Man had delegated His authority to twelve men. The teaching was continued by them. They were teachers divinely accredited by Christ, and all outside was lawless. These men regarded anything that was outside the teaching of the twelve apostles as positively lawless. The early disciples saw that. They recognised the apostles¬ teaching and fellowship. They recognised that which their hearts really cherished, and they had the breaking of bread, that which would sustain their hearts and remind them of their absent Lord in the scene of His rejection. And they recognised prayer. Now I refer to all these things especially to point out that they are the evidences of the children of wisdom, and that they are the justification of wisdom.
There is one thing said in @Acts 2, and that is, that they broke bread in the house instead of in the temple, which, to my mind, is a very touching allusion to their appreciation of the Lord's supper. However much they recognised the temple they did not break bread there. They broke bread at home. It is a touching allusion to the place the Supper had with them. They loved the Lord and they loved the Supper, because it was that which brought vividly before them the affection which was in the heart of the blessed Lord on the night of His betrayal.
Well, now, what I would like to point out is this, that as the testimony developed, the children of wisdom were equal to it. They were equal to the circumstances. And when we come to chapter 20 we find ourselves in a Gentile town, and there are disciples there. And we are told what they *did*, not what they were *told* to do, but what they *did*. And what they did was right. What did they do? They
{112}
came *together* to break bread. Now in the second chapter it does not say they came together to do it; they did it in the house. But in the twentieth chapter they came *together*.
What I understand by that is, that they see that the temple is superseded. You may say "they came to break bread". But it does not say just that. You may say you come to break bread on Lord's day morning. That is not right; you should come *together* first. You may say that is only a matter of a word, but I think I can show you, beloved friends, that the word involves a principle. The fact is this: that the word *together* involves the displacement of the whole Jewish economy. The coming together of the saints involves that they know nothing outside of that, no religious ceremonies or furniture of any kind. The temple necessitated a huge system of ceremonies, garments, and so on, but the coming together displaces all that. Do you not understand that that little word *together* delivers you altogether from the system of religion, the Babylonish system that exists around us today? It is not easy to be delivered from these things if once you have been entangled with them.
You come *together* because your heart is filled with the love of Christ, and you want the company of the saints. You cannot get the company of the saints in the humanly organised systems; it is impossible that you should. You have something in your heart that must be reciprocated in a heart like to yours. Well, that is a heart under the influence of the love of Christ. Men and women are brought under the influence of the love of Christ, and the effect of that is, that they come together. They love one another, because they love Christ. It is what, as I understand it, answers at the moment to the greater and more perfect tabernacle. It is a moral idea. It is something that is for God. It is
{113}
similar to what the Lord said to the Samaritan woman. "The hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship him. God is a Spirit: and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth". (@John 4:23,24)
Now I would like to say this: you will never understand Christianity until you see how the early Christians acted. They came as it were fresh from the effect of the ministry of Christ, and they came together to break bread. I only refer to it, I cannot dwell upon it any longer. You have in the coming together of those who love Christ, the greater and more perfect tabernacle. That is the antitype of what Moses effected. Moses led the people out of Egypt to serve God; but they were to serve Him as knowing His heart. You never serve God if you do not know His heart. They knew His heart by His covenant.
Now in 1 Corinthians you have the terms of the covenant. The second epistle presents to us the man who is formed by the spirit of the covenant. In the first epistle the apostle presents to us the Spirit, and the Spirit presents the terms of the covenant. The second epistle gives you the spirit of the thing. Paul is the man who is formed by the Spirit. You remember it says, "the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life", (@2 Corinthians 3:6). Paul was in the spirit of the covenant; he was formed by it. Well, it is the people that are formed by the spirit of the covenant that serve God.
Well, now, you see these people here. In Hebrews the apostle says, "How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered Himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God", (@Hebrews 9:14). I do not know if you have taken it into account, but I think that the idea of the *living* God
{114}
is most prominent in the Scriptures that have reference to Jewish believers, because they were accustomed to a dead system. They were to see that the new order had reference to a God that was living and revealed to be such in the resurrection of Christ from among the dead. There is a beautiful passage in Hosea: "After two days will he revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we *shall live in his sight",* (@Hosea 6:2). That means that you are raised up in the power of God and made to live in His sight. The word *live* refers really to the quickening power of God; you are made to live, you serve the living God. That is the divine thought, and that is what I had in my mind to present to you.
I read that passage in @Acts 13 to show you how the testimony had freed itself from the Jewish setting, and breathed the atmosphere of liberty. Outside of Jewish territory or Jewish setting there is the service of God. No longer in Jerusalem, no longer in the temple, but established in living men in the Gentile world. That was a great triumph for God. They had the ministry of the Lord, and they were equal to it as regards themselves, for they fasted. If we are to be equal to the heritage that our fathers have handed down to us, we must be prepared for it. Are we equal to it? What is required is fasting. They ministered to the Lord and they fasted. That is how the thing is continued. You may depend upon it, that if we do not fast, there will be no continuance with us. As I understand it, fasting is a complete deliverance from fleshly desires. "We are the circumcision, who worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh", (@Philippians 3:3). That is Christianity. It answers to the Lord's remark that the hour had come when the true worshippers should worship the Father in spirit and in truth.
{115}
May the Lord grant that these simple thoughts may affect us, that he affections of the saints should be gathered in Christ. That is the idea, I think that there may be such an appeal to our hearts that there may be an answer in the assembly; in he book of Revelation she invites Him to come. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". (@Revelation 22:17) "Even so, come, Lord Jesus". (@Revelation 22:20)
{116}
THE LIFE LINE
@2 Samuel 8:2
What I have to say stands in connection with the three lines spoken of in this verse. I have before me to show the different testimonies for God, and, to call attention to the intent of each. And when I speak of the different testimonies I speak in a very general way, embracing under the first line the law and the prophets, and under the second line Christ down here in the flesh, and under the third line Christ in resurrection.
You will understand that in using a scripture in this way from the Old Testament it is not to present it in a dogmatic sense. I think we are allowed by the Lord great latitude in ministry, in the use of the Scriptures. They are said to be "profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness", (@2 Timothy 3:16); and I think a minister is given, as it were, certain latitude, by the Spirit, in his use of them. They are said to be profitable; that is to say, they help in the ministry of the truth, they help in the way of showing how it is set, its bearing; and I would say in that connection that the Old Testament is as much for us as the New. We read: "Whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning", (@Romans 15:4). So that you will understand, that in using these Scriptures, I do it to endeavour to make the truth clear to you.
This verse is found in a peculiar connection. In the previous verse David is seen smiting the Philistines and taking out of their hands Metheg-ammah, which, as you may know, is the bridle of the Mother (city); it was the capital. What a thing it is to see the power taken out of the hands of the enemy and placed in the hands of Christ! Before David's day the people were dominated by the Philistines.
{117}
That marked, the situation, and Saul failed utterly to cope with this. We are told that he was to "come to the hill of God, where is the garrison of the Philistines", (@1 Samuel 10:5). It was a serious matter, that the hill of God was in possession of the hostile power. Well, that was a reminder to Saul of what he had to do; he was to understand that that evil power must be dislodged. He never really answered to the charge, hence it remained for David to face the situation and overthrow the Philistine.
We are all held under some influence. I know the influence that God intends should affect us, and it is the duty of the preacher to make that clear, but you may be certain that you are under *some* influence. What we see here is that David takes that which dominated the situation. He smote the Philistines and subdued them, and took Metheg-ammah. I wish to show you the setting of the passage. David takes out of the Philistine's hands the *bridle*. Now, apply that to Christ; power is in His hands now, instead of in the hands of the enemy. Let me ask you whether you are really, in subjection to Christ? He has power whereby "he is able even to subdue all things to himself", (@Philippians 3:21). To-day He is bringing souls into subjection, having gone on high, as we have been noting. You will remember how David referred to the sword of Goliath. He said, "there is none like that". (@1 Samuel 21:9) It was the means in the hands of David of overthrowing the Philistine's power. The Lord took that which was the great weapon in the hands of the enemy in holding His people in terror and in bondage, that was *death*. What souls require is light. You want to see the full bearing of the death of Christ. The full bearing of it in this respect is, that He has wrested death out of the hands of the enemy, and having done it, He has gone up to heaven with the symbol of His triumph.
{118}
You will remember that David took the head of the giant to Jerusalem; he took there the testimony of his triumph. So Christ has gone into heaven. It is in this way that we are to understand the bearing and power of the kingdom of God. And in connection with this there is the purification of the conscience. A good conscience is by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, for He died for our sins, and was raised for our justification, @1 Peter 3:21; @Romans 4:25. Before you can have a good conscience you must have a *bad* one. The effect of the light of God thrown into the soul is to produce a bad one; and this leads to exercise which is met by the gospel. The gospel is the power of God, because therein is the righteousness of God revealed, @Romans 1:16. The righteousness of God is seen in the death and resurrection of Christ, and by this the believer has a purged conscience. But you want more than a purged conscience; you want Christ in heaven, and so the apostle goes on to say, "who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God; angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him", (@1 Peter 3:22). All power is in the hand of Christ. What a great thing then the kingdom is! The Lord Jesus Christ has wrested the power from the enemy, and He wields it in heaven, and He intends that it shall exercise sway in your heart. That is the setting of this verse.
We come to Moab now. Philistine power is the religious power by which people are held in bondage; religion may be used to hold your soul. When you come to Moab you come to man as he is; man as he is is very proud. You remember what is said about Moab. "We have heard the pride of Moab (he is exceeding proud) his loftiness, and his arrogancy, and his pride, and the haughtiness of his heart", (@Jeremiah 48:29). Now, there are two lines for death. You may wonder how it is that God should
{119}
have a testimony for death, but I think we can understand it if we understand what Moab represents. There are two lines for death and one full line for life.
I think you will find that wherever *three*, things are put together on the part of God, they refer to what may be termed *complete testimony*. If you get *two* things put together on the part of God you have *adequate testimony*. When you come to the *complete* testimony on the part of God, you have the means whereby God secures His end. The third full line has reference to God's end for man. This is eternal life. It is a most interesting subject. I was speaking this afternoon to some of you as to what the Spirit of the remnant in the day of Hosea said: "Come, and let us return to the Lord: for he hath torn, and he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up. After two days will he revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight", (@Hosea 6:1, 2). They knew that God would do these things on account of light afforded them. God had rendered light and their faith was based on this. They did not stop with being bound up, if God creates a wound He will bind it up; they say, "After two days he will revive us". (@Hosea 6:2) That involves *waiting*, patience, but there is the testimony, which they understood. The third day is the day in which He secures His great end for Israel and for man, and it answers really to this third line, "one full line to keep alive".
Now I take the first line to be the law and the prophets; that is, classifying them together, which I think Scripture supports: the Lord says, "The law and the prophets were until John, since that time the kingdom of God is preached", (@Luke 16:16). The kingdom of God was distinct from the law and the prophets. In rendering the testimony of the kingdom, in His ministry here on earth, the Lord
{120}
was "the glory of God". What must the glory do? The law effected death, clearly, and the glory of God, coming in as testimony, can only convict man of his state, even more surely. There can be no question that the law is the first great line for death. It was holy, just and good. It was ordained for life, but in result, it was found to be for death. It asserted God's authority over man, but this only brought to light that man was utterly lawless, and so under the penalty of death. The apostle says, "I was alive without the law once", (@Romans 7:9). I do not say he was alive to *God*, he was alive to *himself*, his conscience did not smite him; "But when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died". (@Romans 7:9) That is what I understand to be the first line of death. It was ordained for life, but it brought in death.
Has that testimony any weight with you? You must not think that it is not intended for you. I take the law to be intended for us in that respect. The law is a divine testimony, and has many bearings; by law is the knowledge of sin. Now one inquires as to whether it has rendered that service to all present? We have very little knowledge of ourselves. The apostle says, "I was alive without the law once" (@Romans 7:9); his conscience was in the dark. How many young men and young women walk about on this earth as if they were entitled to live, and without any conscience of their state before God, without any sense of their sinfulness? The apostle says, "When the commandment came, sin revived, and I died" (@Romans 7:9); the effect is to smite you in your conscience, so that you are utterly without standing in the presence of God.
Now there was the second line, which had the same effect exactly; the second line is the glory of God presented in Christ here in the flesh. The apostle says, "All have sinned and come short of the glory of God". (@Romans 3:23) Sinning refers to transgression,
{121}
and without law there is no transgression; sins are put to account where there is law. Then there is the additional thought of the glory which shows how utterly wanting men are. The glory is what Christ was here in the flesh. The Psalmist says, "He delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemy's hand", (@Psalm 78:61). That was an allusion to Christ as here in obedience. Wonderful testimony on the part of God! He said, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O my God". (@Hebrews 10:7) These were the words He uttered as He came into the world. There was not only the thought of carrying out the divine counsels from eternity, but He was taking up a position as Man; He was entering into man's estate; He was entering into every detail of man's circumstances on earth; and in every detail there was the presentation of God, and the shining out of the glory. It was what man should be for God. Would that our souls could lay hold of that.
God said, "I am the God of Abraham". (@Genesis 26:24) What that meant was, that He was the God of that *kind* of man. As a man of faith, Abraham was, in God's account, after the order of Christ. Think of what Christ was here; God is God of *that One*. Do you understand what I mean? God does not commit Himself to all; He is God to that One; and what I say to Christians is this; Christ has brought us into His own position Godward. He said to His disciples, "My God, and your God". (@John 20:17) But in the gospels God was God to the Man who moved for Him here; every pulsation and every movement of His life was to answer to God; He was the Man that God's heart had set itself on. That is the idea of the glory. Adam was but a figure of Him that was to come. Christ is the One that was to come, and has come into human circumstances, and as here He was God's glory, God's glory is the measure for every man.
{122}
The application of the measure only shows how utterly *short* man has come of it, and hence his case is altogether hopeless if left to himself. He is appointed for death. God has no pleasure in literal death; He has no pleasure in the dissolution of His creature; but He does desire to bring the element of death into your conscience, so as to lead to exercise. This is by the law. The other testimony I spoke of was even a greater one, more comprehensive. That is Christ as God's glory. "All have sinned and come short of the *glory* of God". (@Romans 3:23) There is the standard, and God brought in a perfect standard, and that is the glory. Whilst, on the one hand, you are made to realise that you must be shut out for ever from that glory as on the ground of the flesh, on the other the gospel shows, that it is God's thought that man should be at home in the presence of it, and that He can accomplish this consistently through the death of Christ.
I want to go on to the third line. The third line is called the *full* line. I connect it with @Romans 5. I take that chapter to be the full life line. God has found the means of purifying man's conscience. The blood of Christ on the mercy-seat does this, as we learn in @Romans 3. In the light of this you are no longer under death in your conscience. Paul says, "I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth ... for therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith", (@Romans 1:16). As I understand it, it is the power of God in the first instance, as affording a good conscience. A good conscience is moral power. It is not the *Spirit's* power here. A good conscience is *moral* power: "The righteous are bold as a lion". (@Proverbs 28:1) Has everybody here a good conscience? If you have never had a bad one, you have not a good one. The Holy Spirit is also power in the believer, of course, but that is
{123}
another matter. A good conscience and the power of the Spirit go together. A good conscience is by the blood of Christ.
Having a good conscience - justification -- the believer is prepared to apprehend God's purpose for men, which is eternal life, and I connect this, as I have said, with the "full line for life". God had devised that man, *that order of being*, should be preserved. Man was wisdom's ideal, @Proverbs 8, and so he must be made to live. I desire to say a word about that in closing. Man must be made to live. Hence there is one full line for life, and that is through Christ in resurrection. How great is God's victory in Christ's resurrection! *Man* has brought us life! Read @Romans 5, from verse 12 to the end. There is the *abounding* of things through Christ, and all in the line of the accomplishment of God's great purpose of blessing for man. "That as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord". (@Romans 5:21) The whole passage taken together is to emphasise the magnitude of the present position of grace in regard to the race of Adam. Grace is on the throne. What a happy thought that is for a purged conscience. You have to do with *grace*. The idea of a throne is that it is absolute. The throne in Scripture is in no sense modified, it is absolute. If you put grace on such a throne as that, what an economy that is! Absolutely nothing but grace for the soul. The law came in by Moses, grace and truth have their subsistence in Christ. Grace establishes your heart in confidence in God. To give you an example of the reign of grace, I would refer you to the Lord's instruction to the apostles to *begin at Jerusalem* the preaching of repentance and remission of sins in His name, @Luke 24:47. Where sin had been at its highest, there forgiveness is preached.
{124}
In @Romans 5, the blessing is *through* Christ. That word. *through*, therefore, directs your heart to Christ. If you have righteousness and life, it is *through* Christ Jesus. It is intended to have a moral effect in your soul. He has a claim upon you. In the sixth chapter the expression changes; it is *in* Christ Jesus, verse 11. The apostle treats in these six chapters of the question of man's relationship with God in righteousness and life here on earth; and he shows that *through* Christ Jesus our Lord man is brought into life, and that that life is *in* Christ Jesus our Lord. In other words, chapter 5 shows that you are indebted to Christ for eternal life, and chapter 6 shows that it is an "act of favour of God" for you *in* Christ Jesus. Christ acquires a place in your soul, on the one hand, and all your hopes and desires are centred in Christ on the other. That is the effect of the gospel. I do not think it is fully effective in us until every thought and every affection converge on Christ. The gift of eternal life is in Him, and it is in Him for all men, but only possessed by those who believe.
May God help us to understand the full bearing of the gospel, as that in which life and incorruptibility are brought to light.
{125}
ENTRANCE INTO THE PURPOSE OF GOD
@2 Corinthians 5:13 - 18
The thought in my mind was to seek to show how we are led on to the side of divine purpose, and I ventured to read this scripture because it sets forth the judgment formed by one who knew what it was to be there. I like to refer to this epistle because it shows us the spirit of Christianity; not exactly as it was seen in Christ, but as it was seen in a man of like passions as ourselves; that is the apostle Paul, and in that way it is brought nearer to us. I do not deny that it was brought near to man in Christ; this is seen in Elihu, who said to Job: "I am as thou ... my terror shall not make thee afraid". (@Job 33:6,7) Christ drew near to men as Man, so that the things of God, and God Himself, might be understood; that is what the gospels present to us; they present to us what Christ was as a Man come near to men. He was in that estate in lowly grace in order that God might be known. The epistles show us that that was effective, that what Christ was here among men was reflected in others, and particularly in Paul. This is seen in a very marked way in the second epistle to the Corinthians. It shows us the spirit in which we have to say to God and to one another, and in which we move toward the land of Canaan.
Now I desire to enlarge on these points as I am enabled of the Lord, because it is of great moment that we should enter into the divine side of things, into the purpose of God; and, as I said, it begins with a right judgment being formed. One would question one's own soul and others as to what kind of judgment we have about things. I refer to the judgment we have formed as the result of the gospel
{126}
that has come to us. If you have not come to form a judgment as to things here, it is not likely that you will ever give them up. You will accept them as a matter of course and go on in them, such as the political system under which you have been born, the social conditions, the commercial relations, and the ordinary family relations, with the duties attendant upon them. All these things are accepted as a matter of course. We have very little thought about them, except that we go on in them. The thought of God is to set our hearts and minds in movement in regard to all this. The gospel comes to us, as light on the part of God, and it is intended to set our hearts and minds in movement, and if they are thus affected the result is that we begin to form a judgment about things around us. People who have no definite judgment as to conditions in the world are unreliable as to the testimony. The apostle says, "we thus judge". He had formed a judgment about one thing, and that was that if One died for all, then all were dead. You may say that man goes on the same after the cross as before; that he is not any more dead now than before the cross. The fact is, he was dead before it as much as after it. You may say, I do not understand that; people seem to be alive. How many years will they live? It is a matter of a few years, and all will have left this scene that we know now, and if it is a matter of forty or fifty years until death actually occurs, that does not set the fact aside that all *are* dead. God speaks of things that be not as though they were. If you are to die next year, you are as good as dead. Death is on all as a divine penalty. The apostle's judgment is right; he did not judge by outward appearances merely, he judged from the moral side: "If one died for all, then were all dead". It is useless to establish anything on the fact that man lives for a few years, for that is merely a matter of God's
{127}
forbearance. God said, "The end of all flesh, has come before me", (@Genesis 6:13) that meant, that the man of the old world was gone in God's account. "His days shall be one hundred and twenty years". (@Genesis 6:3) That was a matter simply of God's longsuffering. God fixed the period, but morally the end of that man had come. In God's account all was over, the end of all flesh, had come. It may be regarded as the *first* man, or the *old* man, *but that man has gone*. in God's account. God says, "the end", and He means the end, a few years are nothing. The secret of it lay in this, that another Head had come in.
I am referring now to @Genesis 6. Noah's birth is recorded in @Genesis 5; in him you have the second Man typified; that is to say, you have the man brought in upon the scene who is agreeable to God, and that man remains; the end of that man has not come, his name signifies *rest*. God rested in him, and the other man is terminated. If the first man is allowed to live one hundred and twenty years, it is only in the presence of him who typified the second; it is only in the presence of another; he is allowed to continue in grace because the second Man, in type, is there in the energy of the Spirit. See how Peter takes account of it: speaking of Christ he says, "by which (Spirit) also he went and preached unto the Spirits in prison". (@1 Peter 3:19) It was grace; the man after the flesh was allowed to continue for one hundred and twenty years through God's grace, but in a sense it was under the headship of another, because really in principle the new Head was there from the end of chapter 5. God can afford in grace to allow the condemned man to remain for one hundred and twenty years in order to preach to him. Wonderful grace! It is called *longsuffering* in the New Testament. It is not a question of tolerating a man, but of bearing in grace and longsuffering, in order, if it were possible that he might be saved. So God
{128}
preached to him through Noah. God retains man in this world to preach to him; He retains him that He might be witnessed to by the Spirit; so the Spirit of Christ was in Noah. The Spirit, in which Christ rose from the dead is the Spirit in which He preached through Noah. Compare @1 Peter 3:18 - 20. It only remained for the given period to elapse and the whole race disappeared in judgment; even Noah disappeared in the ark. The ark referred to Christ in that sense; it was constituted to survive death, not to succumb to it, but to go through it and survive.
Now if Christ is out of death. He is out of it as a *new order* of Man. He was always that personally, but He took upon Him what we were, and terminated it. So now, if we who have faith, are allowed to continue on here, it is not as the ungodly continue; we are here as a matter of righteousness. We are the only ones who have any title to remain on earth. But this is only on the ground of *faith*. As we have no title in ourselves, Christ has established the title for us to live. That is the situation for Christians. We are taken up in a new Head, in One who vindicated His name. Noah vindicated His name; his parents gave him his name and he vindicated it. When he appears in the new earth, he takes of the clean beasts and he offers them to the Lord, a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savour, and the Lord smelled it; God was glorified in it. All this refers to Christ. We are accepted in all the fragrance of His death. We have title to live on the ground of the burnt-offering.
What we find in chapter 9 is, that Jehovah makes a covenant, not now only with Noah, but with Noah's sons. The sons are now formally taken account of by God; they were saved on the strength of Noah's faith, but now they are viewed as his sons and a covenant is made with Noah and with them. As believers in Christ we are recognised by God in connection with Christ. We have title to
{129}
live to God. The language of faith is: "After two days will he revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight", (@Hosea 6:2). That is the position; we are raised up really in the resurrection of Christ; that is Colossians; we are said to be raised *by faith*. But faith in what? We are raised by "faith of the operation of God who hath raised him (Christ) from the dead". (@Colossians 2:12) That is the position in which we are regarded there. The point is that Christ might have His place in the hearts of the saints; that is the point in Colossians. Here in 2 Corinthians it is that they should not henceforth live unto themselves. That is the position, as I understand it, which a righteous judgment leads to, if we accept the fact that all are dead. I repeat it, that it is but a matter of time; all are dead, not one left; not one in sight; just as when the deluge came, everything disappeared; not a vestige of humanity was left in sight. The Lord, having died and risen, has established a title for us to live before God, but we live, not to ourselves, but unto Him who died for us and rose again. The passage opens up a large and wide sphere to us.
I refer now for a moment to the epistle to the Romans. I would suggest that the idea of being to another, in chapter 7, to Him who died for us and rose again, opens up room for the marriage relation. It is there that the thought of the marriage bond comes in; and I connect that in my mind with the covenant in @Exodus 19:1 - 6. You will remember how Israel was delivered from Egypt. Jehovah, referring to it afterwards through Jeremiah, says: "I remember for thee the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land not sown. Israel was holiness unto Jehovah, the firstfruits of his increase", (@Jeremiah 2:2, 3). There was love in Israel for Jehovah, and the proof of it was that they followed after Him. The covenant,
{130}
in principle, had in view a marriage bond between the people and Himself. God took the part of a husband to Israel. When a believer comes to recognise the force of his baptism, when it becomes a matter of light to you, then you recognise that you are baptised *to Christ*. Being baptised to Christ signifies that He has a claim over you, and the result is that your body is brought into subjection.
Now I would warn young people that unless your will is broken you are useless in the testimony. The will must go, and when the will has gone the body is the Lord's practically, and it becomes a wonderful vehicle in His hands. It becomes, as we learn from @Romans 6, an instrument of righteousness, or rather the members become instruments of righteousness to God. There is qualification now for the testimony. I have often thought of the moral greatness seen in many old believers: they are in entire subjection to the Lord, and so qualified for the testimony. In this way they are seen as in accord with the ark of the covenant. The Lord takes them to Himself in love, but the grace that broke their wills and moulded them for His will can do the same with others. In this way the testimony is continued.
The Lord says to Peter, "When thou wast young thou girdedst thyself and walkedst whither thou wouldest". That was will; but "when thou shalt be old thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not". (@John 21:18) Now Peter's will is gone. He is resigned to the will of Another. Thus would he be in accord with the ark of the testimony. Peter suffered martyrdom for the testimony. How important it is that we should be in subjection to Christ early. It is a simple question of recognising that, as brought under grace, you should be subject to Christ, and you will be in consistency with His death.
In @Romans 7 we get light as to the Lord's body.
{131}
It is in full keeping with what I have been saying. The Lord, you will remember, in the institution of the Supper, said, "This is my body, which is for you". (@1 Corinthians 11:24) He meant to imply that His body was devoted to the assembly. He came down from heaven, saying, "I come ... to do thy will, O God". (@Hebrews 10:7) That is the ark of the covenant. His body was devoted to the will of God, but He also took account of the assembly, and devoted His body to it. "This is my body, which is for you", (@1 Corinthians 11:24) He says. Well, in @Romans 7 it is referred to, not exactly in that connection, but to show that the Lord has relieved us of all legal pressure by dying for us. We have become dead to the law by the body of Christ. You can see what a service the Lord rendered by relieving us of that bond. It is that we might "be to another, who has been raised up from among the dead, in order that we might bear fruit to God". (@Romans 7:4) There you have light that will develop in your soul into the assembly's position. You have the principle on which the assembly's relations with Christ are formed. Christ has a moral claim over you. The apostle sets it out as his judgment, "that if one died for all, then were all dead; and that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them and rose again", (@2 Corinthians 5:14,15). Christ is in resurrection. You walk in "newness of life" in @Romans 6, and serve in "newness of spirit", in chapter 7, which is in the form of a psalm; the idea to be reached is presented first, and then the road by which it is reached. In the end of the chapter you come to the Deliverer, and the Deliverer really becomes the Husband.
Now, we read in the Song of Solomon that the bride is seen coming out of the wilderness leaning on the Beloved, chapter 8: 5. I speak of that for a moment in connection with @Romans 8. It is really on the arm of Christ; that is, in the power of the Spirit,
{132}
that the saints go up out of the wilderness. You will remember that Israel set out for Canaan after the springing well. There is a moment in the believer's history when he comes to recognise the Holy Spirit; henceforth the Spirit is his power, not the flesh. This is what @Romans 8 sets before us.
Proceeding a little further into the type, the biggest man in Scripture appears directly after that; that is Og. I refer to him as the biggest man in Scripture because of the dimensions given of his bed in @Deuteronomy 3:11. It is remarkable that the dimensions of a man's bed should be given. If the Spirit records such a thing, you may depend upon it, that it has some special reference to the kind of man he was. I leave that to your reflection. Bed is a place where there is no exercise, that is the idea. This is overcome in the power of the Spirit. You will remember how Rahab, in speaking to the spies, referred to what Israel did to Sihon and Og; @Joshua 2:10. The Lord dried up the water of the Red Sea, but the people slew the two kings of the Amorites. Og's was a very large bed, a bed of iron; but all that it represents disappears where there is exercise, and only as exercised are you prepared to go into. Canaan. Towards the end of @Romans 8 the purpose of God comes into view. We are to be "conformed to the image of God's Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren". (@Romans 8:29) What a goal to have before us! And it is to be reached now in the power of the Spirit.
Returning to @2 Corinthians 5, the apostle says, "we know no man after the flesh". It is a question of what Christ is in resurrection. See what a change in us when we begin to know each other in Christ instead of as in the flesh. It makes all the difference when you take account of a brother as in Christ. This was how Paul knew the saints. If any one is in Christ, there is new creation. New creation is
{133}
connected with Canaan; in that sphere all things are of God. What a sphere! We are acquainted more with what is of man. In the epistles to the Corinthians we are impressed that God and what is of Him must prevail. In the assembly He must rule; and not man, and so in new creation all things are of God. So if any one be in Christ, there is a new creation; the old things have passed away; behold all things have become new: and all things are of the God, "who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ". I cannot proceed further; I trust you have followed. It is a great thing to have the divine end in view. If you form a right judgment, keep to it, and the Lord will support you in it; and you will get increased light. "The path of the righteous is as the shining light, going on and brightening until the day be fully come". (@Proverbs 4:18)
{134}
Pages 134 - 290 - "Headship and other Subjects".
Indianapolis, 1913 (Volume 18)
HEADSHIP
@Ephesians 1
J.T. I suggested this chapter because it presents headship in its fullest sense. It is said, that Christ is given to be Head over all things to the assembly, which is His body. Therefore the assembly, in that way, is linked with Him. He is not only Head to it, but the church is linked with Him in the headship, inasmuch as she is said to be His body.
W.C.R. Would the headship of Adam, as having dominion over all things, be typical?
J.T. I think so. In Old Testament characters we have headship presented in some form. Other things are presented, of course, but we shall find the idea in some form, in Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, David, Solomon.
E.H.T. What do you mean by headship?
J.T. It has to be distinguished from lordship and apostleship. The idea of headship is that it is in One in whom divine wisdom is expressed.
J.L.J. Is it on behalf of God, in setting forth God?
J.T. It has in view the labyrinth of evil that exists in the world on account of sin. It is in the Head that a way is made out of that. Adam typified the purpose of God, but the phases of headship seen in those who came after him contemplate the effects of sin. The end in view is to recover all to what was foreshadowed in Adam and Eve. Ephesians answers to this.
L.T.E. Does the idea of direction enter into it?
J.T. Yes. Headship is a very wide idea in its bearing, but in order that it should take form you must have divine wisdom expressed. It is seen in
{135}
One in whom divine wisdom is; that is, divine wisdom in a Man.
R.S.S. By wisdom you mean resource.
J.T. Yes. So that the Head is not simply a mouthpiece; He is Himself the thing He expresses.
J.D. This supposes Christ as Man.
J.T. Quite so. It is in man that headship is to be set forth. To indicate the difference between authority, or apostleship, and headship, I would cite Moses. In his earlier books. Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers, it is almost invariably said, "As the Lord commanded Moses". That is the way things are expressed, or, "The Lord spake unto Moses, saying". Every paragraph is introduced in this way, and the point in that is, that God would assert His authority. What is presented carries divine authority, and Moses is the mouthpiece. Now, when you come to the book of Deuteronomy, it is what Moses says. "These be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel", (@Deuteronomy 1:1). In other words, the book of Deuteronomy suggests headship, because now it is Moses speaking, as it were, from himself. If it is looked into, you will find that to be true. It is Moses now speaking out of affection for the people, knowing the divine thoughts about them, and seeking to prepare them for the great position that God had destined for them. Of course, God's authority is always in evidence, but Moses is seen more as marked by divine love and wisdom. He knows what is suitable to God, and he has love for the people; he desires that they should be formed for the position which God had destined them for.
R.S.S. The blessing of Moses, the man of God; would that illustrate your point?
J.T. Yes, in a remarkable way. Compare, too, his song in chapter 32. You will find that Deuteronomy speaks of a second covenant in chapter 29:1. It is an additional covenant to that given to
{136}
the people at mount Horeb, but it is largely what Moses, under God's authority, of course, unfolded. Therefore it is a result of headship. The same thing appears in David. He also represents the authority of God as king. He is anointed to carry out the authority of God, but having brought the ark to Zion, everything now is ordered by him, and you hear nothing of "as the Lord commanded David". It is David acting as head according to the wisdom that he had.
R.S.S. Not exactly as king there.
J.T. No. After @1 Chronicles 15 it is David acting as head; therefore, it is not what Moses inaugurated, but an entirely new order of things established, not on the principle of divine command, but on the principle of headship; that is, of wisdom in David. Therefore we have a great many new features to those which we get in the economy established at mount Horeb. For instance, we get twenty-four courses of priests and twenty-four courses of Levites; and the people, even the congregation, are divided into courses of twenty-four thousand for each month of the year. That is, it is entirely a new order, and yet it is not said to be what "the Lord commanded David", but what David enjoined. The scripture shows, that it was according to God, because these things are alluded to later as having spiritual significance. David had divinely given understanding as to them. See @1 Chronicles 28:11 - 19.
B.T.F. In connection with what you have said as to David, do you mean, that he was acting of himself as head? Was he not acting under God?
J.T. That is fully owned. He was king before he was head.
B.T.F. Comparing it with God's people now, is not the thought set forth that they should be so acquainted with Christ that they should act as those
{137}
who have been in His company. Is that the thought you were putting forth regarding David, now?
J.T. No; I was speaking about him as head as distinct from his kingly position. As king, he is there on behalf of God to enforce the divine will, but the idea of a head is that he acts from wisdom in himself, which, of course, is divinely given; only when you come to Christ, the Antitype, He *is* wisdom, so that when He speaks it is wisdom speaking.
A.F.M. What you say would indicate the way in which we become acquainted with the Lord; first as Lord and then as Head.
J.T. Quite so. You come to the truth that this Person has all wisdom. You do not seek it elsewhere. That is a thought beyond the kingdom. I think Mary of Bethany, sitting at His feet and listening to His word, was recognising the Head. She had come to see that all wisdom was there and she wanted to get it.
G.A.T. What is the difference between Lord and Head?
J.T. It is what we have been saying. Moses was king at the outset. The people came to Moses for judgment, @Exodus 18. Moses had to judge the difficulties that arose among the people. That presents the king to us. Every one recognised that God had placed authority in that man, so that he was king in Jeshurun. That is one side of the truth. The other side of the truth is that Moses, in Deuteronomy, as *knowing* the mind of God, *teaches* it to the people. He is on their side, so as to prepare them for God's land. That is headship.
A.R.S. Does headship imply communion? If we are in communion with the Lord, we will know His thoughts and mind. Is that the way we are in accord with it?
J.T. I think so. You are in touch with the Lord, and you move here in relation to Him.
A.R.S. I understand by what you have been
{138}
saying, that Christ is our Moses and our David. Everything is vested in Christ today, so that if we would own Him as Head there must be communion, and subjection to His thoughts, and in that way He will lead us out of the labyrinth of evil.
J.T. No one not in communion knows headship. Persons not in communion might do what the Lord *told* them to do, but for headship you must be in communion.
W.G.R. The Colossians were in danger of turning to other wisdom, "philosophy and vain deceit". It was man's wisdom.
J.T. That is the point. The epistle to the Colossians is to establish the saints in the truth of headship. It was imperative that they should recognise Christ as Head. They needed not to go to any one else for anything.
R.S.S. It might be well to have brought out more clearly the distinction between the lordship and headship of Christ; it was said that we learn Him as Lord first and then as Head.
J.T. What I was saying about Moses helps in that way. The people came to Moses for judgment; that is an illustration of lordship. Every difficulty in your soul, every problem, you recognise the Lord in it; for whilst we are in the wilderness the lordship of Christ is always in evidence. The authority of Moses went on to the banks of Jordan, beyond the brazen serpent. But then headship, fully exercised, takes you out of the wilderness.
A.McB. The Head was introduced in view of another place.
J.T. It is first attested in a scene of evil and darkness. It is intended really to lead us out of that into a sphere of order and blessing. The best illustration of that is Noah. He was really the head in God's mind for one hundred and twenty years before the old world was set aside. God, in that way,
{139}
indicated His forbearance with the world by bringing in a new head. He raised up a new head and in him He set forth His mind. There was light in Noah, and all that there was in Noah was for any who might avail themselves of it.
L.T.F. There was not exactly authority with him, but there was light.
J.T. Noah does not represent authority before the flood. He does afterwards; but headship was there.
A.F.M. That helps in regard of Christ being the Head of every man. There was what any one could avail themselves of in Noah's day.
J.T. So now the Head of every man is Christ. Thus men are tested. The four gospels show what Christ was, and so they are a test. If people do not avail themselves of *such* a Head, it only proves their folly. Men are convicted of folly because they do not accept that Head. The gospels show that Christ was the personification of wisdom.
J.D. Does your thought as to what was seen typically in Moses, lordship and headship, involve the incarnation, particularly in Deuteronomy. Is it, that what God had in mind for man in eternity, comes close to man in Christ?
J.T. Yes; we have in Christ both apostleship and headship. Apostleship is authority, headship is divine wisdom in a Man, who is on the side of men. Both are seen in Christ. Christianity is established in this world on the ground of authority, but then it is also established on the ground of wisdom. You cannot improve upon it.
J.D. You connect it with the last Adam.
J.T. Quite so.
A.B.S. We were speaking about "the Lord said unto Moses", and then Moses after that speaks himself to the people in Deuteronomy. The idea seems to be that in Exodus the Lord told Moses
{140}
certain things to speak to the people, but in Deuteronomy he had God's mind, and spake accordingly to the people.
J.T. I do not say that Moses did not have wisdom from the outset, or that he was any wiser in Deuteronomy than at mount Horeb, though his experience had doubtless made him wiser; but at mount Horeb the point was divine authority; "See ... that thou make all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the mount"; (@Hebrews 8:5) and almost every paragraph is introduced or ended by "the Lord spake unto Moses", or "as the Lord commanded Moses". You will scarcely find that in Deuteronomy, because Deuteronomy is the expression of Moses¬, affection and wisdom, divinely given, of course.
W.B-s. In Exodus he speaks as for God, but in Deuteronomy we have more the result of his own exercises.
J.T. Christ is both Apostle and King, and these two things have to be distinguished. In Him there is divine authority, because He is the Apostle and the King. But then He is also the Head.
E.H.T. Is the thought of the head intelligence?
J.T. Wisdom marks the head.
G.A.H. In the kingdom you may be a very good subject, but not very intelligent.
A.A.T. Do you think that we learn wisdom by pondering the Lord's path as seen in the gospels; and the way He met evil?
J.T. I think so. The gospels present wisdom, and the epistles the children of wisdom. Take, for instance, the record in the Acts. You will find what is recorded is what the apostles did; not exactly what they were told to do, yet the Lord's authority is there; the fact that they are called apostles implies that.
A.A.T. The body is seen in the epistles. His wisdom comes out in His body.
{141}
J.T. No doubt, and that only bears out what I am saying. What the apostles did was right. You cannot improve on anything the Lord did and said in the gospels. In the Acts what strikes you is the perfection in which things were done in the main, and yet the record does not show that they had specific commandments for everything.
B.T.F. What leads up to the apprehension of headship in the history of the soul?
J.T. In Mary of Bethany you see it. She discerned, that in that Person there was wisdom, and she sat at His feet.
B.T.F. So the truth of the kingdom precedes that of headship; that is, we are first translated into the kingdom of the Son of His love; and then we see that the Lord has wisdom, and He becomes our Head.
J.T. That is right. We must know the kingdom first. What I was saying about the Acts is important. It is a question of wisdom's children. The Lord said, "wisdom is justified of all her children", (@Luke 7:35) and the book of Acts shows that those who learn from Christ justify Christ. All that they did was a justification of Christ.
A.F.M. They were "holding the Head".
J.T. Quite so. They were wisdom's children. The Acts is a record of the actions of wisdom's children.
G.A.T. The Acts gives us the Head in heaven and the body carrying out His mind here, and this is in accord with what He did when He was here.
J.T. So they were not acting under specific commandments, but in wisdom, because they had learned it in Christ. We may see in chapter 1, that although the Lord had been forty days with them after He rose He had not appointed an apostle in the room of Judas. They were only eleven now. That was a problem! They had no directions what to do.
{142}
The Lord might have settled the matter by appointing an apostle, but He did not. Had Judas¬ defection occurred in the early days of the Lord's ministry, He would necessarily have appointed another, but the defection occurred at the close, when His ministry was over, so that the twelve were no longer needed as far as His ministry on earth was concerned. The coming of the Holy Spirit would inaugurate a new order of things, and *twelve* apostles would be connected with this, hence the appointing of the twelfth was a very great test.
E.H.T. Did they act under headship or authority in that?.
J.T. I think they acted *wisely*. They availed themselves of all that was available, and that was wisdom.
A.A.T. Do you mean the Scriptures?
J.T. The Scriptures and prayer. If the parents are withdrawn from the household and the children are left to act for themselves, what are they going to do? The question that would arise in every right-minded child's mind is, What would their parents do? That is what I understand to indicate the road to wisdom. The apostles might look at it that way, and they did. How did the Lord act? The Lord recognised the authority of the Scriptures, and we read of Him as being often in prayer. In fact. He prayed a whole night before He appointed the apostles. They were wisdom's children; they acted rightly, and their choice was endorsed by the Lord, for Matthias is alluded to in the next chapter as one of the twelve. "Peter standing up with the eleven". (@Acts 2:14)
A.F.M. In regard to the choosing of the seven deacons we have a similar thing.
J.T. And all the way through. Take the opening of chapter 2; they were together with one accord. The Lord really had taught them how to be united.
{143}
It was He who taught them how to be together in unity. In Christianity we get wisdom's children, and so the assembly is Christ's, body. God "gave him to be the head over all things to the church, which is his body". The body acts according to the Head.
L.T.F. Is not that what characterises Christianity rather than commandments?
J.T. That is just what I have been thinking.
A.R.S. Would not headship produce unity? I suppose that Christendom has lost the idea of headship altogether.
J.T. Christendom has disregarded the Lord's authority. If His authority is disregarded, there can be no idea of headship.
J.D. Is the idea of the body testimony?
J.T. The great thing to see is that it is Christ's body. The assembly is His body. In order to be that the body must be formed in wisdom. Take, for instance, @Psalm 133, brethren dwelling together in unity. That is a very happy thing, but it is also a very wise thing. It is a great thing to see that Christianity is the best thing that wisdom can devise.
A.R.S. I think it was the truth of headship that first of all came to Mr. Darby. The Spirit made known to him that he had a Head in heaven, and that if so, every other Christian on earth has a Head, so the body must be on earth.
J.D. I have thought that the body was for God with a view to testimony.
J.T. In order to be Christ's body the assembly must be formed according to Him. Ephesians affords us the most complete thought of the body.
A.A.T. Is wisdom expressed by the saints collectively or is it individual?
J.T. Its fullest expression is in the body. The manifold wisdom of God is seen there. How can you
{144}
have that expressed apart from the members being formed, individually in wisdom?
A.A.T. Is it not learned individually?
J.T. It must be learned individually, and hence the importance of reading the gospels; you learn Christ there. The gospels present wisdom personified. In order to understand the book of Proverbs truly you must understand the four gospels. At the end of Proverbs you have four things that are little upon the earth, but they are exceeding wise. These speak of Christians; true Christians are small outwardly, but they are wise. And then in the last chapter you have the corporate thing, the "virtuous woman". It is not stated that she is *commanded* to do anything, but what she does is right.
R.S.S. So that authority is connected with the lordship of Christ, but as Head He *influences* us.
J.T. That is it. There is a sphere influenced by Christ as the "wisdom of God". In the book of Acts you are introduced into a sphere dominated by wisdom.
R.S.S. So that in a household he who is at the head of it is not lord, but it is the sphere of his influence.
J.T. The Lord's supper suggests headship: it was instituted in a family circle. The Passover was connected with the households in Israel. The Supper supposes the Lord's absence, but it calls Him to mind..
G.A.T. In which of our meetings should we recognise Him as Head?
J.T. He is Head of the assembly, and this is an abiding fact; but the Supper introduces us into the good of His headship in a very special way.
B.T.F. Do we get Christ as Head connected with the company Godward?
J.T. Yes. He is leader. As I was saying, "These
{145}
... follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth". (@Revelation 14:4) He is the Leader of the company.
A.A.T. I can see how in a scene of evil great wisdom is needed to know how to act for God. Shall we need that same wisdom when out of the scene of evil?
J.T. You will not need it in the same way, but the assembly is the great body in which wisdom will be set forth in the future. He is given to be Head overall things to the assembly, which is His body. The millennial world will be governed according to the principles of wisdom. Everything will be absolutely and infinitely *right*.
A.A.T. Are we being prepared for that now?
J.T. Yes. Wisdom is tested in us in the midst of evil here before it comes into display in the future. Noah was tested for one hundred and twenty years in a wicked world, and then he is seen as the head of a new world.
J.D. Even now there are heavenly intelligences who are being instructed in the all-varied wisdom of God in the assembly, as seen in the scene of contrariety.
J.B. Does not wisdom bring in light and blessing and all the things that continue?
J.T. Look at Joseph. The wisdom of God was expressed in him beforehand in view of the evil that was coming; and then Pharaoh rightly decides that there is no more fitting man to be head than he. He proved his wisdom both in regard to the butler and the baker, and in regard to Pharaoh also. Pharaoh's judgment regarding Joseph was right.
Now *we* are tested; how are we going to act when a difficulty arises? Suppose a complicated difficulty arises in your locality, what are you going to do? You may read up what Mr. Darby says; but how are *you* going to act? I have often thought, that what tests a man's spiritual ability is to give him
{146}
a case of discipline to decide upon. There are a great many people who are negative, they do not *do* anything. That is safe to a certain point, but the man of God is fitted to act for God in a positive way in a crisis.
R.S.S. Is it not a principle in Scripture, that would apply in every case, that if you have a spiritual person, he knows what to do?
J.T. Yes, indeed.
W.B-s. I would like a little more to be said in connection with the Lord's supper, and as to lordship and headship in @1 Corinthians 10 and 11. When we have to do with evil in any way, is it connected with headship or with lordship?
J.T. I think lordship relates to evil. "For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep". (@1 Corinthians 11:30) There the Lord acted according to His authority over His people, it was His discipline. But if you give the Lord His place as Man according to His love expressed in the Supper, you have His headship.
E.H.T. I would like to ask a question as to Corinthians. We have been speaking of the manifold wisdom of God and the principalities seeing it in the assembly. In Corinthians you get the Supper as showing forth His death, till He come. Ought the bread and cup to be covered?
J.T. No, I do not think so.
B.T.F. You get Christ in two aspects before us in the morning meeting. Prior to the breaking of bread it would be more as Lord, but then in His joining us it would be more as Head.
J.T. Quite so. In order to enjoy assembly privilege fully you have to recognise the Head.
A.McB. We seem to be very defective as to the appropriation of the Head. How can we gain on that line?
J.T. I would recommend a study of the gospel
{147}
prayerfully in order to know what wisdom really is, how wisdom, acted in different emergencies that arose; and then you know how to act. You are in accord with the Head. That gives you qualification for the assembly.
A.A.T. We get testing to that end.
W.L.P. Is affection connected with headship?
J.T. Christ becomes endeared to you as He is known as Deliverer. "I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord". (@Romans 7:25) In @Luke 7 the Lord became endeared to the woman because of forgiveness. She loved much because she was forgiven much. A soul having been brought so far would be led on farther, and I think this is indicated in chapter 10. The next woman we are told of is Mary of Bethany, and she is sitting at the Lord's feet and listening to what He is saying. Affection leads her to listen to Him; it is really in that way we acquire wisdom and knowledge.
R.S.S. And then she goes farther and anoints Him for His burial.
A.A.T. We read of "all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge". (@Colossians 2:3) What is the difference between wisdom and knowledge?
J.T. It is not easy to define the difference. Knowledge is more what is *acquired;* wisdom is resource and skill. It is augmented by acquired knowledge and experience, but it is more what a person *is*.
Rem. Proverbs says, "The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright", (@Proverbs 15:2) indicating that wisdom is shown in the manner in which you use knowledge.
J.D. In connection with wisdom may we say that the body being in the life of the Head, wisdom is still here?
J.T. All the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are in the mystery, and that is an allusion to the body of Christ.
{148}
J.L.J. What is the meaning of the "spirit of wisdom and revelation" in (@Ephesians 1:17)?
J.T. That is what we have been considering. It is distinct from knowledge; it is "the *spirit* of wisdom and revelation" that God gives to us.
J.B. Will you say a word on Christ as Head, not *of* but *to* the body?
J.T. I think the point is to show the greatness of the assembly's place in God's counsels. Christ is not simply Head over all things by Himself alone, but His headship works out through the assembly. She is said to be the *fulness* of Him that filleth all in all.
L.T.F. That involves that the assembly is allied with Him as Head over all things.
J.T. And what He is is reflected in the assembly, which is the vessel through which headship is expressed. That shows how important it is for us that we should learn now. We are being prepared now for that.
A.F.M. Now as to the gain of this at the breaking of bread: I suppose if we had learned Christ as Head individually, we should be better qualified when we come together on the Lord's day; we are then exposed as to how little we know of headship.
J.T. I think when the Spirit gives the Lord His proper place in our souls, then He is free to act as Head.
A.F.M. After we have broken the bread we find practically very little recognition of Christ as Head. It is often disappointing; sometimes too much activity and sometimes too much silence.
J.T. I think all that arises from the want of knowledge of the Lord and communion; it is the result of not being in communion.
G.A.H. If He were recognised, He would lead in the assembly.
J.T. Those in the good of His headship "follow
{149}
... whithersoever he goeth". "The tribes go up". (@Psalm 122:4) What we look for in the assembly is ascension. That is what is normal. What precedes the Songs of Degrees, @Psalm 120 to @Psalm 134, is @Psalm 119, which coincides, in principle, with the Lord's supper, because there you have the will of God expressed. "The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?" (@1 Corinthians 10:16) It was in the Lord's body when here that the will of God was fully carried out, and we are in accord with that. @Psalm 119 is really the writer's expression of his delight in the will of God. It is a remarkable psalm.
R.S.S. I like the connection of @Psalm 119 with the Supper and the Lord's body. Taking a body, He said, "I delight to do thy will, O my God". (@Psalm 40:8)
J.T. @Psalm 1 is the demand for the godly man. He delights in the law of the Lord. Then in @Psalm 40 the Lord comes to do the will of God, and in @Psalm 119 the remnant have learnt that. They delight, as He did, in the law. The blessedness of a man was in his delighting in the law. That was seen in Christ. The Lord's path was a path of infinite suffering, but a path of infinite blessedness. Those who saw Jesus saw that; they learned it in Him; so that in @Psalm 119 you have the expression of the remnant's delight in what they saw in Christ, and every letter in the alphabet is employed to express their exercises. In such a man God's will is done on earth as it is in heaven.
A.R.S. Does the thought of ascension, or going up, mean that the Lord elevates you from your plane to His? It does not mean that the Lord comes down to *your* plane.
J.T. I think He comes to our side and leads us *in*, but this implies elevation. It is a great thing to see that we are entitled to ascend.
A.R.S. Is not that the nearest thing to heaven?
J.T. Quite so. The title to ascend is in @Psalm 119.
{150}
If a man carries out God's will where everything is opposed to it, that man is entitled to be elevated. So the Songs of Degrees are really songs of ascension. "I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord ... . Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together: whither the tribes *go up*, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel". (@Psalm 122:1,3,4) I think we see in that what is proper to the saints after the Supper.
R.S.S. That is very important. "Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven"; (@Matthew 6:10) and I was thinking that the man who does it is therefore qualified and fit to go to heaven; he has learned to do the will of God here.
J.T. These Songs of Degrees are steps, they come after @Psalm 119. The man seen in that psalm is entitled to ascend, and he shows in all that he says that he is fully in accord with each step till he reaches mount Zion.
B.T.F. So we have in the hymn, "That way is upward still". (`12:6)
G.A.H. @Psalm 40 is what we were dwelling on last Year -- the true God and the true Man. But in order to ascend you must be in accord with "him that is true".
J.T. In @John 20 the Lord shows to the disciples that His God was their God; that is, He brought them on to His own platform as having carried out the will of God here. So now He says, My God is yours. He solved the problem for them, but they have to be brought into accord with that, and @Psalm 119 sets forth a man delighting in the will of God. Now in the Supper the Lord's body is seen as the vessel for the will of God; and on the other hand it is "my body which is for you". (@1 Corinthians 11:24) It had been for God here, but in the Supper He says it "is for you". In this sense He devoted His body to the assembly. That should have a profound effect on our hearts.
{151}
A.F.M. He was here for the will of God, on the one hand, and then for the assembly.
A.A.T. What is the objective point in ascending?
J.T. It is that the assembly's place is a most exalted sphere. Of course, in the Psalms it is mount Zion, which is the centre of all God's thoughts as regards the earth. But the assembly is exalted morally.
W.C.R. The Lord said in @John 20 that He had not yet ascended. Does that mean that He wanted to bring them on to His side of things?
J.T. I think so. He said, "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father", (@John 20:17) as much as to say. When I have ascended, you can have part with Me there. "Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God". (@John 20:17) In that I think we have title to ascend, for He links us up with Himself. If *He* has gone up we have title to go up.
G.A.T. You were going to say something about connecting the Supper and ascension.
J.T. I think if you give the Lord His place He will lead you upward. It is not physical, but moral. These shall "follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth". (@Revelation 14:4)
J.L.J. What about His coming to our side?
J.T. "Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved?" (@Song of Songs 8:5). He supports us out of wilderness circumstances into the sphere of blessing and privilege.
G.A.T. Do you get that with regard to the two on the way to Emmaus?
J.T. He set them going towards Jerusalem where the company was. Going towards Jerusalem involved going up.
W.L.P. "My body ... for you". That is what produces love for Him in our souls.
{152}
A.F.M. The last sentence of the Songs of Degrees is: "The Lord that made heaven and earth bless thee out of Zion". (@Psalm 134:3)
J.T. I think it is very beautiful. All blessing issues from that point, from the highest point.
A.F.M. It illustrates the assembly's present place in administration.
{153}
RESURRECTION (1) - THE POWER AVAILABLE FOR THE SUPPORT OF THE TESTIMONY
@Matthew 28:1 - 20
J.T. My thought is that a practical result of the resurrection is represented, by the person, or persons, seen at the sepulchre in each gospel.
R.S.S. You do not refer to the disciples and the women who were there?
J.T. No; I refer to the persons whom the disciples *saw* there. It was in that connection that I felt encouraged to suggest that we might in this way look at the different records of the resurrection.
R.S.S. In this gospel, we are told that "the angel of the Lord descended from heaven".
J.T. "And behold, there was a great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord, descending out of heaven, came and rolled away the stone and sat upon it. And his look was as lightning, and his clothing white as snow. And for fear of him the guards trembled and became as dead men". I thought, that the angel here, whose countenance was like lightning, would stand for the power of God, especially in its bearing towards the combination of evil which the apostles had to contend with. So the Lord says later that all power in heaven and earth was given to Him, and in the light of that they were to go and make disciples of all nations, "baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost".
R.S.S. So you would think that the *power of God* is set forth in Matthew in connection with the resurrection more than in the other gospels?
J.T. I think so. That is the special feature of it, in view of the administration that was to be committed
{154}
to the twelve which was to extend to all the nations. It was essential that they should know the power that was at their disposal.
A.R.S. Is that shown by the earthquake and the rolling back of the stone?
R.S.S. And also by the fact that the angel appears.
J.T. And that his countenance was as lightning, a figure that every one of us can understand as emblematical of power, for no one who has seen lightning can fail to recognise that it is an irresistible power. All the navies and the armies of the world would be destroyed in a moment if God chose to use that power. That is obvious to everybody.
G.A.T. Like the judgment in @Revelation 11; fire goes out of the mouth of the witnesses to devour their enemies.
J.T. Exactly. If God were pleased to use these things against the combination of evil that we have to meet with now, how quickly He could dispose of them! But the apostles were to make disciples of all nations instead of destroying them. God is not going to destroy the nations yet, but the power is there equal to that, and that enables us to see our position here; instead of executing judgment we are to be here as witnesses to that power, but it is exercised in grace.
A.F.M. As in the case of Saul on his way to Damascus. Saul was on his journey as an opposer of the Lord Jesus Christ. Yet the Lord spoke to him and subdued him completely.
J.T. Quite so; the Lord could have destroyed Saul. He represented the combined power of the world, for he was the emissary of the priests in Jerusalem and they were subordinated to Rome. He may thus be taken to represent the combined power of the world; but instead of the Lord destroying him he is subdued to Christ. This is a remarkable
{155}
testimony to the reign of grace. Saul's power for evil was broken up, but he is secured for God. The power for good now is as great as the power that will be exercised in judgment in the future; but at the present time that power is being exercised in grace.
R.S.S. God delights in grace, whereas judgment is His "strange work".
J.T. So the day of grace is lengthened out. To make the point clear I would refer to the earlier part of the second book of Kings. Elijah was raised up under the reign of Ahab; he appears in @1 Kings 17, and he exercises his ministry more in the character of judgment. The power of God was there to meet the apostate conditions in Israel. Elijah, instead of finishing his mission, fails, and goes to Horeb and resigns, making a charge against the people at the same time. They had forsaken the covenant, thrown down God's altars and slain His prophets, and he only was left; and he adds, "they seek my life". Now the Lord says to him, "Yet I have left myself seven thousand in Israel, all the knees that have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth that hath not kissed him". (@1 Kings 19:18) Then Elijah received a second commission from the Lord, "anoint Hazael to be king over Syria: and Jehu the son of Nimshi shall thou anoint to be king over Israel: and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy room. And it shall come to pass that him that escapeth the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay: and him that escapeth from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay". (@1 Kings 19:15 - 17)
Elijah, however, did not anoint Hazael nor Jehu, but he did anoint Elisha, who was with the twelfth yoke of oxen when Elijah found him, and anointed him. Therefore Elisha's ministry comes in before that of Jehu or Hazael. In other words, God suspends judgment in order to make room for the reign of grace and I think that illustrates the present time.
{156}
The angel here symbolises the power by which God could obliterate all the nations easily, for all their power was seen in the seal on the Lord's tomb. And the power of the angel could easily overthrow the world, but the world is allowed to continue in order that grace might be presented to it; instead of the power being used for judgment it is used in the administration of grace, just as in Elisha's case. Elisha sets forth the grace of God and the house of Ahab is allowed to continue during his ministry, which is a remarkable testimony to God's forbearance.
R.S.S. That is very helpful.
A.McB. Would you connect John the baptist's ministry with Elijah?
J.T. John the baptist was an antitype of Elijah.
A.McB. He is out off and the reign of grace comes in in Christ.
J.T. Quite so. That ministry of judgment is held in abeyance.
A.McB. He says the axe is laid to the root of the tree but that is suspended.
J.T. God does not give it up, but He would lengthen out the reign of grace; in the end Elisha anoints Jehu.
G.A.H. Do we being on Elijah's line?
J.T. Elijah travels the whole course involved in the testimony from Gilgal to Bethel; he acknowledges that at each point there had been breakdown; and then he goes through death; in this he is clearly a type of the Lord, and the testimony therefore is to become effective in the ministry, of Elisha, in the ministry of grace, and that is Christianity. But then God does not forget what the house of Ahab is, and the evil connected with it, so Jehu overthrows the house of Ahab.
R.S.S. Would you also say that both Elijah's and Elisha's ministry find their antitype in the Lord Himself, while what was said in regard to John the
{157}
baptist is quite true and borne out by Scripture. Does Elijah set forth the Lord's ministry and testimony here against evil, and Elisha rather the ministry of grace.
J.T. Quite so. Elijah is more than John the baptist, because he goes through Jordan; then he ascends to heaven. It is in the spirit of the ascending man that Elisha takes up his ministry.
R.S.S. I was thinking of it in connection with our brother's question as to whether we begin with Elijah's line. I was thinking that both Elijah and Elisha find their antitype in a sense in Christ, and also should in us; on the one hand, bearing a testimony against evil, and also in the expression of grace.
J.T. Yes.
G.A.H. The Lord says to the disciples who wanted to bring down fire from heaven, "Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of". (@Luke 9:55) They had not learned the principle of grace yet. They wanted to act on the line of judgment.
L.T.E. What significance has the translation of Elijah in connection with this power you are speaking of?
J.T. It is really the power of a heavenly and ascending man. Christianity is set up here in a heavenly power, and it has a heavenly character.
L.T.F. Elijah will come again, as we find in Malachi.
J.T. "Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet". (@Malachi 4:5) But that was fulfilled in John's ministry. I think we have to distinguish between Elijah's *ministry*, and what he was as going through Jordan; there he passes out of the view of the people. Another chapter opens there; his ministry stands by itself, and it is distinguishable from that of Elisha inasmuch as it was a ministry to recall the people to divine principles, but it had not the power to recall them;
{158}
it was lacking in grace. The ministry of Elisha is that which secures things for God, so there is recovery in the ministry of Elisha.
W.C.R. He receives a double portion of Elijah's spirit: what is the bearing of that?
J.T. The double portion is that of the firstborn. It refers to Christianity. We have the place of the firstborn. See @Hebrews 12:23. Nothing that comes to pass afterwards will equal Christianity.
A.F.M. When you said just now that Elijah visited these different places do you refer to the testimony?
J.T. Each of the places which he visited represents some phase of the testimony, and then he goes through Jordan; as much as to say, that all is a failure on the line of responsibility; then he ascends, and Elisha comes back in the power in which Elijah had ascended, and he inaugurates a new system at Jericho, which is typical of Christianity. There is recovery in Elisha's ministry. Even as to those who had died, there was revival when the dead man touched his bones, @2 Kings 13.
A.F.M. That is the crowning feature, is it not?
J.T. Yes. I only referred to that to show, that instead of judgment, although the power is there for it, power is now exercised in connection with grace. So the twelve are to go unto all nations making disciples of them, and this in the light of the Lord's words that "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth".
B.T.E. Is it not a remnant truth for the future, that the twelve were to disciple the nations?
J.T. I think they ought to have acted on it after the Spirit came. But they failed in it, and therefore Paul is taken up.
B.T.E. Is the thought that judgment is suspended for the moment so that the reign of grace may be introduced?
{159}
J.T. That is it. It is a great thing to be in the light of the fact that the power is available for judgment; not that we desire it, but as having to do with the combination of evil that is in the world, it is a great encouragement and stay to the soul to know that power is available to deal with it.
G.A.T. And God has appointed a day when He will take it up.
J.T. We are already in possession of the power that will deal with it. We would, however, prefer to have the present period continued.
R.S.S. In that respect Christians are exceptional and unique, because in the previous dispensation the saints desired the judgment, and in that which follows the souls, under the altar cry, "How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood?" (@Revelation 6:10) I suppose the very fact of the disciples desiring that the kingdom should be restored to Israel showed the line they were on, for that could only be restored by power exercised in judgment.
J.T. I think a study of the book of Daniel helps us. The "saints of the most high places" (@Daniel 7:22) take the kingdom. In chapter 7 there is a full outline of the Gentile dominion of the world beginning with the Babylonian monarchy and extending to the Roman monarchy. But the statement is that the saints of the most high places take the kingdom; that is prophetic. Therefore the saints are entitled to regard every position of authority as theirs by right. Every position of authority is ours, but we are bearing with the conditions; we are with Christ in it. The book of Revelation presents Christ in rejection, the Lamb. We accept the rejection, but maintain, in principle, as to our testimony, that the saints of the most high places take the kingdom. It is theirs. We bear with the present situation, but at the same time we hold in our souls that every
{160}
position of authority is ours in connection with Christ.
J.J.L. But we have no right to exercise that authority now.
J.T. No. We have the authority and the power in title, but instead of using it in judgment, we use it in grace, so that we are praying for these people who are really rivals. Every king or emperor is in a sense a rival of Christ and the assembly. But the saints are morally greater than they are, hence we pray for them. We are exhorted to pray for kings and all that are in authority. We are enabled to do that because we are supposed to have moral power.
W.C.R. Then the preaching of the gospel, which is the power of God unto salvation, is also a means of blessing.
J.T. Take Paul's ministry; it was a commission to the nations. It really involved the power by which every nation will be overthrown, that exalts itself against God in the world. But Paul, instead of using the power in judgment uses it in grace, so that the offering up of the nations might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Spirit.
A.R.S. We may say that the angel is withdrawn, and the Holy Spirit has come down. When the Lord comes in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, that will answer to the angel here, but the Spirit of God is here now, and He has brought all the good things of God; He is freighted with them and He brings them down here in this day of grace.
J.T. And that indicates our place now. But at the same time we hold in our souls the purpose of God and that is, that the saints of the most high places take the kingdom. God gives it to them. But then the Ancient of days comes, and the stone cut out without hands appears, and breaks in pieces the
{161}
whole world-system. We know how that will take place, and it will be in the very power by which the Roman seal on the stone at the sepulchre was broken when the earthquake came.
A.R.S. The earthquake speaks of the existing order being broken up, but the judgment is stayed for the present.
J.T. So we read in Matthew "Many bodies of the saints fallen asleep arose, and going out of the tombs after his arising entered into the holy city and appeared unto many". (@Matthew 27:52,53) Christians do not suggest *judgment*, but the contrary. The saints had been raised; they "entered into the holy city and appeared, unto many". (@Matthew 27:53) That shows how the dispensation began.
A.R.S. What does that mean? What saints were they? and is that "holy city" Jerusalem?
J.T. It was Jerusalem viewed in the light of God's mind about it, for Jerusalem is the holy city. It has fallen under the influence of evil now, so it is spiritually Sodom and Egypt, "where also our Lord was crucified". (@Revelation 11:8) That is the historical city. But then we must distinguish between the historical city and the city of purpose. Jerusalem is Jerusalem in the mind of God, and never will be anything else. Zechariah says, "the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee". (@Zechariah 3:2) Satan is opposed to Jerusalem. All the great movements of the world have had that as a centre. Men do not know it, but Satan knows it. He knows that Jerusalem is God's earthly centre and all His work in connection with the earth has that in view; so it is the holy city in the mind of God and ever will be.
J.B. That comes out in the temptation in Matthew, "the holy city".
J.T. Satan knows much better what Palestine and Jerusalem signify than statesmen do. Statesmen do not know anything about it, but Satan knows
{162}
about it. It is characteristic of Matthew that the holy city comes into view, because it is a question of government and administration in Matthew. There is a witness there in the holy city to the power of Christ's resurrection, that it has a bearing towards all that God had established in connection with Jerusalem.
J.L.J. That testimony is to be given now in the assembly.
J.T. Yes. Jerusalem and Zion will be recovered on the principle of life from the dead, and the appearance here of raised ones was a testimony to that.
S.T. Were these saints raised as Lazarus was, in natural bodies?
J.T. It is difficult to say much about it. They were allowed to come up as a testimony. The Scripture is silent beyond this. We are not told in what form they appeared.
A.A.T. In the introduction of Christianity there was undoubtedly evidence of this power, particularly with the apostles in the way of miracles and tongues. Has the power diminished?
J.T. The power has not diminished, but paralysis has come in and the body is enfeebled. There is no diminution of the power itself, but the vessel of the power is hampered, so that you cannot look for the same expression of power now; but the Spirit is here and, of course. He remains unchanged.
E.H.T. The Lord said if He had prayed to the Father He would have given Him twelve legions of angels. Will angels be the power eventually used in judgment, but grace comes in in connection with the Spirit?
J.T. The operations now are by the Spirit. It is in this way the Lord will change our bodies of humiliation "according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself". (@Philippians 3:21) He does not change our bodies by angelic power, but by
{163}
the power of the Spirit, according to @Romans 8. It is "by his Spirit that dwelleth in you". (@Romans 8:11)
E.H.T. Are the angels the instruments that execute judgment in the time of judgment?
J.T. The Lord will come out of heaven Himself. According to @Daniel 2, the stone cut out without hands, smites the image on its feet and breaks it into pieces. According to @Revelation 19, Christ comes out of heaven with His armies. He comes out in spiritual power to overthrow all that is evil here. I think He does it by the Spirit.
J.D. Do you judge that to be morally true in the earthquake which we read of here?
J.T. I think so. The whole scene in this chapter, the earthquake and the angel with a countenance like lightning, represents the power of God available against the combination of evil in the world, when God is pleased to use that power.
J.D. There will be no additional power needed, when He comes out, to be added to the power that is set forth in the resurrection here.
J.T. The power that is available is already attested. That is the way it is presented in Matthew. It was a great thing for the apostles to understand that there was power available for the overthrow of all that is evil in the nations, for the nations will combine against Jerusalem, and the power will be on the side of Jerusalem. One can see now that the development of things in the nations is tending to the latter days. In @Daniel 7 we have the great Gentile powers beginning with Nebuchadnezzar and ending with Rome. Rome is said to have ten horns; that is to say, that instead of universal empire, such as existed in the Lord's time on earth, there will be a combination of nations that have one mind. I do not say, that as yet it is fully developed, but the thing is there to be seen. What is called the concert of Europe is nothing more than the acceptance of the
{164}
responsibility implied in the numeral *ten*. That will become more and more apparent as time goes on, and they will have one mind and support *the beast*. Then a *little horn* arises and he overthrows three of them, and he acts against Jerusalem and forms a league with the apostate Jews; these really are the conditions that will prevail in the latter days. God will act for Jerusalem. Daniel was exercised about things, and he understood through Jeremiah, the prophet, that seventy years were determined for the desolation of the city, and he prayed to God fervently, and an angel was sent to him to tell him how things would be. "Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon thy holy city" [that is the great centre in the mind of God and in the mind of faith], "to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy" (@Daniel 9:24) (or really the Holy of Holies). That is the revelation made to Daniel. In other words, the purport of the mind of God as made known to Daniel was, that God would interfere. "From the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto Messiah the Prince should be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks". (@Daniel 9:25) And then Messiah would be cut off and there would be an alliance with the Prince for one week, and then God would come in and act. And then all these things would be accomplished, everlasting righteousness brought in and the Holy of Holies anointed. Now in @Matthew 28 faith sees there is the power to do all that. Matthew shows there is power available to do that, and the testimony of the risen ones in the holy city is the proof of it. They went into Daniel's "holy city, and appeared unto many".
S.T. Why is the appointed place of meeting with His disciples Galilee?
{165}
J.T. Galilee is the place of the remnant. That would be a slight on the historical Jerusalem. The Gentile world is in view. It was "Galilee of the nations".
J.B. The Lord says, at the end of the chapter, "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth". Is that now being set forth in the wondrous grace of God?
J.T. Instead of the city being taken up literally and restored, the power is with the apostles.
J.B. He who has all power given to Him is with them.
L.T.F. That power continues to the end of the age; it is the same power now, and it goes on to the end of the age.
J.T. The Lord is with those who are discipling the nations, but He is going to return to Jerusalem and act there.
B.T.F. I had thought that Jerusalem was then under the control of evil and that the Lord manifests His victory there by those who are risen coming into it as a proof of what will be done in the future.
J.T. Inasmuch as it is in the "*holy* city". It is not the *historical* city, but the city of purpose.
W.C.R. In the testimony of the disciples is not the power of God set forth in two ways? They preach the gospel, the power of God unto salvation, and then at the end of their discourse they warn those who do not obey the glad tidings that the power of God would be towards them in judgment, @Acts 13:41.
R.S.S. In connection with the point regarding the angels being used in the execution of judgment, I would like to read @Matthew 13:49. "So shall it be at the end of the world: the angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just, and shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth". (@Matthew 13:49,50) How does
{166}
that come in in connection with what you have been saying?
J.T. The angels will be used, I doubt not. They will be agents for the carrying out of God's will in the latter days, as they are now. God uses them in a providential way now for overruling the governing powers and for helping us in regard of our bodily circumstances. "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?" (@Hebrews 1:14) But at the same time, in the resurrection and the subjugation of "all things", He acts by the Spirit.
R.S.S. There is another execution of judgment which is not dealt with either by the Lord directly or angels. I refer to the destruction of Babylon. Babylon is destroyed by the nations. The fact that the Lord does not take it in hand Himself is significant.
A.A.T. To whose eyes was the evidence of the resurrection exhibited?
J.T. The testimony is to the power of God. They had put the stone on the sepulchre and sealed it. Now it is rolled away and the angel is sitting on it. "He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision". (@Psalm 2:4) It is strikingly solemn. The angel sat on that which they thought could keep the Lord in the tomb!
W.L.P. In @Ephesians 1 the resurrection is called "the surpassing greatness of his power towards us who believe, according to the working of the might of his strength". (@Ephesians 1:19) Why is that used in connection with resurrection?
J.T. The full expression of God's power is in the resurrection, and it is the power that worketh in us. Take the patriarchs; Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; they believed in God Almighty; that was their faith. They believed in the God who raised Christ from the dead. Their faith referred to the resurrection
{167}
of Christ. Now Joseph believed that too, but he further believed that the power that was effective in Christ would be also effective in himself. He believed in the resurrection of the saints.
R.S.S. So he "gave commandment concerning his bones". (@Hebrews 11:22)
J.T. His bones were put into a coffin in Egypt. The word may be translated *ark*. It was a question of preservation.
J.L.J. Does that set forth the position of the assembly at the present time?
J.T. Yes. The bodies of the saints are buried in that light. "If we believe that Jesus died and rose again" (that is the faith of Abraham), "even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him" (that is the faith of Joseph). (@1 Thessalonians 4:14) In that way @1 Thessalonians 4 is like Joseph's commandment. We believe that God will bring the sleeping ones with Jesus and He will change the living ones; therefore we commit the saints who fall asleep to the Lord.
E.H.T. In the end of the chapter it says they were to disciple all nations. Would they have to be in the power of resurrection to do that?
J.T. Yes. The Lord would be with them in all the power displayed here.
E.H.T. In the first part of this reading there was a question as to whether the power was unlimited at the beginning. Would not the power be as available now for the saints who are in the good of resurrection?
J.T. But the vessel is greatly hampered on account of failure.
J.H.C. What would answer to the *ark* now?
J.T. Egypt was a place where you would look for burial, but Joseph's body was put into a vessel in which it would be preserved and carried. The fact is, that monuments and obelisks, such as those
{168}
in the world erect over their dead, are all a testimony to unbelief.
R.S.S. They are not looking for the resurrection. What would be the use of these obelisks when the resurrection comes?
J.T. I think that Egypt was an infidel country. They did not know God.
G.A.T. Do we not have tombstones to mark the place where we bury our dead?
R.S.S. Yes. Just to mark the place.
J.S. We have had three resurrections brought before us; the resurrection of Lazarus, the Lord's resurrection, and those that rose from their graves and went into the holy city. But we see that the Lord is in the centre of them.
J.T. We have to take the Lord's resurrection as the adequate setting forth of *resurrection*. That is to say, the Lord's resurrection was the bringing in of a new order of man, not only in a moral sense, which *He* had ever been, but in a new actual condition. Lazarus was raised back to what he had been, and so in the cases where resurrection took place in the Old Testament it was a recovering back to old conditions. For instance, Hezekiah went down to the gates of death. God proposed a sign, that the degrees of the sundial should go backward or forward. In the Old Testament any testimony to the power of resurrection was to bring a man back. There was no new ground covered. There was testimony to *power*, but there was no new ground covered. To bring a man back to his old condition and reinstate him where he was before, there is no new ground covered in that. That was the case with Lazarus. Hezekiah asked for the degrees on the sundial to go back. He wanted to be reinstated in his old life here. But when you come to Christ, the degrees go forward, because in Christ it is a new beginning, a new order of Man, and in resurrection
{169}
condition. So the Lord says, "they who are counted worthy to have part in that world, and the resurrection from among the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage; for neither can they die any more, for they are equal to angels, and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection", (@Luke 20:35,36) That is the idea of resurrection.
J.B. "That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection". (@Philippians 3:10)
J.T. It is a new order and condition of Man. The Lord laid down His life, but He took it up in a wholly new condition.
J.B. Is it not interesting that that which was so terrifying to the keepers was to be no occasion of fear to the women. The angel says to them, "Fear not *ye".*
J.T. There is nothing in that power for you to fear. It is all in your favour.
A.A.T. Is there anything in the word, "All hail", which was the greeting of the Lord to them?
J.T. It is victory. All their hopes were secured in Him risen from the dead.
A.B.S. Does not the weakness of the chief priests stand out in contrast to the power of the Lord's resurrection? They cannot do anything. They bribe the soldiers, but they are utterly powerless.
J.T. You cannot read the chapter without being filled with encouragement. In view of the administration of grace, and that is what we are connected with, there is immense encouragement in it.
{170}
RESURRECTION (2) - THE KIND OF VESSEL IN WHICH THE TESTIMONY IS SET FORTH
@Mark 16:1 - 20
J.T. The person seen at the sepulchre here is a "young man". "And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on the right, clothed in a white robe". I think we may take that as a sign of the result of the resurrection as found in this gospel -- a *"young man".*
R.S.S. What do you mean by result?
J.T. On the ground of the resurrection we have here the *kind of vessel* that God uses in the testimony, whereas in Matthew we have the *power* which is available for the administration of grace.
R.S.S. You think it refers to the writer of the gospel himself?
J.T. Yes.
W.B-s. Would that signify energy?
J.T. I think so. God does not take up a man whose strength is expended. He takes up man in his prime, as we see in the Levites.
A.F.M. A young man sought to follow the Lord on His way to crucifixion. Is there a contrast between that young man and this?
J.T. I think that young man alluded to Mark himself. That is to say, he was exposed in endeavouring to follow the Lord. But this "young man", in chapter 16, is clothed with a white robe. That is the garb in which the testimony is to be set forth and sustained in the world.
A.F.M. A spotless robe?
J.T. Yes. It is very clear that besides energy we must have the clothing suited for the testimony.
W.B-s. Would Joshua be a type of that? He
{171}
was a young man who departed not from the tabernacle.
J.T. I think he is an apt type of the vessel that God takes up in the service of the testimony.
W.C.R. When you say he must have a garment suited for that service, you mean there must be moral fitness?
J.T. Quite so. Our garments have reference to what encircles us.
A.F.M. The "young men" in John's epistle are exhorted not to love the world. That would bear on the point.
J.L.J. You get the young men set forth in the Levites in @Numbers 8. They were to serve from twenty-five years old to fifty, and then cease.
J.T. Yes. It is so all through Scripture. God takes up young men.
A.A.T. Is it not the case that young men are sometimes devoid of wisdom?
J.T. I do not think that would apply to those who are the product of the resurrection. As a matter of fact, the apostles were all young men. The Lord Himself came forth on His ministry at the age of thirty, and the apostles were all young men when they were commissioned by the Lord to go forth and preach.
A.F.M. The point is that we should *keep* young.
J.T. Energy that characterises youthfulness is the point; energy and freshness. That is what the resurrection secures; and there is no growing old.
J.L.J. Do you think that this depends on our being in the power of resurrection?
J.T. Yes. The order of humanity that Christ has secured in resurrection is very beautiful. It is marked by freshness and energy, and there is no decay. So that there is no lapsing or decline. You will find that in Mark's gospel the result of the word
{172}
sown is "some thirtyfold, some sixty, and some an hundred". (@Mark 4:20) There is increase instead of decrease. In Matthew it is decrease, a "hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold". (@Matthew 13:23) There is no decrease in Mark.
J.L.J. What is the meaning of @Numbers 8:25? After fifty years the Levites shall cease waiting upon the *service* of the tabernacle, but should minister with their brethren in the tent of meeting, and keep the charge.
J.T. I think the one point in levitical service is, that it is always to be marked by energy. They were to cease before old age set in. In the power of resurrection that is exactly what takes place. There is no decay or decline.
R.S.S. Why is it that you get the descending scale in Matthew in regard to the seed?
J.T. I think it is the side of human responsibility that is in view there. Mark presents the divine side as in his own case. His end was brighter than his beginning, and in one sense that is what takes place in the history of the assembly. The Lord secures victory at the end. I mean that the assembly is recovered *as such*. In the last chapter of the Bible we find, "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". (@Revelation 22:17) There is nothing lost. The assembly is seen in the full energy of affection.
A.F.M. And also in service.
J.T. Quite so.
A.F.M. Is not @Psalm 110 interesting in that connection?
J.T. What is your thought?
A.F.M. I thought of Christ's place on high, and then that lovely verse, "Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in holy splendour from the womb of the morning shall come to thee the dew of thy youth". (@Psalm 110:3)
J.T. That is very good.
{173}
R.S.S. Is the principle that though the outward man perish, the inward man is renewed day by day?
J.T. Exactly. There is no decline, no weakening in the inward man, and it is on that ground that God secures His testimony.
G.A.T. Do you think that if a man is not converted till he is old, he will not be used much of God?
J.T. As a matter of fact, those whom God uses are taken up when they are young. Would you agree with that?
R.S.S. There are exceptions.
J.T. They are very rare.
A.McB. In the resurrection there is no old age.
J.T. And so in the levitical service, as has been pointed out, old age did not appear. A man is not in his decline till after fifty really, and so neither the weakness of infancy and boyhood, nor the frailty of age, appeared in their service. They had attained to full physical development before they were introduced into the levitical service; so in the types God showed that His service was to be sustained in the energy of manhood.
R.S.S. At the time of the late Spanish-American war the demand was for young men from eighteen to twenty-five, showing that the principle we are speaking of now applies really in the world in that way. In this country, where there is no standing army, when they need men, this is the material they look for.
A.McB. In taking up these things is it not well to remember that one who might be a child in the Lord's things, apart from age, would not do for the Lord's service, neither would one who had declined?
J.T. Yes. It is well to see that the power of resurrection has to be known in the soul. It is in that power only that the testimony can be sustained.
{174}
A.McB. If that is maintained, there will be freshness all along.
J.T. Exactly. The Psalms show that.
E.H.T. In connection with energy we have your thought. What about the white robe? Is it analogous to calling "on the Lord out of a pure heart"? (@2 Timothy 2:22)
J.T. That is the idea, purity. But it involves purity in your circumstances also.
J.D. Will you develop a little the meaning of your expression, order of humanity that Christ has secured in resurrection?
J.T. It is in contrast to the natural, because what marks the natural, as we see in the last chapter of Ecclesiastes, is decline. "Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them". (@Ecclesiastes 12:1) And then it ends with a melancholy picture: "or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain". (@Ecclesiastes 12:6) That is man in the flesh, the natural man.
J.D. You are speaking of man now in an intensely moral way.
J.T. Man in the flesh. Moses alluded to him in the same way in @Psalm 90. "The days of our years are threescore years and ten". (@Psalm 90:10) If that was exceeded, it was labour and sorrow.
J.D. But as to the order of man in resurrection, are you speaking of it in a moral way?
J.T. In the history of humanity, in the days of Abraham, God began to cut short man's days, which, I think, governmentally showed God's wisdom. Had God allowed men to continue to live five or eight hundred years, one can see what a result we should have today. The world would be intolerable; sin would have accumulated to such an extent. I doubt very much whether we have much understanding of what the old man really means in Scripture, and how
{175}
the body of sin stands connected with him. The longer a man lives in lawlessness, the greater the power of sin in that man. I think, with the increase in number, and age, and experience, there is increase in the power of sin. It is an entire mistake to assume that the power of sin was as great in Adam as when Christ was in the world. The power of sin increases with the race and the number of men in the world and with their mental abilities. The greater mental abilities, the greater the power of sin. So that had God allowed men to live long lives, as in the earlier days of the world, what a terrible world we should have now! For instance; take a man like Napoleon, as an illustration, or other great men that have lived during the last thousand years. Let us suppose they had lived until now, what a world we should have had! God foresaw all that, and He out short man's days. So that when you come to Moses and Joseph you see the difference. Joseph lived only one hundred and ten years, and yet he was supposed at that time to be an old man. Well, now, I think it was at that point that the idea of eternal life came into evidence; the thought of everlasting life becomes all the more appreciated if men are to live here only a few years, say seventy, instead of seven or eight hundred.
A.F.M. Can you give us a Scripture to show that, or are you simply judging?
J.T. It is implied in the gospel preached to Abraham. God emphasised death. Death is necessarily emphasised as man's life is shortened. It occurs more frequently. The oftener the occurrence, the more testimony to its power. "Death reigned from Adam to Moses", (@Romans 5:14) but its reign was intensified as man's life was shortened. In @Genesis 5 men lived seven and nine hundred years. Death was there. It reigned, but its reign was greatly mitigated for the reason that men lived such ages. But when
{176}
God cut short man's life the reign of death was emphasised. Now it is at that point you get the gospel. That is to say, the gospel of *blessing*. Noah preached the gospel, but not the gospel of blessing. Paul speaks of the gospel being preached to Abraham; "In thee shall all nations be blessed". (@Galatians 3:8) These were the conditions, and a young man appears, Isaac, the one in whom Abraham's hopes are all centred. Abraham saw everything in Isaac. His heart *had* rested in Ishmael. He saw death everywhere, and that it would come upon himself ere long; but there were the promises to his seed, and so he says, "O that Ishmael might live before thee!" (@Genesis 17:18) But it was not to be Ishmael, but Isaac, and so Isaac is born; and when he is weaned Abraham makes a great feast in his house to celebrate the occasion, and I have no doubt it was there that in faith he saw Christ. The Lord says, "Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad". (@John 8:56)
R.S.S. Why there particularly?
J.T. Because it was there that Isaac, type of Christ, got his full place. He was enthroned when he was weaned.
R.S.S. And when Ishmael was cast out.
J.T. Exactly, because he persecuted him that is born after the Spirit. You can see how all Abraham's hopes were centred in that child, and the child grew to be a young man. Now there is the situation.
E.H.T. What about the order of humanity in resurrection?
J.T. I was going to add in regard to Isaac, that as a young man Isaac in figure is cut off. It may be well to add, that the offering up of Isaac in no sense implies that death was a necessity on Christ personally. Isaac was to be *offered as a sacrifice*.
G.A.T. A figure of Christ.
J.T. Yes. The Lord was out off in comparative
{177}
youth. He had not attained to even half the age allotted to man.
W.B-s. "In the midst of my days", @Psalm 102.
J.T. Exactly.
B.T.F. Is the principal thought in a young man energy?
J.T. And freshness. That is what will mark the resurrection sphere.
W.B-s. Will you go on further about Isaac?
J.T. What exercise of soul Abraham must have had! Death was upon him and upon all, and it was, as I have said, greatly emphasised. In the presence of all that, God proposes blessing for all; and Isaac is the one in whom the blessing is to be, for he is the promised seed, and he is cut off figuratively. The result brings out the true situation, that Isaac is received back from the dead in a figure, in all the bloom and energy of youth. But then he is in type a risen man.
A.McB. Where there is no decay.
J.T. And now it is in him, in that seed, in this man risen, that the blessing is. That is the situation. The necessity for it lies in the strength of sin that is in the old man. If we felt that, we should feel the need for the energy of the new man. The strength of sin is in the old man, so it says, "our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed". (@Romans 6:6) As I was saying, I doubt if we have estimated aright what the body of sin is in its practical working, and how it is displayed in the old man.
E.H.T. The principle of the old order of man is sin.
J.T. Yes, but it increases as the old man increases, whether numerically or mentally. For instance, had the tower of Babel succeeded, sin would have increased enormously.
R.S.S. For what reason?
J.T. Because man would have had a centre.
{178}
"Let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name". (@Genesis 11:4) Centralisation today is the strength of sin.
R.S.S. The thought of *name* in that connection I never quite understood before.
J.T. They wanted to have renown; it has been pointed out that name is renown. That is what men are after; the character of the present day is centralisation, and the more centralisation there is apart from God the greater the strength of sin, and it is only in the energy of spiritual youthfulness that we can cope with it.
J.B. We have to remember that sin is lawlessness.
E.H.T. Centralisation produces the "man of sin".
J.T. That is it. He is the outcome of centralisation.
G.A.T. What was the object of building a tower to heaven?
J.T. It was not that they wanted to get to heaven. They wanted conspicuousness on the earth, that which could be seen.
J.B. Nebuchadnezzar's kingdom reached to the heavens; so Babylon reached to that point; conspicuousness was in mind.
G.A.T. I thought it was with the object of ignoring God's way of getting to heaven.
J.T. They had no thought of getting there. They wanted a name on the earth. So, in result, the *earth-dweller* is equivalent to an opponent of God; that is, in the light of Christianity, which involves a place in heaven; to want a place on earth is equivalent to opposition to God.
S.T. Christians walking in the power of the Spirit would be a great check to the power of evil.
J.T. Quite so. I should like that we might better understand what the old man is, and how it is in him that the body of sin is. Sin had its greatest strength in Jerusalem, because God had owned it
{179}
and established the first man there. The Lord had to contend with the old man there; Jerusalem was outwardly owned of God and fortified with divine institutions. A great element of the strength of sin in Judaism was that it could lay claim to divine sanction.
A.R.S. Do I understand you to say, in regard of the "young man" seen in the sepulchre, that it is characteristic of Mark's gospel? Mark speaks of service, and then in John's epistle the "young men" are characterised by being strong; "the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one". (@1 John 2:14)
J.T. That is the kind of man in whom the testimony is maintained.
R.S.S. In order to appreciate the qualities of a *young man*, according to the way you are speaking of him as in resurrection, we need to take account of the great contrast to that in the old man and the development of sin in him.
A.A.T. Is there any connection between the *young man* we are speaking of and the *elders* in @Hebrews 11?
J.T. Elders set forth *experience*. They do not grow old spiritually.
A.A.T. I thought the word elder meant old.
J.T. It means in Scripture, rather experience. In @Revelation 4 and 5, the twenty-four elders around the throne represent experience. They are not old, as *we* speak, because really in the resurrection world there is no such thing as *age*. It is everlasting life. It is everlasting freshness and bloom.
W.C.R. It was found with Caleb.
J.T. And with Moses; he was one hundred and twenty years, and so was an old man in his day, and yet his eye was not dim nor his natural force abated.
B.T.F. You are not speaking now on the line of the order of the house of God, are you?
{180}
J.T. We are speaking of the kind of man in which the testimony is maintained in Christianity, and which will be in display in the millennial world, a world of eternal freshness and vigour being established in resurrection. These features, spiritual freshness and vigour, are what mark those who are realising the power of Christ's resurrection.
R.S.S. I think what you say in regard to the elder is helpful. Of course there is no one to appoint to such an office now, but at the same time, there are those who would take up that which might fall to them in that way, and what you would look for in such is not exactly years, but experience. You might get an old man with very little experience, or judgment, or wisdom.
J.T. What marks the *elders* all the way through in Revelation is, that they have the mind of God. They *know* things.
R.S.S. "Sir, thou knowest", for instance.
J.T. They can explain everything. They can give an account of the saints, @Revelation 7:14.
A.McB. That is the character in which Moses comes out in Deuteronomy. He is a man of experience.
J.T. Deuteronomy is very interesting in that way. It shows what Moses was personally. The age assigned to the Levite is very helpful as typical of the energy in which the testimony was to be upheld. The book of Numbers has reference to Christianity, and it refers to the energy in which the testimony is to be maintained now. The age is from twenty-five or thirty years to fifty. That is a man in his prime physically. I think it is very beautiful to think of an order of man in which there is perpetual bloom, and energy, and freshness; this lies in the Spirit. One would like to get hold of that thought. In @Romans 6 the old man is said to be crucified. There
{181}
is a striking fitness in the words, "our old man is crucified". (@Romans 6:6)
A.McB. He *ought* to be crucified.
J.T. The old man and crucifixion fit morally, because in the old man the strength of sin was seen. The totality of it was seen there. Crucifixion is what answers to that. How obvious it is that we should not "serve sin".
A.McB. Newness of life comes in there too.
J.T. We are to serve in newness of life. That is the point. In chapter 6 we *walk* in newness of life, and in chapter 7 we *serve* in newness of spirit.
J.D. What is the point reached in chapter 8, "if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteousness"? (@Romans 8:10)
J.T. It is Colossian truth introduced in the epistle to the Romans. He does not say that Christ *is* in the saints at Rome, but *if* He is, the body is dead, because the body is the vehicle of sin; but then the Spirit is life in view of righteousness.
J.L.J. It has reference to the believer's own personal body.
J.T. Yes. I think @Romans 8 gives us the young man of @Mark 16.
W.B-s. It says of him, "sitting on the right side", and then in the end of the chapter it says, the Lord "sat on the right hand of God".
J.T. The right hand is the symbol of power.
R.S.S. You were remarking a moment ago that you get in @Romans 8 the young man.
J.T. I think Romans is the adjustment of everything on *earth*. It brings in the man that God sought. Man is recovered according to God, and that involves *newness*. We get newness of walk in chapter 6 and newness of spirit in chapter 7. The latter is in contrast to the oldness of the letter.
E.H.T. @Romans 8 speaks of the Spirit of Christ.
J.T. I have no doubt that chapter 8 involves the
{182}
*young man*. There is the energy and freshness of the Spirit. The chapter shows how it is arrived at in us.
W.C.R. That is how it works out in @Numbers 21, after the well is digged and the water springs up.
J.T. There is no flagging or murmuring after @Numbers 21. They set forward. Then Og appears. Some of us have been dwelling on the fact that the size of his bed is mentioned. It was a very large bed, 16 ft by 7 ft, a remarkable size. Og appears after the brazen serpent, and Rahab, in speaking to the two spies, says, we have heard what Jehovah did to the Egyptians at the Red Sea and what the people did to Sihon and to Og. I have no doubt that is an allusion to the energy the people had acquired in the springing well. In that energy Og was overthrown.
L.T.F. What about the big bed?
J.T. A bed in this connection suggests spiritual slothfulness and weakness. The state described in @Romans 8 is the immediate contrast to this. It is man characterised by the Spirit, and therefore marked by energy and freshness.
R.S.S. In the Psalms we are told a good deal of David's musings on his bed in regard to Jehovah.
J.T. But spiritual power is acquired in *exercise*. The bed is the contrast to exercise. See @Proverbs 6:9 - 11.
W.B-s. The paralytic man was on a bed and afterwards he carried it.
J.T. That is the point, and it is the kind of thing one looks for as a result of resurrection. The Lord would bring in a man who, instead of resting on his bed, could carry his bed. As we have been saying, @Romans 8 gives us the idea of the *young man*, a man in the energy of the Spirit.
J.B. Walking, "not after the flesh, but after the Spirit". (@Romans 8:4)
G.A.H. Up to @Numbers 21 is it not more inward
{183}
and the difficulties in the believer more individual? After that chapter is it not more outward deliverance, but the conflict does not cease, though the nature of the conflict is different? When you get the Spirit it is more for external conflict.
J.T. Sihon and Og have no reference to such enemies as are contemplated in Ephesians. In Ephesians we are said to be in conflict with spiritual wickednesses in *heavenly places*. I do not think Sihon and Og typify that, but rather a warfare that is carried on inwardly. I do not think that Romans gives us conflict *for the testimony* exactly. It has reference to your inward experience.
R.S.S. But the conflict in regard to the testimony is in Ephesians.
J.L.J. You were saying there is no murmuring after @Numbers 21. What about chapter 32, where the two and a half tribes want to stay this side of Jordan?
J.T. They did not want to go into Canaan. That is type of those who, although they have the Spirit, and have light as to the assembly and are prepared to fight for it, but *live* in their families and businesses. That is what we are all exposed to.
W.L.P. Is not that a dangerous position to be in? You cannot stay there.
J.T. You are sure to be taken captive if you continue to live there. There is not the protection that there is in Canaan.
But I suppose it is well to keep the point of our chapter before us, the "young man". That is the order of man in whom the testimony is maintained in the present time.
A.McB. Will you say a little more on @Romans 8?
J.T. It is a chapter of the greatest interest, and I believe that, carefully considered, we shall see that it presents this energy and freshness that we are dwelling upon.
{184}
A.McB. The chapter begins with everything ended as regards the old man and everything new in Christ Jesus; and then, at the end, nothing can separate us from the love of Christ and the love of God.
J.T. The latter part of the chapter corresponds with the prophecies of Balaam. The saints are seen in the light of God's mind. There is no divination against them, and they are more than conquerors through Him that loves them.
W.B-s. The "young man" here speaks of Jesus in connection with a then despised place from which He came; "Jesus of Nazareth". He then speaks of the crucifixion and the resurrection, and then as to seeing the Lord in Galilee, the outside place. As we accept contempt and crucifixion we realise the power of resurrection; then the outside place corresponds with this.
J.T. When Barnabas forsook Paul, Timothy appears as a young man. Paul took him and circumcised him, and he is the one in whom the energy is continued after Paul's departure. I think it is very suggestive, as if the thing is to be continued in the energy of youth.
R.S.S. What we are considering has a good deal in it for our younger brethren.
J.T. I think so. Now the older ones necessarily have great exercise as to who will be exercised as to the maintenance of the testimony if they are removed. Take an old brother who has been through the school of God's discipline, and has come to the end of his years. He is now really in accord with the ark of the covenant. The Lord said to Peter, "When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest; but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not". (@John 21:18) That is to say, at the end of
{185}
his days Peter would be absolutely in accord, with the ark of the covenant; his will would be fully gone. Well, you would think, why is not Peter left here? He seemed to be the kind of man to leave. But he says, "I must put off this my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath showed me". (@2 Peter 1:14) His body was a tabernacle. The tabernacle was in accord with the ark. So that it would seem as though Peter would be the one to leave here, or Paul. Why did not the Lord perform a miracle and continue these men? But the Lord would love to bring in others like them. If He has wrought mightily in Peter, He can do so in another. I believe the promise to the children has the testimony in view. "Children, obey your parents in the Lord; for this is right". It is "the first commandment with promise; that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the earth". (@Ephesians 6:1 - 3) If one's days are long on the earth, it is that they may be identified with the testimony. It is right in that sense to have a desire to live, and therefore the "commandment with promise" is an encouragement to that desire, and the way to it is to recognise the authority that is placed in the parent. If you recognise that, you will have long life; but then if you recognise that authority as God's authority, you will come to recognise the ark of the covenant, because the ark of the covenant refers to One who recognised the will of God. If you are left to live long on the earth, it is that you may be identified with that.
R.S.S. The tables of stone were there.
J.T. They represented the will of God. That is how the youth among the saints are brought in to take up the line of testimony. They learn it from the parents. It is right to want to live in connection with the testimony, and therefore if the young recognise the authority in the parent, they will come into levitical service *in time*.
{186}
W.C.R. Do you mean by that, that they first learn subjection to their parents and then subjection to the will of God?
J.T. Yes. It is very gracious of God to place authority in the parent. If authority is placed in the parent who loves you, you will accept it and submit yourself all the easier; that is God's grace. And really God has, from the outset, placed a testimony in the human race to almost everything that should come in afterwards. The authority placed in the parent at the outset is a testimony, that God in grace has placed there. A child can recognise authority in a parent easier than in Christ, whom he does not see, but recognising it in the parent he recognises it in Christ.
S.T. Paul speaks of Timothy as "my own son in the faith". (@1 Timothy 1:2) And Peter speaks of "Marcus my son". The apostles were fathers in the faith to these men.
J.T. Quite so. The older brethren, who are exercised, naturally consider for the testimony, as to whether the youth among the saints accept any obligation as to it. If you bow to the authority of the Lord in the parent you will become a Levite, and all your desires will be met and your life will be long on the earth, but it will be in levitical service.
R.S.S. Explain that.
J.T. Because long life for the child is made to depend on his bowing to the will of God. You live on the ground of carrying out the will of God. If you begin that way and continue in it, you come to love the will of God, and eventually you see how it is all in Christ, and so you love Him as the ark of the testimony.
R.S.S. How does this make you a Levite?
J.T. Because a Levite loves the testimony.
A.McB. In 1 Corinthians the apostle says that he baptised the household of Stephanas, and in the last chapter he says of that same household, "they
{187}
have addicted, themselves to the ministry of the saints". (@1 Corinthians 16:15)
J.T. I would not baptise a child except in view of the testimony. I mean that I would have in mind that the child is to be a vessel of the testimony.
W.L.P. You would not care to baptise the child of those who are not in touch with the testimony?
J.T. Faith is not lawless. It is the opposite. Faith bows to God's will. You see these children are to replace their parents. That child is here, under God, to replace its parents. You have that in view. Baptism has that in view.
R.S.S. Baptism "for the dead".
J.T. To fill up the gap. If the parents pass away the children should take their place.
W.C.R. You made a remark as to whether we were justified in speaking of the *conversion* of the children of Christian parents.
J.T. Conversion is turning to God from a path of unbelief. Now the children of Christian parents are regarded as already in relation with God from the outset. They are said to be "holy".
R.S.S.. Conversion is from unbelief and lawlessness.
A.F.M. You expect that God would work in the child, however.
J.T. The child must become a subject of God's sovereign work, of course.
A.F.M. And learn the grace of God.
J.T. But he does. "By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three months of his parents, because they saw he was a proper child; and they were not afraid of the king's commandment. By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season". (@Hebrews 11:23 - 25) That is the order. That is to say, Moses came into fellowship with the people of God when he was come to years,
{188}
and as coming into fellowship with them he is taken up for the testimony of God.
E.H.T. Do you think his parents were in the light of the testimony?
J.T. I believe they saw something of the beauty of Christ in the child.
A.F.M. And their faith as to him was in the light of that.
J.T. When he comes to years he puts out his hand to God's people; he identifies himself with them. And then God takes him up as a vessel of the testimony.
L.T.F. Would you say that such have not pursued the path of lawlessness and unbelief?
J.T. Yes, and they are already regarded as the Lord's. I am not, of course, denying that if the child of a Christian parent turns aside he needs conversion. *He does*. I am speaking of the thing viewed normally.
J.B. In regard to Timothy, do we not get him brought out in the epistle as an antitype of the Levite?
J.T. Yes. I think levitical service is seen in the epistles to Timothy in a marked way.
G.A.T. I like what you say about Moses, that God did not use him till he comes into fellowship with the people of God.
J.T. Neither does He use us. The idea of coming into fellowship is that you commit yourself to the people of God; and no one knew better than Moses how much reproach was attached to that people; he identified himself with them in spite of that.
G.A.T. You would not apply that to us today?
J.T. I think the child has to come into fellowship with the people of God. The parent, as a parent, has nothing to do with bringing the child into fellowship. If the parent does that, he is likely to do damage. The child comes into fellowship when he has spiritually
{189}
"come to years". Moses refused, the court of Pharaoh and chose the people of God.
E. Must there be a personal belief on the part of the candidate for baptism?
J.T. It demands belief in the head of the house, or in a person converted from heathendom.
E. "He that believeth and is baptised shall be saved".
J.S. I suppose you alter the *position* of the child by baptism, but you can never alter the *condition*.
J.T. That is it. The Israelites are said to have crossed the Red Sea by faith.
A.F.M. The children went through.
J.T. It was an act of faith on the part of the people. This refers to baptism being understood by those who are committed to it.
W.C.R. Therefore salvation was connected with it. As it is in @Mark 16: "he that believeth and is baptised shall be saved".
J.T. Quite so. But it is important in connection with the question raised as to those who are to take up the testimony. The testimony should be in view in their baptism.
{190}
RESURRECTION (3) - THE HEAVENLY COMPANY
@Luke 24:1 - 12
W.B-s. I notice there are *two men* here in shining garments.
J.T. What that suggests is, I think, that the divine thought is reached in that we have *men:* "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in *men".* (@Luke 2:14) That is the point of view in Luke. We have the plural; instead of one there are two. Reconciliation is a collective thought.
G.A.H. Is there order in what we have been having; Matthew first, and then Mark, etc.?
J.T. Yes. Matthew's account of the resurrection suggests the power of God; in Mark we have the vessel in which the testimony is to be sustained, and Luke gives us the *race*, that which Wisdom had set its mind upon, *men*.
B.T.F. What do you say about Luke. You speak of the power in Matthew; and of the "young man" in Mark?
J.T. I think it is reconciliation: "good pleasure in men". Hence there are "*two* men".
A.F.M. There is a point of interest in the fact that they "found not the body of the Lord Jesus". They are perplexed about it; and in this same chapter He invites them to handle Him and see that He is really a man.
J.T. Yes. That He is really a man in resurrection. "A spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have". (@Luke 24:39)
J.L.J. Do you think the two men in Luke's gospel correspond in a sense to the two wave loaves in @Leviticus 23:17?
J.T. That passage refers more particularly to the
{191}
day of Pentecost; that is, the effect of the Spirit's presence was to bring to light the two wave loaves. They were brought out of their "habitations".
J.L.J. Testimony is seen there in "two".
J.T. Yes; the fruit of the Spirit. There was *one wave* sheaf. It did not go through the fire. It was simply out down and waved before Jehovah. That was Christ in resurrection. Fifty days afterwards they were to bring out of their habitations *two* wave loaves baken with leaven. That is a testimony to the effect of the Spirit here. The effect of the Spirit having come in renders sin ("leaven") ineffective in man. It is admitted to be there, but it is rendered ineffective: so that the two wave loaves refer to the saints historically under the eyes of men, as in the Acts.
R.S.S. It is not Jew and Gentile.
J.T. No; it does not go outside of Israel. The feasts of the Lord referred to what took place *in* Israel, and I think the two wave loaves referred to the effect of, the Holy Spirit coming down and rendering sin ineffective in the saints, not removing it, which was done *judicially* in the death of Christ. It is admitted to be there, but rendered ineffective. The loaves were not unleavened bread; they were leavened, and that corresponds with the account in the Acts. Whereas what is presented here in @Luke 24 is the order of man that is to abide in the presence of God. There was plurality, to correspond with what the angels said at the beginning, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". (@Luke 2:14) I think these two men present the idea of reconciliation, and I think that is a great point in Luke.
W.B-s. Is the white raiment here equivalent to the best robe in @Luke 15?
J.T. The word here is "shining". It is more than purity. What shines is heavenly.
{192}
W.C.R. Was not that seen in the Lord on the mount of transfiguration?
J.T. Quite so.
W.L.P. The fact of these two being *men* speaks of God's good pleasure in men. Were they not angels in reality?
J.T. Undoubtedly, but the Scripture calls them men, and that leads us to consider what is in view. The result of reconciliation in Luke is to bring in a race for God's pleasure.
B.T.F. Why do you emphasise, the fact that reconciliation has a company in view?
J.T. Because it is so stated. Colossians is more negative: "you ... hath he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight". (@Colossians 1:22) I mean, by saying it is negative, that while the death of Christ is emphasised, in Ephesians it is "that he might reconcile both unto God *in one body* by the cross". (@Ephesians 2:16)
E.H.T. Is reconciliation God's side and new creation our side, objective and subjective?
J.T. I think new creation is essential to reconciliation on our side. In Ephesians it is said that He hath reconciled both in one body by the cross. That is important to bear in mind. Ephesians shows that it is collective. You cannot have the new man seen in one person. You must have two at least in order that there should be the expression of the new man.
E.H.T. "If any one be in Christ there is a new creation". (@2 Corinthians 5:17) What does that mean?
J.T. That is our side. "In Christ" implies new creation, and this, of course, has no reference to a work in Christ personally; it is in us.
R.S.S. Referring to our brother's remark as to why these persons are called men when they were really angels, in the chapter you were alluding to
{193}
in Daniel yesterday it speaks of "the man Gabriel", yet he was an angel.
J.L.J. Also in Revelation, the one who speaks to John is one of his brethren and yet called an angel.
J.T. They are here as a sign, they signify something. They signify that reconciliation has now taken place.
W.C.R. Christ was presented as the Son of man in Luke in relation to men; has that a bearing on it?
J.T. I think it has. Luke's line is to bring in the vessel of grace, and that is in a man. Now at the birth of the Lord angels were there and they are so called. They are not called men but angels. One came to the shepherds and then we get a multitude of the heavenly host without naming them, and they convey to us the mind of God. That is to say, you get first the idea of *one*, and then of a *multitude*. Now I have no doubt that the two men here are the sign of the multitude, only it has to be a multitude of *men*.
J.D. And hence the body. If I have apprehended your thought, it is that the body involves new creation and hence sonship.
J.T. And that it is in the body you have that which is positively for God's pleasure.
J.D. So the body is created after Christ, that God might have that Man continued down here.
J.T. Hence you require at least two persons to have the idea of reconciliation and the new man.
J.D. In connection with the word in Colossians, "to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight", (@Colossians 1:22) you pressed the thought that it was negative, but had it not an object in view?
J.T. Yes, because death is more in view *then*, whereas in Ephesians it is more the concrete form in which reconciliation is seen now; that is the point we should consider, because you cannot have that
{194}
which is for God's pleasure in men without a company. For instance, you cannot have love expressed without two. What is for God's pleasure is expressed collectively.
W.B-s. In @Psalm 133 you get the thought -- "brethren". .
J.T. I think so. Reconciliation is seen there in brethren dwelling together in unity.
W.B-s. The Lord commanded the blessing there.
J.D. What part does testimony play in connection with the body?
J.T. The body is the vessel of it. So in Ephesians after reconciliation is stated, we get the word, that "coming, he has preached the glad tidings of peace". (@Ephesians 2:17) Preaching came in consequent on reconciliation. The vessel in which the light is set is really that in which reconciliation has taken place.
J.D. In that way it seems there are two points connected with the body; the body is for God, and He looks down here and sees the moral qualities of Christ in that body on the one hand, and consequently, on the other hand there is testimony manward.
J.T. And hence the importance of our being set in relation to one another. I have often thought of the commandment, "thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself". (@Matthew 22:39) It implies local responsibility. It is as local obligations are accepted that you have the practical working out of what God finds pleasure in. It is noticeable that "thou shalt love" (not thy brother, but "thy *neighbour* as thyself". I think, that God's thought was, that men as brought near to one another, should become the expression of the new man. He had the new man in view.
G.A.T. What have you in your mind in quoting the command that we should love our neighbour as ourselves?
{195}
J.T. Because the neighbour suggests what is local. A neighbour must of necessity *be a neighbour*. He must live near to you.
G.A.T. You mean the brother we are walking with in our local meetings.
J.T. Yes.
R.S.S. It would go outside of that also. It would include the people you come in contact with in your daily life.
J.T. I think not. I think your neighbour is really your brother. Israelites were all brethren. I mean the commandment was given to a people already in relationship with God. They were all children of one stock. They were all brethren, and indeed it is formally acknowledged that they were. "Thou shall not suffer sin" on thy brother.
A.R.S. Do you not make any distinction between brother and neighbour; for instance, John speaks about loving the brethren?
J.T. That is general. For instance, a man might live in Australia and be your brother, but he could not be your neighbour. You might love him as your *brother*, but not as your *neighbour*.
L.T.F. Your neighbour is the brother that is near by.
R.M.L. In the parable the Samaritan was neighbour to him that fell among thieves. He would not have been brother to him. There seems a shade of difference.
J.T. He acted the part of a neighbour. I do not think the point was that the Samaritan *was* neighbour, but he acted the *part* of the neighbour. He regards himself as an outsider, but he did what the priest and the Levite, the literal neighbours, did not do.
R.M.L. And therefore the contrast brings the question home all the more strongly.
J.T. So the Lord asks, Which acted the part of
{196}
neighbour? And the lawyer has to confess, "He that showed mercy on him"; and the Lord says, "Go, and do thou likewise". (@Luke 10:37)
E.H.T. He came *nigh* unto him. Is that the thought?
L.T.F. It was really the Lord who was the neighbour?
J.T. The Lord came in and did the part of the neighbour when those who were in the relationship of neighbours did not do it.
J.S. If this scripture in @Luke 24, had said two angels, that would not have brought in the thought of reconciliation.
J.T. No; if the Spirit of God says two *men*, we are entitled to attach importance to it. Luke mentions angels at the Lord's birth, but not at His resurrection.
J.S. I suppose that reconciliation and new creation run together.
J.T. On our side it is absolutely impossible that we should be for God's pleasure without new creation. I think every believer ought to move about in this world in the consciousness that he is for God's pleasure.
A.F.M. "And if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his house take it", (@Exodus 12:4). That explains the neighbour; and is there not a reference to it in Proverbs -- "better is a neighbour that is near than a brother far off"? (@Proverbs 27:10)
W.L.P. It is right to do good to our neighbour, even if he is an outsider?
J.T. You are to do good unto all men, especially to those that are of the household of faith. Therefore there is a wide enough range of activity. There is perfect wisdom in the commandment, because the neighbour is the one who is likely to test your love most, but if you answer to the test, your love will
{197}
be strengthened and so will his; so you get a practical expression of the new man.
J.B. Your point would be that that which comes out in the new man is what God had in view in reconciliation.
J.T. And it is a very important matter to bear in mind that local companies of Christians ought to be in measure the expression of what is for God's pleasure. If not, there is nothing in the way of testimony; one great thought in Luke is to bring in a heavenly, a *shining* company.
E.H.T. Would that be the eternal thought? His "delights were with the sons of men". (@Proverbs 8:31)
J.T. It is a very great design on God's part that He should set His people in different localities, so that there should be a practical testimony to the "new man". There is something in each locality for God's pleasure.
G.A.T. Would you mind giving us a word as to our local meetings. I can see how I can act as a brother to one I like well. But how about the one I do not care much about?
J.T. But the responsibility is that he is my neighbour, and I must love him.
E.H.T. I suppose you would pour in the oil and the wine. You get the joy of the Lord set forth there.
S.T. Is the thought of neighbour seen more in God's attitude as we have it in Luke, reconciling man unto Himself, coming near to man in the person of Christ as Man?
J.T. I think the Lord has shown what the neighbour is. He indicates what the neighbour is in chapter 10. He poured in the oil and the wine. Where need is he ministers to it.
S.T. In reconciling man, God does not impute trespasses. So the true neighbour finds the man
{198}
among thieves and does not speak of his trespasses, but meets his need.
J.T. I believe it tests as very much to accept the injunction to love our neighbours as ourselves, because in it is secured the whole principle of local responsibility.
E.H.T. Would not loving our neighbour show how much we are in the presence of God and what place the Spirit has with us?
A.F.M. It is part of God's will that we should love our neighbour as ourselves.
J.L.J. Do you not get neighbour in two lights? In @Luke 10 and in @Ephesians 4? "Speak every man truth with his neighbour, for we are members one of another". (@Ephesians 4:25) I thought that in Luke's gospel your neighbour carries you outside of believers.
J.T. The Lord came in and showed what a neighbour *should be*. He acted the part of neighbour, and therefore He has set the example for us; but primarily the thought of the neighbour contemplated that the persons were already in relation as brethren, because Israelites were all brethren, and they were a people already acknowledged as in relationship with God.
A.F.M. All Christians are regarded, as your brethren, but not as neighbours.
L.T.F. But suppose a Methodist brother lives near you?
J.T. I do not think the commandment contemplated a disordered condition such as Methodism. It supposes a people in relationship with God and with one another as brethren. The general relationship is there. But the brother that is nearest to you is the one who tests you most, and that, I believe, is the reason why it does not say your *brother*, but "thy *neighbour* as thyself".
A.A.T. You mean geographically near to you?
J.T. Yes.
{199}
J.B. This could only be fulfilled in a divine way; the new man is *after* God.
W.B-s. The new covenant and reconciliation run very much together. Is not the new covenant really what God is towards us, and reconciliation is the outcome of that? Loving one's neighbour as oneself involves reconciliation.
J.T. That is exactly the thought. If there is an answer to the covenant, there is reconciliation. And then the secret of all is that there is a new creation. Apart from that, considering what we were, these things could not possibly exist.
W.B-s. In Luke here it brings in new creation.
J.T. These two men contemplate the full result in resurrection, therefore they suggest, to us the effect of the ministry of the new covenant; they suggest also, as we have said, reconciliation and new creation. So that, in order that we should answer to these two men in shining garments, we must be in the good of new creation: "all things are of God".
R.S.S. Is not the thought of new creation very wide? Would it begin with new birth?
J.T. Born anew is a different idea. New creation embraces all that God does in us. It begins in the idea of "new". So that the grand result of God's work in us is new creation, where "all things are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ". (@2 Corinthians 5:18)
J.D. In Ephesians it says we are created anew in Christ Jesus.
A.F.M. Where do you draw the line between new covenant ministry and the ministry of reconciliation? New covenant ministry forms you in the wilderness according to God, but the ministry of reconciliation puts you in the land. Where do you draw the distinction?
J.T. The new covenant met the people directly
{200}
they came out of Egypt. Therefore God says, "I bare you on eagles¬ wings, and brought you unto myself". That is in @Exodus 19:4. "Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests". (@Exodus 19:5,6) That is what God proposed to them. Then the next chapter is the unfolding of the covenant. And what is so striking is that chapter 20 is the covenant, that was in God's mind, and chapter 21 is the Man who expressed the, covenant; that is to say, the Hebrew servant. God in a figure places alongside of the covenant the One who would answer to it in every possible way; and you can understand, that in the Hebrew servant you have reconciliation. He says, "I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free". (@Exodus 21:5)That is the idea of reconciliation. The Hebrew servant was seen in Christ; God, as it were, placing alongside of the law, in figure, the Person who would answer to it in every possible way.
R.S.S. And the Person who answers to it is the One who is for His Master's pleasure.
J.T. And who remains with Him for ever. Now I think that the second epistle to the Corinthians is to show how that same spirit is worked out in the saints; it was seen in Paul. The spirit of the Hebrew servant was in Paul, and that shows, that at any rate, in one man the covenant had become effective. He was in the spirit of the covenant. The first epistle to the Corinthians gives us the *terms* of the covenant, and the second gives us the *spirit* of it. All that is seen in Paul. There was one man, at any rate, who was in every way actuated by the spirit of the covenant. Now you can understand that in that man reconciliation is seen. If you are actuated by the spirit of the covenant you may depend upon it you are for God's pleasure.
{201}
J.L.J. That is seen in @1 Peter 2, in the offering of "spiritual sacrifices"; and then coming out as a "royal priesthood" in testimony.
J.T. Quite so. The offering up of spiritual sacrifices is for God's pleasure. The effect of the covenant is not only what we are Godward; it is also what we are saintward, toward one another; it is in the expression of affection one for another that we are for God's pleasure.
B.T.F. Is the evidence of it in men here for the pleasure of God; the local company dwelling in unity and showing love for each other?
J.T. Where the spirit of the covenant is you have what God delights in, the saints set in relation to one another. The new man is what God delights in, and to have that you must have *two* or more. The apostle says, "though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved". (@2 Corinthians 12:15) So far as he was concerned the spirit of the covenant was there in him. Whatever their attitude was towards him, his attitude towards them was nothing but love.
R.M.L. The *two* suggest the thought of the "much fruit", consequent on the corn of wheat falling into the ground and dying.
J.T. I think so. They are a testimony to the multitude of men that are to be the fruit of the death of Christ; and they are not only to be men, but men *shining*. Luke brings in the heavenly company.
A.F.M. That kind of man has access to God.
J.T. If you come to God and say, 'I have a sacrifice', God would say, 'What about your brother?' and that tests you. God will not accept it apart from the brethren.
L.T.F. "First be reconciled to thy brother".
J.T. That is the order.
J.D. In the body you cannot afford to be without one member.
{202}
J.T. If you do not love your brother whom you have seen, you do not love God whom you have not seen.
W.C.R. Love always works for the good of its object.
J.T. And if you love God, you love your brother.
W.B-s. In Colossians, where it speaks of reconciliation, you get a great deal about loving one another; "and to all these add love". (@Colossians 3:14)
J.T. Quite so. It is well to consider carefully what the covenant is; what God proposes to effect by the covenant. He gave it to Israel directly they came out of Egypt, and the point was to *form them*. Now the book of Deuteronomy contemplates that the first covenant was not effective, so that there is, in a sense, a second covenant: see chapter 29:1.
E.H.T. Do you get the expression of the new covenant in Christ laying down His life?
J.T. Yes.
J.B. Does reconciliation, as we are now looking at it, bring in the headship of Christ? It would not be possible unless He were Head.
J.T. I think the way the truth works is, that the Lord has come in and shown what it is to love a neighbour. He has shown the spirit of the covenant. @John 13 is the spirit of the covenant. He has expressed it in order that it might become formative in us, and as it becomes formative there is a company for God's pleasure.
G.A.T. Is a man neighbour to his wife supposing they are breaking bread together?
J.T. I do not think a man's wife could be his neighbour. I do not think a man and his wife could express the truth of the assembly.
J.L.J. Would you say they should not break bread together?
J.T. I do not think they should. I do not think they could express the truth of the assembly. Under
{203}
such circumstances it is more seemly to wait on the Lord to add others.
J.D. That is very good, and a check to isolation.
J.T. For the assembly to be expressed you must have saints together according to God.
B.T.F. And this is impossible except as we love one another; where envy and strife are, assembly privilege cannot be enjoyed.
J.T. It is really out of the question. If you approach God in such wise He would say to you, What about your brother?
W.B-s. Two men spoken of in Scripture are a contrast to what you have been speaking of: Cain and Abel: *what* a contrast!
A.A.T. Is there a difference between love and fellowship?
J.T. I do not understand fellowship apart from love. In the beginning of Acts we read, "And they continued stedfastly in the apostles¬ doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers". (@Acts 2:42) Now that is the statement of a fact as to what took place in the early days of Christianity. But before that statement they were set in relation to one another in affection. I do not see any testimony in the saints coming together unless they love one another.
W.B-s. The Corinthians were not going on well together, there were some eating before the others.
J.T. And so the apostle says they were coming together "for the worse", for they were coming together without love.
W.L.P. What about brethren with whom we cannot have fellowship in the breaking of bread? Those in other meetings who have left us, for instance? We love them, do we not?
J.T. You cannot go on with them because of certain principles they have adopted; for these principles are incompatible with love.
{204}
A.A.T. Do you mean that we should not love them?
J.T. You *should* love them, but you cannot go on with them on account of the principles they have adopted; if there are those who recognise the authority of the scriptures, continuing stedfastly in the apostles¬ doctrine, you are glad to go on with them. Why do you come to meet the saints?
A.McB. Because I love them.
J.T. That is the reason, and apart from that there is nothing in meeting them.
O.J.O. The Lord says, "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another, as I have loved you". (@John 13:34)
J.T. Some people say, 'I am going to meet the Lord'. Others say, 'I am going to break bread'. Now neither expression is strictly correct. Because before you can break bread according to Scripture, or meet the Lord with your brethren, you must be in relation to them.
A.F.M. In @Matthew 18 we are exhorted to treat a certain one as a heathen and a publican. How do you understand a scripture like that? Is he past admonition? Would he be breaking bread?
J.T. That is a matter of discipline. I am speaking now of the saints coming together. Before you can meet the Lord in the breaking of bread the saints must come together.
W.B-s. It is like `394:1: "Jesus, Lord, we come together in the bonds of Thine own love".
J.T. That is it. "Upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came together to break bread". (@Acts 20:7) It says they *came together*, and this is an important point.
W.G.R. And the basis of it is confidence and love.
G.A.T. Sometimes we find in a meeting that one or two have a dispute. What would you say about
{205}
their coming together? Is it right for those two to come together to break bread?
J.T. If you come to God under those conditions, God would say, as it were, 'What about your brother' So the word is, "Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift". (@Matthew 5:24) God will not accept you on any other ground than that, and the principle of the assembly lies in it; that is, that we must be in relationship with one another in affection.
A.McB. There could not be any approach unless reconciliation is seen, and that depends on the covenant.
J.T. God's heart is set on man. Man, the kind of man as is expressed in Christ, is His ideal. Now that is the Hebrew servant. He sets forth the kind of man that God takes pleasure in; and in order that we should approach God, and have a place in the land of Canaan, we must be formed after that Man.
G.A.T. If I have a feeling against my brother, would you think that I should not come together till that feeling is removed?
R.S.S. It says, "when ye stand praying *forgive".* (@Mark 11:25) If you do not, God will not hear you. I am sure if people were really praying, and had any feeling against a brother, they would not be long on their knees without being exercised in regard to him, and you would judge everything that is in your heart against that brother, even if there was good ground for the feeling. It is very simple if people would only act on the scripture.
J.T. The golden altar expresses it. There the incense was offered up. That is what is for God's pleasure. It is in practical Christian unity, the unity of affection, that God has His pleasure.
J.L.J. Would you say we cannot reach the golden altar without being in the activity of love?
{206}
J.T. I am perfectly sure we cannot.
S.T. What is implied in "Leave there thy gift before the altar"? (@Matthew 5:24)
J.T. It refers to what you bring to God. But God will not accept your profession of love to Him unless you love your brother.
B.T.F. Would you say the incense would represent the sweetness and perfection of Christ which the heart would be filled with?
J.T. Yes; it is what Christ is as Man before God.
J.L.J. Would the last part of @Leviticus 21, where it speaks of certain who had blemishes not being permitted to offer the bread of his God, be connected with what we are speaking of?
J.T. That passage illustrates God's consideration for us. There are those who *partake* of divine things who have not access to God. There are many in Christendom who benefit from the light, but they have no access to God themselves. But you do not want to be among those, you want to have access to God, and there is no possibility of it apart from that affection which the covenant suggests. I think the thought in the golden altar, which was a cubit square, was unity. It refers to the unity of spiritual affections which is only found amongst Christians.
Rem. As regards coming together, it says, they "came together to break bread". (@Acts 20:7) In @Acts 2 it is said they broke bread in the house, at home. There they were still owning the temple, for they continued daily with one accord in the temple and broke bread at home.
R.S.S. Does that refer to the Lord's supper?
J.T. I think so. But when you come to @Acts 20, it says they came together to break bread, and that is where the assembly is fully seen. I mention it now, because we have such vague ideas as to the breaking of bread and meeting the Lord. As I was saying, it is often said, 'I am going to break bread',
{207}
or 'I am going to meet the Lord'. Now, suppose you are the only one there, you cannot break bread. Therefore we come *together*. That is the first thing.
R.S.S. And is the expression, 'I am going to meet the Lord', not correct?
J.T. It is not according to the order in Scripture. You must meet the saints first.
A.F.M. And you break bread because He is absent.
J.T. We come together as those that love Him and one another.
R.S.S. What is it that constitutes the assembly In function?
J.T. I think it is when the Lord has His place. It is in function then.
J.D. Is it practically possible?
J.T. It would be to admit complete failure to say that it were not. It was possible at the beginning. The saints were together in the enjoyment of Christ as Head.
G.A.T. Would you say that we should come together on the principle of verse 6 of this chapter: "he is not here"?
J.T. Yes; but you come together with those you love.
A.McB. You go to a room to meet a company of people whom you love.
J.T. Exactly.
W.L.P. The purpose of those who come together is to break bread, is it not?
J.T. Yes. But it is as having met your brethren. We come *together* to break bread.
J.S. Still the breaking of bread is the rallying spot?
J.T. Yes. But with all that you meet the saints first.
L.T.F. It all involves that you cannot pass by your brother to meet the Lord.
J.T. That is the point.
{208}
A.A.T. What would you do where a brother does not recognise right principles, and it is difficult for you to come together with him in that sense?
J.T. That brings in another consideration. The assembly has the prerogative of discipline, and, as our brother referred to, in @Matthew 18, we have light. We have to deal with evil. But then it is all on the same principle of love. It is because you love him. You want to remove sin from the assembly and from your brother.
A.McB. I must be in the power of affection myself.
A.F.M. What you are suggesting is that we rub shoulders with each other during the week.
W.B-s. Though the state is required, the Object before us is the Lord Himself.
J.T. Yes. But God has pleasure in Christian affection. Hence, as gathered, the saints are for God's pleasure. Now you can understand the Lord would come in there. He can identify Himself with that, and in that connection you get headship, and the assembly in function.
E.H.T. That is where He "commanded the blessing", @Psalm 133.
J.T. Israel went into the wilderness. It is one thing to go *into* the wilderness and another thing to come *out* of the wilderness. The covenant is really in the wilderness. It was made with the people at Horeb, and the thought in it was that they should be for God's pleasure, a company coming out of the wilderness for God's pleasure. It is said, "Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved?" (@Song of Songs 8:5). That is to say, Israel goes into the wilderness and comes out of it, but she comes out of it supported by Christ. She is leaning on her beloved. I think that *we* should come out of the wilderness in all the dignity of companionship with Christ.
{209}
R.S.S. Do you refer to the assembly?
J.T. Yes.
W.L.P. Coming up out of the wilderness is going into the land.
B.T.F. Do the men in shining garments indicate resurrection?
J.T. I think they represent the heavenly company. It is in keeping with Luke. Luke gives us the *excess of grace*. Luke contemplates that the disciples should have their names written in heaven.
A.F.M. And the Lord is there said to be "carried up". That is characteristic of Luke. Everything goes to heaven in Luke. "Peace in heaven" is another feature.
J.T. What can go up to heaven except what is to God's pleasure? Whenever we come together it should be in the sense that we are for God's pleasure and qualified to be translated. We do not consciously enter into the thought of the assembly unless we are conscious of being qualified for translation, because God translates that which is for His pleasure.
W.B-s. Of Enoch it is said, that "Before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God". (@Hebrews 11:5)
E.H.T. Would you say that we are near translation on the Lord's day morally, as we are gathered in the Spirit, but we must continue in affection?
J.T. There is nothing incongruous between the assembly, viewed normally, and heaven. Normally it is constituted for heaven.
J.S. I suppose you could love your brother and yet not love his ways.
J.T. If his ways are incompatible with love you would endeavour to correct them. "Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him". (@Leviticus 19:17) It is a very wholesome injunction, because we know very often it requires courage.
{210}
J.S. That is very good; that is what will come, courage for that.
J.T. Yes, to tell him frankly what the difficulty really is.
O.J.O. What if the brother will not hear you?
J.T. Then you have the word to take another with you. Two brothers going to a brother are liable to reach a man more easily than one.
E.S.T. And if it comes to the extreme, "let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican"; (@Matthew 18:17) but that does not indicate any cessation of your love.
J.T. No; it is the best service you can render to him. Really souls under discipline are often hindered by some who disregard the discipline; you can only damage them by disregarding the discipline they are under.
W.L.P. It is really love to separate from a brother who is walking badly.
J.L.J. "Faithful are the wounds of a friend". (@Proverbs 27:6)
J.B. The one put away according to 1 Corinthians is to be the subject of their care, and they are to receive him back lest he be swallowed up of overmuch sorrow, according to the second epistle.
J.T. If the sin is judged, there is nothing left but to restore him.
W.B-s. What is the thought of @1 Corinthians 11; "Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat". (@1 Corinthians 11:28) Does it embrace what we are speaking of, or is it between him and the Lord?
J.T. As we approach the Supper we should judge ourselves. We should eat as self-judged persons.
W.B-s. That is personal.
J.T. Yes. But then you want to come to the shining side. Without self-judgment we miss the shining; "the tribes *go up".* It is in that connection you get what shines.
A.A.T. Going up as worshippers?
J.T. You draw near to God.
{211}
A.McB. "Arise, shine, for thy light is come". (@Isaiah 60:1) Is that the thought?
J.T. Yes. "The glory of Jehovah is risen upon thee". (@Isaiah 60:1)
A.R.S. The queen of Sheba saw Solomon's ascent to the house of the Lord.
J.T. Yes; it is very suggestive. It does not say his ascent to his throne, but to the house of the Lord. That is what affected the queen of Sheba, and wherever you have an upward movement, that is the effect.
R.S.S. What does it mean by saying, to the house of the Lord?
J.T. The house of the Lord was on the elevated plain. It was raised. The principle was that you had to go *up* to it; in order to go up to the house of the Lord you have to be exercised. It is not on a level with your ordinary path.
G.A.H. What Jacob said when he went up to Bethel is suggestive, "Put away the strange gods that are among you". (@Genesis 35:2)
J.T. The house of the Lord is on an elevated plain.
G.A.T. The effect on the queen of Sheba was, that it left no spirit in her.
A.F.M. Is the shining garment involved in the passage -- "as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly"? (@1 Corinthians 15:48)
J.T. Quite so.
G.A.H. If the conditions of which you have been speaking are found amongst the brethren, that which follows will be easy.
J.T. Quite so. Then it is wonderful how things work out. It is in a company where love is active that God is complacent. That company is in the good of reconciliation.
G.A.T. The result would be blessing. "There the Lord commanded the blessing", (@Psalm 133:3).
{212}
RESURRECTION (4) - THE DIGNITY OF THE HEAVENLY COMPANY
@John 20:1 - 18
W.B-s. Do you think this scripture would crown what we had this morning? In Luke you get the company and here the Person.
J.T. Yes. And hence the dignity of those who have part in the resurrection, which is another thought, and, as regards us, perhaps the greatest thought.
E.H.T. Do you mean relationship?
J.T. I mean the dignity of those who are regarded as having part in the resurrection. One feels confirmed that in understanding the four records of the resurrection you have in your soul a wonderful foundation; the power of God; the character of the vessel in which the testimony is maintained; the order of humanity that has come in for God; the dignity attaching to those who are the companions of Christ as having part in it as His brethren. The latter is the most important side of the truth for us.
W.C.R. What would the two angels in white garments signify?
J.T. I think in John the two angels would point to the deference and honour paid to the Lord in view of His dignity. It was a question of the spot where He lay. It is not a question of power, but of the spot where He had lain.
R.S.S. "The one at the head, and the other at the feet".
J.T. Yes. Such care and interest are shown. The references to the clothing and the napkin, all showing the greatest interest in the spot, on account of the Person who had lain there.
{213}
B.T.F. Speaking about the spot, was that in line with the new sepulchre wherein man was never laid?
J.T. That, too, was a matter of divine interest and care. His murderers had "appointed his grave with the wicked, but he was with the rich in his death", (@Isaiah 53:9). That was a matter of divine care, and now that He has left the tomb for ever, the interest shown on the part of the angels, suggests to us the place that He had with them; the adoration in which He was held.
A.F.M. The character of things here is private in contrast to Matthew, where it is public.
J.T. Yes. One can see that the angel with countenance like lightning, and he sitting on the stone, had reference to what was outside, to the power, of evil. The young man of @Mark 16, on the other hand, would, as we have seen, suggest to us the energy in which the testimony would be maintained. But here in John, it is that which is peculiarly sacred and private. It was profound heavenly interest evinced in the angels sitting in this position, at His head and at His feet.
A.F.M. As elsewhere in this gospel, "the world seeth me no more". (@John 14:9) He does not appear in public any more; it is all with His disciples.
J.T. So that a worshipping spirit arises in the heart, and that is what we get in John. If the gospels do not produce that in us, they do not effect their complete work in us.
W.C.R. Do we not see in connection with Mary, and John, and Peter, a great concern as to His Person, the same concern as was evinced in the angels?
J.T. Mary was there thinking of His *body*.
W.C.R. And Peter and John as to the *place*.
A.A.T. Do you think that is the point that Paul had before him in writing to Timothy: "And
{214}
without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels"? (@1 Timothy 3:16)
J.T. Yes.
J.L.J. Angels looked down on His body and took account of Him as Man.
J.T. When you come to the end as John presents it, the scene becomes intensely sacred. It is a question of the affections being engaged, and it produces a worshipping spirit.
B.T.F. In @Psalm 91 we have: "For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways". (@Psalm 91:11) Would you in any way connect this with that charge?
J.T. "They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone". (@Psalm 91:12) They had watched His feet. Angels had been the custodians of His feet and His head. The woman in @Luke 7 anoints His feet, and so also did Mary according to John's report, but in Matthew she anoints His head.
A.F.M. His head in Matthew and His feet in John.
J.T. The feet refer to His walk and the head to His dignity. The woman in @Luke 7 showed how she appreciated those feet. It was a question of what they had carried to her. Whereas in @John 12 it was not simply what they had carried to Mary; she anointed Him in view of His burial, in view of the cross. His Person was before her.
W.C.R. In Romans we have, "How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace". (@Romans 10:15) That is what His feet brought to the woman in @Luke 7.
J.T. That is it. "How beautiful upon the *mountains*" (@Isaiah 52:7) is said in Isaiah. One can understand how she appreciated those feet, for what they had carried to her. I think the feet and the head taken together suggest to us what Christ was here as Man
{215}
on the one hand, and what He is in His own Person, His dignity, on the other hand.
S.T. What is the point in what is said of the priests who were carrying the ark of the testimony, that when their feet touched the Jordan it fled?
J.T. It is an allusion to Christ. It was when His feet touched death.
W.C.R. Men dishonoured His head in putting a crown of thorns on it.
J.T. The anointing of His head by Mary was in contrast to what man had put on His head.
G.A.T. Do the affections of Mary represent the affections of the assembly?
J.T. Yes, and ending in worship. The gospel of John produces a worshipping spirit in the saints.
J.L.J. Their affection in bringing the spices in @Luke 24 sets forth the affection that comes out in worship.
J.B. In @John 12 the house is filled with the odour of the ointment.
J.D. Do you distinguish between the dignity of the Head and the dignity of the position in which His brethren stand to Him?
J.T. Our dignity is necessarily defined by His. Would you not think so?
J.D. I was wondering if in this place it refers *personally* to Him.
J.T. That necessarily comes into view first.
J.D. Do you mean that the dignity of our position lies in our affinity of nature to Him as His brethren?
J.T. Yes, of course; they had no dignity in themselves. Their dignity lay in what the message conveyed. I mean that the light of their position is contained in the message sent to them.
J.D. I am supposing the relationship to be there.
J.T. The nature comes in afterwards. There must have been nature and affection suited to the relationship, but there must be the *light* of the
{216}
relationship first. We have here the message conveying the light of the relationship, and the Spirit coming in afterwards; "he breathed on them". The breath of Christ is that which produces subjectively what corresponds to the relationship contained in the message. Their dignity lay in the light contained in the message, just as a title conferred upon you by a superior confers dignity. The title gives you your position, but then you require support for that position. In fact, you require education for it.
J.D. I had no thought that they stood in any relationship to Him at all until He put them in that relationship, but once the relationship is known it lies in the affinity of nature.
J.T. Affinity of nature would exist after they received His breath.
J.D. I think so.
J.T. I feel it would help us enormously if we were enabled to read John's gospel, having in view that there might be a worshipping spirit. The assembly should be permeated by that. We were dwelling this morning on reconciliation. Reconciliation in result is really what we are to one another; what God sees in us in our relationship with one another, and apart from that we cannot approach. But when we come to John, we have suggested to us the idea of approach. We not only approach as reconciled, but we approach in dignity. Reconciliation alone is not enough, for I think reconciliation is general. Reconciliation is a general thought; all things are to be reconciled; but you require *dignity* to approach.
A.R.S. Is the dignity the position of being His brethren?
J.T. Quite so.
E.H.T. In @John 2 the Lord makes the water wine, showing His dignity in bringing joy into the whole universe, and Nicodemus at the end brings a hundred
{217}
pounds of spices; he is at the full height of worship.
J.T. Quite so. In our relationship with one another, we express what God delights in here on earth, but when you turn to God, you do so in the light of the dignity of your relationship with Him.
J.D. That is what I was going to ask. What is the value of relationship?
J.T. It is that it gives title to approach -- to enter the holiest.
J.D. It is close to sonship.
J.T. It *is* sonship, though not mentioned.
B.T.F. Would you not say that John's gospel particularly educates the soul in the divine nature so that we may rise to the dignity of our position?
J.T. And whilst it does that for us, it maintains the dignity of the Lord's Person, so that while you are in the enjoyment of your own dignity, as related to Him, a worshipping spirit pervades you.
B.T.F. Would you connect that with the Father seeking worshippers?
J.T. That is the point. John alone speaks of that, and if he conveys the mind of God as to what God is seeking, you may look for the means by which it is supplied. God does not simply intimate what He desires, but also the means by which that is to be supplied; and I think John's gospel does that.
A.F.M. In @Psalm 133 you have brethren. In the last Song of degrees you have, "Lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bless Jehovah". (@Psalm 134:2) That is the same idea.
J.T. @Psalm 133 is what is for God's pleasure (reconciliation), and hence there is blessing *publicly*, but @Psalm 134 is God's portion *within*. "Bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord, which by night stand in the house of the Lord". (@Psalm 134:1)
A.A.T. Does not the measure in which we appreciate the Person of the Lord help us in the enjoyment of our relationships?
{218}
J.T. I think so. Everything is arrived at in your soul by considering Him.
J.D. The Lord's personal dignity is always prominent. So, whilst you enjoy the dignity of your own portion with Him, you have at the same time a worshipping spirit in accord with Christ.
W.B-s. Does that accord with Hebrews? In chapter 1 you get that He is anointed with the oil of gladness above His companions, and in chapter 2 you get His brethren; that is, His dignity in the first chapter, and our place with Him in the second.
J.T. One feels how admirably the wisdom of the Spirit is expressed in an epistle like that to the Hebrews; He first lays the foundation in the soul as to the greatness of the Lord's Person, and then He can build up the truth in regard to *our* dignity as associated with Christ. So the end reached in @Hebrews 7 is, that "such an high priest became us". (@Hebrews 7:26) The *us* there is where the emphasis is; he can well afford to emphasise the word "us", because he has already laid the foundation as to the unique place of Christ; hence the importance of our having it thus in our souls.
G.A.T. Would @Hebrews 2 and @John 20 go together: the Sanctifier and the sanctified are all of one; "go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God"; relationship claimed in heaven and on earth.
J.T. Along with that you have the word, "I ascend". That is unique to Him. That guards His Person.
J.L.J. Does not @John 20 go beyond @Hebrews 2? Those who come into the blessing of the kingdom on earth enjoy @Hebrews 2, whereas @John 20 carries us into our position before the Father as His sons.
J.T. I do not think, that they will come into @Hebrews 2 in the sense of "he that sanctifieth and
{219}
they who are sanctified are all of one". (@Hebrews 2:11) That is peculiar to the assembly.
E.H.T. Is not John greater than Hebrews? In Hebrews you get praise, but in John worship. Worship is higher than praise.
J.T. You hardly *get* worship in John; chapter 12 comes near it, but the thought that the *Father seeks* worshippers.
R.S.S. You intimated a little while ago, that if the question of worship is raised, and the *Father seeks it* as stated in the earlier part of the gospel, it would be indicated how God's end is reached, and how *we* reach it. Can you say a little on that?
J.T. I think it is reached on the lines on which we are dwelling now. The dignity of the Lord's Person is brought before us; so that John's gospel, in a sense, is the greatest of the gospels, and so it treats of God's direct dealings with the soul. You do not get any official intermediary in John as in the other gospels. The other gospels present what is official, whereas in John you find the Lord dealing directly with souls. Many instances you find in John's gospel of the Lord holding personal interviews with souls. For instance, Nicodemus, the woman of Samaria, and the man in chapter 9. All these are indicative of this, that it is a question of God dealing directly with souls. The official class is ignored.
R.S.S. Will you give an instance of the official class?
J.T. In chapter 4 there is a striking instance. The disciples had gone into the city to buy bread. That casts a slight on them for they had all gone and left the Lord. He was alone, but as alone He is engaged with the *spiritual*. He says in chapter 3, "The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand". (@John 3:35) Things were not given into any other hands. The Son is dispensing it all Himself. So in the next chapter He says, "If thou knewest
{220}
the gift of God, and *who* it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". (@John 4:10) That brings out His Person. He is endeavouring to give that woman's soul an apprehension of Himself in His dignity. I think the disciples ought to have been there. I have no difficulty in making that remark. There was no need that they should *all* have gone into the city. Buying provision was a secondary matter, and He was left alone.
A.McB. In @John 6, in feeding the multitude, He does not hand the food to the disciples, but directly to the multitude.
J.T. I had not thought of that. It is a very good connection; it shows that the official class is not formally owned in John.
A.McB. I am glad you called attention to the Lord Jesus in the dignity of His Person in the *whole* of this gospel.
J.A.R. The relationship in which we are set leads to what God is seeking; that is worship.
M. When the disciples in Acts appointed a number to wait on tables, one of them, Stephen, was advanced beyond that, showing that there was a difference; not that he ignored the work, but he was given work beyond it.
B.T.F. If we do not get actual worship in John's gospel, do we not get a beautiful picture of it in chapter 12, when Mary anoints the Lord's feet and the house is filled with the odour of the ointment?
R.S.S. What would create the spirit of worship is the revelation and the appreciation of the Person of Christ, the knowledge of Himself. So that the very object of this gospel is that we might know that He is the Christ, the Son of God, chapter 20:31.
J.T. "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him". (@John 4:10) That is the gain of
{221}
light in the soul. That leads on to the great end that the Lord refers to in speaking to the woman. She says, "Our fathers worshipped in this mountain"; (@John 4:20) she connected the worship of God with a *place*, but the Lord says to her, "the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship him. God is a Spirit: and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth". (@John 4:23,24) "In spirit and in truth" involves the revelation that you allude to.
J.D. Would you distinguish what *He* does as a divine Person, and what God *does for Him*. It seems to me there are two lines. What He does Himself as a divine Person; and what God does *for Him* as here in Manhood. It seems to me that there is a difference between ascension and exaltation.
J.T. In Luke it is said He was "carried up into heaven". That is the human side. "Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted". (@Acts 2:33) From the point of view of His own dignity as in John, He ascends Himself. In Acts He is *received* into heaven. In John it is "*I ascend".* That is the divine side. So in John it is what He does Himself. For instance, He dismisses His spirit. In chapters 18 and 19 He is supreme. Even in regard to His enemies, He is not the sufferer in John. He is supreme, and even in regard to the giving up of His life, it is an act of power.
A.McB. In the garden it is an act of power to hand Himself over to the people who sought Him.
J.T. He is ordering everything in John, and then "knowing that all things were now accomplished" (@John 19:28) He says, "It is finished". I think the effect of that on one's soul is to produce worship, so that when we come to this passage it is peculiarly sacred.
G.A.T. What is the difference between worship and praise?
{222}
J.T. Praise is more demonstrative. Praise is the outcome of your admiration of the Person. I think the element of worship may be in praise, but worship in itself is scarcely expressed.
B.T.F. What is the incense from the golden altar in @Revelation 8:3? Would that be worship?
J.T. It is the fragrance of Christ as Man. That is hardly worship. The incense is that which is of Christ ascending up to God in the prayers of the saints.
B.T.F. Would not souls in the assembly, with profound conviction of the excellency of Christ and His perfections, express worship to the Father?
J.T. Yes; but prayer is on the ground of human merit; what Christ is as Man, as far as I understand it. God could not answer a lawless man, and that is what man is in Adam, and hence prayer must be answered on the ground of what Christ is. Even in the Old Testament you see that in some sense.
B.T.F. Do you connect the golden altar with prayer exclusively?
J.T. I think so. It was outside of the holiest. It was before the veil and I think it suggests to us what Christ is as Man. So in @John 17 you get the golden altar.
A.McB. Human merit would refer to Christ in humanity.
J.L.J. In @Hebrews 9 you get the golden censer.
J.T. That is another thought. We are speaking of the golden *altar*. The golden altar has reference to prayer and the excellence of Christ there. What Christ is as Man and what we are in relation to Him, as such, necessarily accompanies worship. But worship is the outcome of our appreciation of divine Persons. There must be in us that which God delights in, and in us in identification with Christ before God. That is the golden censer in the holiest.
{223}
A.F.M. In answer to the question of worship, you were saying just now when we worship there is not activity in man.
J.T. I think it is too deep. It is the deep appreciation in the soul of what the Father is as revealed in Christ.
J.B. Does not Thomas touch it when he says, "My Lord and my God"?
J.T. He came under the influence of a greater One, but I doubt if that goes beyond *homage*.
J.B. It seems to me that what is taken up there is the effect of the presentation of Christ personally to Israel, and the response of Thomas goes a long way.
J.T. I doubt if it goes beyond homage. I do not think the Jewish remnant will worship in the holiest.
A.A.T. I have heard that praise is the sacrifice of the lips and worship of the heart.
J.T. I think worship is a profound thing. It is difficult to define it.
J.S. I suppose there are two things that the Jew will not do: one is that he will not go within the veil, and the other that he will not go without the camp.
J.T. Quite so; the camp will be reinstated. I think the veil will be up in the millennial world.
B.T.F. Will you pursue your thought about @John 17 in connection with the golden altar? I had rather supposed that @John 17 is the closest place that a soul could be brought to, that is the Son addressing the Father in perfect freedom.
J.T. But the prayer has reference to a world of defilement, and the saints here. Prayer contemplates a scene of need, and therefore is, strictly speaking, in the holy place.
B.T.F. Is @John 17 outside the veil?
J.T. I do not like to define, seeing the Lord Himself is addressing the Father, but in view of what
{224}
I remarked, I believe it is more correct to connect it with the holy place.
J.D. The whole universe will be, in a sense, pleasurable in the world to come.
R.S.S. Is not praise more connected with what the Lord has *done*, whereas worship is connected with what He *is*, with what divine Persons are and the measure of our knowledge and appreciation of them.
J.T. I think `235:1 is a good illustration of what praise is and the ground of it.
<blockquote>"We'll praise Thee, glorious Lord".</blockquote>
It is a celebration of what He has done for us, which is very befitting in those who have benefited by the Lord's work. There is the song of Moses also. But worship is the soul's knowledge of divine Persons, of the Deity as revealed.
W.B-s. @Psalm 45 would be on that line.
J.T. There it is not what the King *does*, but what He *is*. "Grace is poured into thy lips". (@Psalm 45:2) I think that is a very good suggestion of what worship is. "I speak of the things which I have made touching the king". (@Psalm 45:1) He had composed something and it had reference to the King, and He goes on to speak of the King and His beauty.
A.R.S. In @Revelation 5, where the twenty-four elders worship, we are not told that they say anything. It is the overflow of the heart.
J.T. That is it.
A.R.S. In praise what they say is often given, but not *here*.
J.T. We do have a record of what is said in Revelation by others, but not what the elders say in worship.
W.L.P. You can praise without singing.
J.T. I think we have illustration of that. In the utterances of Mary and Zacharias in the beginning of Luke you find praise.
{225}
G.A.T. The man in @Acts 3 praises for what has been done to him.
J.D. What in the soul is the basis of worship?
J.T. I think worship, according to John, would be the worship of those in known relationship with divine Persons, not doing homage as Israel and the nations will, which is admiration for God, but not in known relationship as *we* have it. Now the relationship is defined in this chapter; His Father our Father and His God our God, so that the basis of worship in our souls is the knowledge of God revealed and the knowledge of the relationship in which we are set to Him.
J.D. In Christ as Man.
J.T. Quite so, and that is the highest order of worship; higher than angelic worship.
A.R.S. In @John 9 the blind man worshipped when he discovered that Jesus was the Son of God.
J.T. He did, but what is in mind in @John 4 is unique. It expresses more than that, more than falling down and doing homage.
F.A. Does adoring come near the thought of worship?
J.T. That is a question of the meaning of the word. The word in @John 4 is a word that expresses Christian worship. The Lord is *distinguishing* here. He says, "ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship *the Father*", (@John 4:21) it has reference to Christian worship. The Lord is distinguishing between Gerizim and Jerusalem and Christian worship.
A.F.M. Is there such a thing as individual worship? In @John 4 it is in the plural.
J.T. I think that is the divine thought. God's thought is to have a company.
A.F.M. What about @John 14? "If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
{226}
abode with him". (@John 14:23) I admit it is what the Father and Son would do, but would not that produce the spirit of worship?
J.T. Yes, no doubt.
A.A.T. Is the thought of life in any way connected with these relationships?
J.T. The question of life is solved in this gospel before you come to chapter 10. The question of life has to do with each of us individually. The purpose of God is unfolded in chapter 3, and it is that the believer should have life. In chapter 4 the power is in the Spirit; that is to say, the affections of a man are gathered up by the Spirit and set on divine Persons, so that they are springing up into everlasting life. Chapter 5 refers to the sphere of life; you pass from death into life; and chapter 6 is the food, that by which your constitution is built up for it, because you cannot enter into the sphere of life without a suitable constitution. I think the problem of life is thus solved. Then in chapter 8 you have additional thoughts, of following the Lord; and in chapter 9 we find the kind of man that follows Him, and how the Lord leads him out of the worldly fold into the flock. Eternal life was designed for Israel, and Christ was there to make it effective for them, but they would not come to Him that they might have it. Now, He says, I will give it to the sheep. So that eternal life is transferred from the Jews to the sheep. Therefore eternal life is now realised in the flock. I give to my sheep eternal life. That is one section of the gospel. The question of life is thus settled. Therefore, in referring to His brethren in chapter 20, the Lord is not alluding to their having everlasting life; that is already solved, but the point is the dignity of their position. The idea of eternal life is general; it belongs to all, but what is in chapter 20 does not belong to all. This is unique. That is why I felt encouraged to refer to
{227}
this chapter. It shows the dignity of those who have part in the resurrection.
B.T.F. You say eternal life is for all; you mean for every family.
J.T. It was involved in the gospel preached to Abraham.
R.S.S. You spoke of that section of this gospel in which the question of eternal life is dealt with. Does that section close in chapter 12?
J.T. I think in chapter 10. Chapters 11 and 12 have reference to the Lord Himself, giving additional testimonies to Him as Son of God. I omitted one thought as to eternal life, and that is in chapter 12. Winding up the case with the Jews, the Lord says, the Father's "commandment is life everlasting". (@John 12:50) That is a wonderful statement, and He had come to Israel to make it effective for them. They would not come to Him, but then He would not turn aside from the Father's commandment; it must he effective, and it *is* effective in the *sheep*.
A.B.S. Is the Father's commandment that He should give eternal life?
J.T. The Father's commandment *was* eternal life, and the Son was here to make it effective. Hence the word *sent* is the key to John's gospel. The Lord was here to carry out the will of God.
J.B. All these things lead up to the knowledge of the Father in the way He is spoken of here.
J.T. If you go through the teaching of the early part of the gospel, you are prepared for this chapter.
G.A.T. Does it make a difference as to whether "God" or "Father" comes first?
J.T. The Spirit has placed "Father" first.
G.A.T. It is often quoted the other way. Is there any difference?
J.T. I think "My God" has reference to what came out in His path here; *that* Man's God is now our God.
{228}
G.A.H. Why is it "Father" first?
J.T. Father places us in relationship at once. That is the link of affection, it is the thought of Father and Son, but when you come to God it is God and man.
W.B-s. In Ephesians it is "God" first. "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ". (@Ephesians 1:3)
A.A.T. I should like to ask a question as to dignity. Is not liberty connected with dignity?
J.T. I think it is. The dignity involved in the message gives you liberty of access. If you receive the light of the message, you have liberty of access.
E.H.T. Has the thought of "my Father" the idea of a family in it?
J.T. It is the link of affection.
E.H.T. Why does God come afterwards?
J.T. Because you must have the thought of God and *man*.
A.F.M. You connect the title "Son of God" with Father, and "Son of man" with God.
J.T. Yes. I think there are two thoughts; Father and Son, the family idea; and then, God and man.
J.D. Do you think in the eternal state the thought of Father and Son will be there as well as that of God and man?
J.T. I do. I think both relationships will remain, because they are primal thoughts, both God and man, and Father and Son.
J.D. They are connected with counsel.
J.T. @1 Corinthians 15 speaks of the Son delivering up the kingdom to God, that God may be all in all; and then the tabernacle of God is with men, @Revelation 21. The relationship of Father and Son will also be there.
B.T.F. Is not the thought of God and man common to every family, whereas the thought of Father and Son belongs to the assembly alone, and in a peculiar way?
{229}
J.T. I think it does *here*. "My Father, and your Father". That is unique. No other circle will enter into that except the assembly.
B.T.F. But God and man belong to every family.
J.T. Clearly.
G.A.T. "Behold I and the children which God hath given me". (@Hebrews 2:13)
J.T. It is rather a position here on earth that is alluded to there. I doubt if the idea of children goes into eternity. It is what Christ had as rejected by Israel, children instead of the nation of Israel.
R.S.S. And to whom does it refer?
J.T. To the Jewish disciples, those who were attached to Him in His humiliation. While Jehovah's face was hid from the house of Jacob, He gave children to the Messiah.
R.S.S. What is the application of that sign now?
J.T. There is no application except that we come into the place of children, but it refers strictly to the Jewish remnant. It does not reach to the truth of the assembly.
J.D. Your remark in connection with the Father and Son going on to eternity is, I think, morally right.
J.B. Do we not get in @John 20, God's original thoughts in regard to man consummated?
J.T. I think we do. From the outset of man's creation you have the idea of Father and Son, and God and man. The idea of Father and Son was placed in the heart of the race, in the human family. That is the testimony to what is in the heart of God, and it awaited Christ to come and give it form. This chapter shows it *has* taken form.
J.B. According to God's thought at the very beginning.
J.T. Quite so. The original thought of God has been reached, and that is eternal.
J.L.J. In @1 Corinthians 15 we get the kingdom
{230}
delivered up to God, even the Father, and "then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all". (@1 Corinthians 15:28)
J.D. It seems that in connection with revelation, the respective places which the Persons of the Godhead have taken, they will never give up in eternity. God is found as Father, and Christ as Man, and the Holy Spirit pervading the whole universe.
W.B-s. I would like to ask a question as to worship. We get the Father and the Son in John, and God and Christ in Hebrews. What do you understand by the different terms? Evidently in Hebrews you do not get Father and Son, but God and Christ, and yet it is connected with worship. They are *priests* in Hebrews, but in John, *brethren*. How does priesthood affect us as Christians?
J.T. Hebrews does not take us as far as family relationship; the point is to show that we have title to enter the holiest. I would connect relationship more with the land of promise. Hence it would be more worship there in the consciousness of family relationship. There is a difference between worshipping God viewed in His greatness, and worshipping the Father with whom we are in relationship; *that* belongs to us.
R.S.S. And that is John.
J.T. Yes, and hence the basis of relationship is God revealed as Father to us, and our being set in relationship to Him as our Father, as the companions of Christ. It will not be the basis of relationship for others.
R.S.S. Is the sphere in Hebrews connected with the wilderness?
J.T. The tabernacle supposes the wilderness.
J.L.J. Is there a veil up in Hebrews for us?
J.T. Yes, we go *through* it.
A.F.M. In @John 4 it says, "God is a Spirit: and
{231}
they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth". (@John 4:24) And then in the same chapter, "The Father seeketh such to worship him". (@John 4:23) Are we viewed as worshipping God in both characters?
J.T. "God is a Spirit". Worship is not in a place, nor in connection with what is material. It is in connection with what is spiritual. But the Person before your soul is the Father. You recognise that He is God, but you are in relationship with Him as Father. That sets a peculiar kind of affection into activity.
G.A.H. But you said that two things remain, that is, God and man, and Father and Son. The Father and Son is the character of the relationship we may enter into after the breaking of the bread.
J.T. Yes. I think the land of Canaan is not exactly the holiest, although the holiest is involved, but relationship with divine Persons involves Canaan. That is the sphere of relationships. The holiest contemplates a scene of defilement outside, otherwise the terms have no force, but Canaan is a sphere of relationships. It is the land God has as His. We have been speaking this morning of "Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness?" But she is "leaning upon her beloved". (@Song of Songs 8:5) The Lord supports you *out* of the wilderness.
{232}
TRANSLATION, WHAT FITS MAN FOR IT MORALLY
@1 Thessalonians 4:13 - 18
J.T. I think it may be well for us to consider what it is that is to be translated before we come to the actual question of translation.
R.S.S. It is only what is of God in us that will go to heaven.
J.T. Yes. I think the second epistle to the Corinthians helps us as to what it is that goes up.
R.S.S. Do you mean chapter 5?
J.T. Yes. "If any one be in Christ, there is a new creation; the old things have passed away; behold all things have become new: and all things are of the God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ". (@2 Corinthians 5:17,18) And then Paul says later on, "I know a man in Christ ... caught up to the third heaven"; (@2 Corinthians 12:2) referring to what took place fourteen years before. It is a *man in Christ;* it is such an one as that who is translated.
B.T.F. That involves deliverance, does it not?
J.T. Yes, and it involves new creation.
J.L.J. Would that also involve the new body as in @2 Corinthians 5:1?
J.T. Yes.
J.D. Will you open out a little the thought of the "man in Christ"?
J.T. The transference of the soul from Adam to Christ is of all-importance to understand. The apostle begins the subject here by stating that when he thought of God he was beside himself. He was in an ecstasy but if he was sober it was on account of the saints here; that is to say, as far as his affections and desires went he was content to be always out of ordinary reckonings; his joys were all bound up
{233}
with God; so that if he were "sober" and came back to ordinary conditions here it was only on account of the saints, because they were here. If we are sober it is for your sakes, he says, that we are sober. And then he goes on to say, "For the love of Christ constraineth us; because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead: and that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again". (@2 Corinthians 5:14,15) That is to say, he gives us the benefit of his judgment as to things here, as to the import and the bearing of the death of Christ; and it involved that all had died.
S.T. What is the meaning of the word sober there?
J.T. It signifies that he is in ordinary conditions of life in flesh and blood here in contrast to being in an ecstasy, where he was outside of the ordinary conditions. Taking account of the saints is the only reason why he came back to these conditions, because the saints were in them. It was needful for their sakes. Of course, with most of us it is different. People have families and the like, and they have to come back for the sake of their families, but in Paul's case it was only because of the saints that he came back.
R.S.S. "I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better: nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you". (@Philippians 1:23,24) That is the scripture you refer to.
J.T. No; but it supports what we are speaking of. This scripture says he was beside himself in regard of God; in that his life and joy lay. It all lay in connection with God; but he adds, "whether we be sober, it is for your cause". (@2 Corinthians 5:14) He was thinking of them.
J.D. Chapter 12 would be the other side; a man in Christ taken up.
{234}
A.F.M. What you have been saying is characteristic of "a man in Christ".
J.T. That is how the apostle opens the subject, and then he goes on to say, "We thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead: and that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again". (@2 Corinthians 5:14,15)
A.F.M. How do we become men in Christ?
J.T. I was going to seek to point out that progress to the realisation of it is seen in a judgment such as Paul had formed. He formed a judgment as to things here in the light of the death of Christ, that if He died for all, then all had died.
R.S.S. And in that way man in Adam is terminated, and that makes room for man in Christ.
J.T. That is it. So, "though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more". So he says, "If any one be in Christ, there is a new creation". (@2 Corinthians 5:16,17) That is clear. If all were dead in Adam, it is clear that new creation is essential.
R.S.S. Is all this in a moral sense?
J.T. Yes. Men are not actually dead, of course, any more than they were when God said, "The end of all flesh is come before me". (@Genesis 6:13) It did not actually come for one hundred and twenty years afterwards, but it was true morally.
W.G.R. He said to Adam, "In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die". (@Genesis 2:17)
J.T. "In the day". Quite so; he was as good as dead when he ate of the tree; and so @Genesis 5 is to show that although men lived a long time, nine hundred and sixty-nine years, for instance, yet they *died*.
R.S.S. "In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die". (@Genesis 2:17) Was it not that the seeds of death began to work in him from that moment?
{235}
J.T. Death followed sin as a penalty. There would be literal dissolution, of course, but when Adam sinned he died in God's account. God does not count a matter of years. It is that that order of being has been terminated judicially.
R.S.S. A day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as a day. That would apply in Adam's case.
J.T. What is seventy years to God? Nearly all those living now will have died ordinarily in that time.
J.B. The import of death morally is distance from God.
J.T. It is a penalty. Of course actual dissolution occurs, but from God's point of view that is a detail.
J.L.J. "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive". (@1 Corinthians 15:22) That is the thought.
J.T. In Adam all die. That is a statement. *When* it occurs is a matter of no account, though it *does* occur.
W.B-s. "Dying thou shall die". That is the marginal reading. That is, death will take place.
J.T. There was the inauguration of the reign of death directly Adam sinned, and death reigned from Adam to Moses, not simply when Adam died, but from the moment he sinned. In "dying thou shall die". The reign of death set in then, and it reigned from Adam to Moses. If it did not actually occur in many till they lived to be nine hundred years, nevertheless it was *there*.
G.A.T. I suppose Abel was the first to come under its power.
J.T. That is remarkable. The first to die literally is, we may say, a child of God, a believer.
S.T. In what is said of the judgment-seat in the beginning of this, @2 Corinthians 5, do we have the bringing of that first order to an end to make room for new creation?
{236}
J.T. I think the judgment formed by the apostle leads to that; the necessity for new creation is obvious.
J.B. If God brings in life it must be by new creation.
J.T. It must be so in our case. God must act as at the beginning. "For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts" (@2 Corinthians 4:6) so in new creation God begins over again.
W.B-s. Though death was the judgment of God, the first death literally was by the power of evil. Abel was killed by his brother, who was of that wicked one.
J.T. Satan took up death afterwards. He acquired the power of death. He used it against God; by it he kept the people of God in terror; but I think we have to regard it as primarily introduced by God as a penalty, in order to see its full significance. Satan took it up afterwards, so the apostle alludes to him as having the might of death.
S.T. Is that what the Lord Jesus destroyed in going into death and bearing the judgment of God?
J.T. Yes.
A.F.M. Would you say that death is separation from God?
J.T. It is.
A.F.M. When Adam sinned, God was dethroned in Adam's heart, and morally Adam was gone.
J.T. But we must always add, I think, the thought of dissolution as a penalty. That is, man is terminated judicially. The order of life in which he was set is broken up.
J.D. Do you think "in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die" (@Genesis 2:17) involves what is moral, or does it mean simply the dissolution of the body here?
J.T. The penalty of death is on him; *when* it takes place historically is comparatively of no account.
{237}
J.S. As to the thought of "a man in Christ". I suppose at a certain moment the world pronounced the man who was caught up to be dead.
J.T. He did not know himself whether he was in the body, or out of it.
W.B-s. How do you regard the second death?
J.T. That is the lake of fire. When God does a thing twice it is done permanently. There is no longer any hope. Terrible prospect!
W.B-s. It is the portion of those who have not their names in the book of life.
W.C.R. The last enemy to be destroyed is death.
J.T. Death has become an enemy of man. I think it is very clear that it became an enemy because it was first used against Abel. Satan seized it and turned it against God's people; but primarily it came in as a penalty on man for sin.
G.A.T. Is God using it to check sin? He shortened man's days, as you were saying.
J.T. I have no doubt that the flaming sword of the cherubim was that. It is an allusion to death. It turned every way. Death has no preferences, all come under it. The sword was in order to keep the way of the tree of life. It would be monstrous if men were allowed to live eternally in sin. The result would be beyond expression.
W.C.R. Adam was put out of the garden that he might not partake of the tree of life and live for ever.
J.T. Death had become an enemy, as we have been saying. Satan turned it to account against God's people, and it has been an enemy ever since. But it came in consequent upon sin, and it was a divine penalty.
W.G.R. I suppose during the world to come death will exist in *some* sense, but at the close it will be destroyed and will exist no more.
J.T. Yes. The idea of death is disposed of for ever. It is never revived.
{238}
J.D. Going back to our chapter, you opened up the reading by saying we might consider *what* is translated. Do you look at the rapture as the moral result of the totality of the work of God?
J.T. Yes. God translates what pleases Him.
J.D. I think so. I have thought of the rapture in a more limited way; that is, the activity of the Lord on the line of mercy; but your thought is good, because it makes us consider as to whether we are on the line of God's work and purpose.
J.T. There is no moral ground for God translating what is not for His pleasure. It is right to translate the assembly because it is for God's pleasure.
W.G.R. Enoch and Elijah were translated.
J.T. We were saying that death was an enemy. It became an enemy directly it was introduced, and the proof of that is that Cain, who is the type of Antichrist, slew his brother. That is to say, Satan took advantage of the presence of death to use it against God's people, and so all down the line the great weapon that Satan used against God's people was death.
W.G.R. Would the thought that Enoch was translated, being "the seventh from Adam", indicate that God did not allow death its full sway over man?
J.T. That is the point. Cain used it. Then in chapter 5 we have Seth -- one *appointed* instead of Abel. That is what Seth's name signifies. That is in type, Christ in figure set up, and that in regard of the line of life. Now death reigned on the one hand, and the proof of that was that all these men recorded in @Genesis 5 died with one exception, and that one exception proves that death was not absolute, that God had intervened and wrested, as it were, the power from Satan. He reserved to Himself the right to relieve one man of death. Satan could not use it against Enoch.
L.T.E. The secret being that "he pleased God".
{239}
J.T. Quite so. He had wonderful light for that day; he prophesied, saying that he saw the Lord coming with ten thousands of His saints. That was a proof that all would not die, that death was not going to rule universally, because if the Lord is coming with ten thousands of His saints, they are to be relieved of death. He saw that and that is God's victory. Enoch is a type of the assembly. While death reigns today, we have the testimony that in our case it does not *reign*. There are those over whom it does not reign, and this is seen in Enoch.
W.L.P. Is it not significant that there were two caught up that way, Enoch and Elijah?
R.S.S. Enoch was sensible that he pleased God.
J.T. Before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God. That is what we want to get at. I think we want to have that testimony, because that always precedes translation.
R.S.S. So that if you have the sense in your soul that you please God, you have the assurance that you will be translated, whether you die or live.
J.T. It is not a question of getting out of the trouble, as our brother has suggested, but of being for God's pleasure. Paul might have got out of the trouble easily. The Lord would have taken him, but he deliberately chose to remain here.
R.S.S. He could have been taken out of suffering if he had asked the Lord to take him, like Elijah.
J.T. He came back to ordinary life and conditions of his own choice, but it was because of the saints, because they were here.
R.S.S. "More needful for you".
J.T. I do not think any one who understands levitical service, involving what the saints are to Christ, would wish to be removed, to get out of the circumstances. He would wish, because of the saints, to be where the saints are till they go. When
{240}
they go he wants to go, so Paul was willing to come back to ordinary circumstances here for their sakes.
W.L.P. The fear of death is removed.
J.T. That is it. If we have the testimony that we please God, death does not reign over us. Dissolution may occur, but that is not death. Death is a penalty. We fall asleep through Jesus.
R.S.S. What does that mean, "through Jesus"?
J.T. I think it refers to its being through His instrumentality. He puts us to sleep.
G.A.T. Do you get the idea in Lazarus?
J.T. You do not get the idea of the Lord putting him to sleep. The Lord knew that death had come upon him, but with us the Lord puts us to sleep.
R.S.S. Like a nurse.
J.T. His love is in it.
W.L.P. Does that do away with the penalty?
J.T. The penalty *is* done away with for *us*. We do not regard death as a penalty. I often ask souls if they fear death.
L.T.F. "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints". (@Psalm 116:15)
R.S.S. In Christ's resurrection and victory He wrenched the sword out of Satan's hand as David did out of Goliath's hand; and the sword that was against us in the hands of our enemy is now in the hands of our best Friend.
W.B-s. So death is our friend, instead of our enemy.
J.T. It is *ours*. It is our property. What a triumph!
R.M.L. In what sense do we say that death is ours?
J.T. In whatever sense you wish to use it. You use death against yourself, and not against anybody else. The latter is Satan's work.
R.S.S. And there is no sword like it. David said of Goliath's sword, "There is none like that; give
{241}
it me". (@1 Samuel 21:9) And I suppose in the way in which you speak of it now there is nothing like it.
J.T. If you wish to use it against yourself it is a tremendous help.
A.F.M. Would you distinguish between death morally and physically? You were saying you ask souls if they are afraid of death.
J.T. They are inseparably bound up together. Men are all dead morally, as we have been saying, but when man comes to dissolution he is forced to think of the great beyond that he is going into without knowing what it is; and, I believe, that as dissolution draws near, the sting is felt; it cannot be defined, but it is *there* The consciousness of sin is the accompanying sting that the unsaved man feels at dissolution. His conscience may be lulled to sleep until then, but as he draws near to dissolution the sting is felt, he has to do with God.
A.R.S. What do you mean by using death against yourself?
J.T. It is alluded to in the epistles, "Put to death therefore your members which are upon the earth", (@Colossians 3:5) for instance.
R.S.S. As our brother was drawing attention to the other night in @Colossians 3.
J.T. And Paul says, "I, through law, have died to law, that I may live to God". (@Galatians 2:19)
S.T. In Peter's case, when he wanted to follow the Lord Jesus, he did not understand what death meant in the aspect in which the Lord was going to take it up, and the Lord says to him, "thou canst not follow me now". (@John 13:36)
J.T. Peter, had no idea of what was involved in the Lord's position. He could not drink the Lord's cup.
W.B-s. Is not the *unclothing* referred to in @2 Corinthians 5:4, dying, passing out of this scene, the dissolution of the body?
{242}
J.T. Yes. I do not think that a desire to be unclothed is quite the right one, although Paul did say he had a desire to depart and be with Christ; but I think that strictly speaking the right desire is to be "clothed upon". "Not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life". (@2 Corinthians 5:4)
R.S.S. That is, that we might not be in the disembodied state, but have our resurrection bodies.
A.A.T. Is that what we have before us in @1 Thessalonians 4 -- translation?
J.T. Yes; both resurrection and translation are seen in the chapter.
J.B. I suppose we have to look at both in the light of the place the Lord now occupies, the place of all authority and power, having obtained the victory over death. In that way we regard the death of the saints as being put to sleep by Him.
J.T. He says that He has the keys of death and hades.
W.L.P. Is the apostle using death against himself when he says, "I am crucified with Christ"? (@Galatians 2:20)
J.T. He states the fact that he was crucified with Christ.
W.L.P. Is that why we can use death against ourselves?
J.T. We are entitled to do so. You are not entitled to commit suicide, but to use death morally against yourself.
G.A.T. Till you do you will not know much about the "man in Christ".
J.T. Exactly; so he says, "I am crucified with Christ, and no longer live, I, but Christ lives in me". (@Galatians 2:20)
R.S.S. Crucifixion is more than death. I account myself as a worthless thing: "the world is crucified to me, and I to the world". (@Galatians 6:14) The world accounts me a worthless thing, and I account the world a worthless thing, and that is the way I get rid of myself.
{243}
A.F.M. You do not wish to revive a thing you deem worthy of crucifixion.
J.T. As the apostle goes on here, he opens up to us how essential is the idea of new creation, because if all are dead, there is nothing for God, and so He must produce something. He says we do not know Christ after the flesh, but in a new condition, and if any one is in Christ there must be new creation.
R.S.S. And how does that agree with the way in which we know the Lord in His pathway down here? We know Him after the flesh in that way.
J.T. But then you cannot become acquainted with Him in that condition, because He is not in it now.
R.S.S. You mean He is not in it *personally* now.
J.T. You know the Lord now not as He was, but as He is; it is impossible to know Him as He was.
R.S.S. But knowing Him as He is, you can go back to what He was in flesh and blood condition.
A.F.M. That is the manna.
J.T. What He was is now a matter of remembrance.
R.S.S. And he says, "though we have known Christ after the flesh", (@2 Corinthians 5:16) referring to such as Peter and John, but even they knew Him in another way then.
J.T. Just so.
J.L.J. You spoke of an entirely new order in resurrection. How would that go with @Revelation 3, Christ as the beginning of the creation of God?
J.T. He is not a *part* of the creation, but the *beginning* of it. I suppose He sets forth the idea in Himself in the gospels. We are being brought up to that standard.
J.B. The beginning of the creation of God is hardly new creation.
J.T. The Lord takes precedence. Everything is
{244}
to take character from Him, that is the idea of being "the beginning".
R.S.S. That it finds its "beginning" in Him.
J.T. So that even as to the old, which will be taken up in the millennium, the Lord will impart a new character to it.
A.F.M. Was Adam the beginning of the old creation?
J.T. No, I think he was simply the head; he was *part* of it. God did not *begin* with him. After having brought in the creation, He brought in Adam. Adam was head in the sense that he was imbued with wisdom to give names to the lower animals, and the name he gave to each described what each was. So when he comes to Eve he knows how to name her, and in that way he shows his qualifications to be head. He was not the *beginning* of the creation. Christ is that.
R.S.S. After Adam fell was he still regarded as head?
J.T. I think not. I do not think that a man who is dead can be head. God could not hold him as head any longer. God begins to work on the line of Christ after Adam dies, so that faith comes to light: the seed of the woman is introduced, and if the seed of the woman is to bruise the serpent's head, it is clear that Adam is superseded.
R.S.S. And from that moment till the Lord came, the race was without a head.
J.T. Except that faith laid hold of Christ. The *position* was there, and faith would admit of no other but Christ; and when He appears in resurrection the position is there and He takes it up.
J.B. Is not faith the foundation of pleasing God?
J.T. Quite so. Without faith it is impossible to please God. But where can you get that faith? It must be the fruit of God's work in us. It is not in nature.
{245}
E.H.T. Faith is the gift of God.
J.D. I think it would help us if you would say a word on the moral make up of a man in Christ.
J.T. I think it helps us to understand him if we consider his judgment of things. I referred to these few verses in @2 Corinthians 5 to show the judgment of a man in Christ as to things here. He has formed a judgment and his judgment expresses what he is. Well, then, having told us what his judgment is as to things here, he tells us how he takes account of Christ, and that is as He is now.
R.S.S. I see you make a great point of @2 Corinthians 5:14: "because we thus judge". He does not say "because *I*  thus judge". He is speaking for the saints viewed normally. It is the judgment you form. I think we should try to get hold of that. This is what largely forms men in Christ.
A.F.M. A babe in Christ has not capacity for that.
J.T. No.
E.H.T. That is the reason the Corinthians were not up to it. They had the mind of Christ, but they were not using their judgment.
J.T. No, or they would not have allowed so many big men at Corinth. They would measure every man by Christ.
J.S. Did it take fourteen years to mature in the apostle before he could express it in the way he does here?
J.T. I am not prepared to say that. He alludes to the fourteen years to show that it was not a common occurrence. It was a special occurrence. It occurred in his life at least fourteen years before he spoke of it.
J.S. Would you say that was the highest appreciation he had of things and of the Lord?
J.T. I think the Spirit enables us to lay hold of the idea of "a man in Christ". The apostle did not
{246}
need to be translated, to go into paradise, to prove what it was. He simply states it was such a man as that who was caught up to paradise, as much as to say, those translated are such as that. I know a man in Christ. He does not say, *I* was caught up. He speaks so as to imply, what is the order of man to be caught up.
B.T.F. Do you think it goes beyond the enjoyment of proper Christian privilege?
J.T. I think it was special in his case, because he connects it with visions and revelations. He heard unutterable things, not lawful for a man to utter.
B.T.F. I mean, that "a man in Christ" would be one in the enjoyment of proper Christian privilege.
J.T. Quite so. Paul's special privilege is not necessary in order that the idea should be taken in. The enjoyment of a man in Christ is open to all Christians, but it depends on new creation.
R.S.S. Was Paul's catching up abnormal, and what was the purpose of it? What had God in view in connection with this wonderful circumstance?
J.T. I think it was to establish him in connection with his great mission, that he might have every possible advantage in his ministry.
R.S.S. Just as the Lord took up the three men to the mount of transfiguration. What would the bearing be, as far as we are concerned, of his being caught up to the third heaven?
J.T. We learn from it what the order of man is that is to be caught up. It is a "man in Christ".
R.S.S. Is there any experience in our souls that answers to it in any way?
J.T. The nearest approach to it would be ecstasy, which he alludes to in @2 Corinthians 5. But that does not go as far as being caught up to the third heaven. That was Paul's privilege only and it occurred apparently but once in his life.
{247}
W.C.R. Do we not get a parallel passage in connection with Peter: "In an ecstasy I saw a vision"? (@Acts 11:5)
J.T. As to @2 Corinthians 5, you do. I do not think that was very uncommon among the earlier Christians. Peter alluded to ecstasy, and John said he was in the Spirit on the Lord's day. It seems as if it were not anything very unusual, but being caught up into the third heaven was.
J.B. Would you say that occurred to John in @Revelation 4? A door was opened and a voice said, "Come up hither".
J.T. That is all vision.
J.H.C. What is the thought in connection with *unspeakable* things?
J.T. Things that are unutterable. God did not empower him to utter these unspeakable things, therefore we may conclude that they are not things that have reference to the church. The things that the apostle had in reference to the church were all by the Spirit, and he did not need to be caught up to get them. As the three disciples were established in the coming and power of our Lord Jesus Christ by the transfiguration so Paul would be confirmed by this experience.
W.G.R. Peter got added light in his vision.
A.R.S. Is there any difference between a man in Christ and being in Christ, as in @Romans 8:1?
J.T. The latter defines the *position* of the believer, but when you think of a *man* in Christ, the man is before you more.
A.R.S. Is that the man that is acceptable to God?
R.S.S. But both involve new creation.
J.T. Romans is the *position* and the *character*, whereas Corinthians is the man that is *in* the position. He is not only set free by the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, but he is a subject of new creation.
{248}
J.L.J. Then there *is* that in every believer that answers to a man in Christ?
J.T. I think so. Every true believer is a subject of divine work. Every one who has the Spirit.
J.B. Is it not the normal characteristic of the believer?
W.L.P. What does the translation in @2 Corinthians 5 show? It is not the same as the thought of Thessalonians. It only shows that nothing goes but what is created anew.
J.T. That is why I referred to 2 Corinthians, because it indicates *what* goes up.
W.L.P. But in Thessalonians we have the body.
J.T. Thessalonians does not go so far.
W.B-s. In Corinthians you get the moral aspect, but in Thessalonians the affections are brought in; "comfort one another".
J.T. Thessalonians is elementary. I turned to Corinthians because it indicates what it is that is to be translated, and Thessalonians does not develop that side. It was written to young believers who were sorrowing about their departed ones; they had not gone on very far.
A.McB. So that if we are in the good of 2 Corinthians, Thessalonians is very simple.
J.T. Only you can take it up on higher ground than that on which the apostle sets it forth.
B.T.F. Would you not say a man in Christ is translated?
J.T. Translation is of the whole company, the assembly. But it is composed of such as these, men in Christ.
B.T.F. Is not the climax of new creation seen when the saints are changed on earth, @1 Corinthians 15:51? It is a changed company that is caught up.
J.T. Quite so. But then new creation has reference to us before the body is changed. The word in @Romans 8:11, for the changed body is
{249}
*quickened*. Quickening is not simply that it is made new, but made to live.
A.F.M. As to the tabernacle, referred to in Corinthians, the point is that Christians are now like the tabernacle of old, greater inside than outside. It is a question of the work of God in us.
J.T. That is what we are now. The assembly is greater internally than externally. Now in 2 Corinthians the apostle changes from the thought of tabernacle to that of house. "For we know that if our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed, we have a building from God, a house [not tabernacle house] not made with hands, eternal in the heavens". (@2 Corinthians 5:1) That is to say, the body we shall appear in is viewed as a "house", and in that sense we shall have neighbours. Each will have his own "house", and in that way will form part of the city. The neighbour idea will continue.
A.F.M. You were saying last year that the city depends on the covenant.
J.T. And it is formed of such persons as the covenant produces. The apostle treats of the spirit of the covenant. Paul was formed in the spirit of the covenant; he was in that way internally equal to the city. He was formed by the spirit of the covenant; all he lacked was the *house* in which to live, "which is from heaven". Now think of a city formed of men like Paul living in houses "not made with hands, eternal in the heavens". (@2 Corinthians 5:1)
R.S.S. You speak of the body in which they will appear, and that it accords with the thought of a city.
J.T. Because the city is composed of houses from heaven, and he says, "He that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God". (@2 Corinthians 5:5) We are formed for that. God "also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit". (@2 Corinthians 5:5)
J.L.J. The thought of *house* appears more than
{250}
once in this scripture. How would that go with @1 Corinthians 15, where it is said, "we shall all be changed"? (@1 Corinthians 15:51)
J.T. At Corinth some were ignorant of God and of the resurrection, so the apostle is led to elaborate on the subject, and he shows that "it is sown a natural body" and "raised a spiritual body". (@1 Corinthians 15:44) The point was to justify God as to the truth of resurrection. He says, "God gives to it a body as he has pleased". (@1 Corinthians 15:38) Those who do not fall asleep will also be changed.
J.L.J. It seems to me that in 2 Corinthians the body comes out of heaven, and in I Corinthians it comes out of the grave. Will the body come out of heaven into the grave and then be raised?
J.T. We have to be careful as to that, because the identity of each person must be preserved. I have no doubt that what is said of the patriarchs as to burial would show that they were in the light of the power of God, according to the revelation He made of Himself to Abraham. It was in view of this that a burying-place was purchased. They desired to be buried in Machpelah, and I believe they had in mind that their identity should be preserved. The person is identified in his body. Scripture speaks of the burial of the person, not his body simply, and the resurrection of the person. Christ died, was buried, and rose again. So also as to the saints. Stephen committed his spirit to the Lord, and yet it is said, "devout men carried Stephen to his burial"; (@Acts 8:2) not his body simply. Joseph had, by his faith, light as to the resurrection of the saints and the changing of the living ones. I do not say he had much intelligence in regard to it, but by faith men go beyond their intelligence, and in reality Joseph foresaw what the apostle treats of in 1 Thessalonians, that the living saints would be changed and the sleeping ones raised. He gave commandment concerning
{251}
his bones. In @1 Corinthians 15 the objections, "How are the dead raised up? and with what body do they come?" (@1 Corinthians 15:35) had to be met. The answer involves God's pleasure and power. "It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body". (@1 Corinthians 15:44) In 2 Corinthians the subject is treated of from the side of normal Christian desire and expectation. The outer is ultimately to be in every way equal to the inner man.
J.H.G. What is the difference between translation and resurrection?
J.T. Resurrection necessarily goes before translation, so we have it here, "that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air"; so resurrection takes place before translation.
J.H.G. Was Enoch not translated instead of being raised?
J.T. He had not died. Resurrection is for those who die.
W.G.R. The apostle says here that we shall not all sleep, indicating there will be some alive when the Lord translates them.
J.B. Translation does not enter into the thought of @1 Corinthians 15.
J.T. It is resurrection there and change. I think the victory of God is in the resurrection. It is in the resurrection of Christ and the saints. Translation is a matter of God's love and pleasure.
R.S.S. That is evident, because the conflict was here and thus the victory is here.
W.B-s. What is the thought of the shout in Thessalonians, and the voice of the archangel, and then the Lord descending?
{252}
J.T. The word, I think, is "assembling shout", as if to convey that the thought of the assembly is there. There is an assembling voice now on earth. The Lord's voice brings us together. What a wonderful thing it will be when the assembling shout is heard, and it penetrates the realm of death so that the whole assembly, as I understand it, is brought together finally upon the earth and caught up collectively.
R.S.S. "The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout". Then as to the voice of the archangel and the trump of God. What will their significance be?
J.T. I suppose the archangel's voice suggests the *character* of the voice. It is not, I apprehend, that the archangel is there, but rather the authority in which the Lord speaks, supreme authority.
W.B-s. Does it not increase in force by ending with the trump of God?
J.T. The bringing God in is all very interesting. First you have the assembling shout, that is the Lord's relation to the assembly, and there is the authority that is in His voice. Then archangel voice is its character: it is not *the* archangel, but "archangel's voice"; the kind of voice; and then the trump of God; the latter gives God His place.
E.H.T. I had thought that the shout was more of joy here; is this new creation caught up? There was joy in connection with the first creation: the sons of God shouted for joy.
J.T. I think the archangel is the symbol of authority, and the "trump of God" is God getting His place, the God who raises the dead.
R.S.S. And, furthermore, it not only embraces the assembly, it will embrace every believer from the foundation of the world.
A.F.M. Do you not think the archangel's voice refers to the dead and the trump of God to the
{253}
living? The assembling shout is general, applying to both. The trumpet was blown to call the assembly together in Israel.
J.T. But I think the trump of God is for the dead. The dead in Christ shall rise first. I think God's voice has to be heard. It is due to God as such that His voice shall raise the dead.
J.B. Are not all these connected with the Lord Himself? He comes with assembling shout and the trump of God.
J.T. It all comes through Him but God is there. God is acting as well as the Lord viewed as Man in His own relation to the assembly.
O.J.O. It shows the power of God in raising them.
J.T. I was saying Joseph's faith is the faith that believes in the power of God to raise the saints. So it says, "if we believe that Jesus died and rose again". That is the basis of faith for ourselves. It is very interesting that this was a distinct revelation for the Thessalonians.
W.B-s. Will you tell us something about the blowing of trumpets, @Leviticus 23? Does it refer to the "last trump" in @1 Corinthians 15?
J.T. The blowing of trumpets has allusion to Israel. It is to awaken them in the last days. It awakens them to their responsibility to God, and following on that you get the day of atonement when they afflict their souls.
R.S.S. Was not this revelation given to Paul to meet the question that might naturally arise through the closing words of the previous chapter: "To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints"? (@1 Thessalonians 3:13) How is He going to come with all His saints? Was it not given in order to explain how His saints are with Him so as to come with Him?
J.T. It does explain it, at any rate, but I think
{254}
it was given to meet their difficulties with regard to their departed ones. The coming of the Lord was a general truth known to the Thessalonians from the outset.
J.S. Would those that are asleep in Jesus retain in that disembodied state the joy of the highest appreciation that they reached of the Lord here?
J.T. I do not know that we are entitled to say anything on that. It is an intermediate kind of state, and there is joy and blessedness there, but it is difficult to say much about it. What do you say?
R.S.S. We know Paul said it is "far better". Better than anything we have had here, but it is not the thing that God is engaged with. God is not specially engaged with people that have left the world, but rather with those that are still in it.
J.S. The contrast that I would bring would be @Luke 16. The rich man shows the other side.
J.T. There could be no doubt there is a great measure of capacity for enjoyment because the apostle says it is "far better".
B.T.F. I was going to ask you to say a word with regard to "even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him". Is it the spirits that God brings with Him, and then they are clothed upon?
J.T. No, I think not. God bringing them with Him looks on to the appearing. In the end of the previous chapter the Lord is referred to as coming with all His saints. Well, now, they might question as to those fallen asleep. Are they to come? Will God bring them with Him? This chapter is the answer to all that. God bringing them is bringing them out into display.
E.B-s. And that looks on to the appearing.
S.T. Can we connect the beginning of @John 14 with this?
J.T. I think so; only, as has been said, possibly
{255}
this would embrace the Old Testament saints. What the Lord says in @John 14 is specially for the assembly.
W.B-s. How do you regard @Acts 1: "shall so come in like manner"? (@Acts 1:11)
J.T. That is His coming back to Israel and the earth. "This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven". (@Acts 1:11)
L.T.F. All Old Testament saints are regarded as dead in Christ, are they not?
J.T. Yes.
R.S.S. This aspect of the Lord's coming is of a private character, so far as the world is concerned.
J.B. The word "in Christ" is very important. "The dead in Christ". It is the key to the whole situation.
R.S.S. As to the sleeping saints, @1 Thessalonians 4:14, the New Translation reads "*through*"; they sleep "*through* Jesus". But it is the dead in Christ. It is rather remarkable that wherever the Lord's people in death are spoken of, they are not spoken of *as dead* simply, but as the "dead in Christ", and that they are "asleep through Jesus"; there is always a qualifying term. Where "the rest of the dead" are spoken of the unjust are referred to.
J.B. I was thinking of those saints who have died in faith, that God regards them as being in Christ.
W.B-s. The trysting-place is that they meet the Lord in the air. Is that of a private character?
J.T. I think so; "and so shall we ever be with the Lord".
R.S.S. There is a beautiful thought we have not touched on, and that is, we are caught up together. You were speaking of "*together*" and its importance in @Acts 20: "upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came together to break bread". (@Acts 20:7) And here it indicates that there is the great re-union
{256}
between those who have died and have been buried and those who are still living here. They are re-united before they go to heaven.
W.B-s. Is that the comfort He gives them?
J.T. Yes. Comfort would be that you have the living ones with you.
G.A.T. Would that answer the Lord's prayer in @John 17, that we shall be all one?
R.S.S. I hardly think that is the idea. As translated we are really caught up in the air; it is not together here.
{257}
THE HOPE OF CHRIST'S APPEARING AND ITS EFFECTS
@Revelation 22:16 - 21
B.T.F. Would, you say just a word or two as to the different effects on the saints of the thought of the rapture and the thought of the appearing?
J.T. I think the expectation of the rapture would have the effect of leading to the desire to be to the Lord's pleasure, and to please God. The effect of the appearing would be to turn us aside from the present order of things, because the appearing has to do with the existing order of things in the world; the *appearing* of the Lord has reference to that.
J.L.J. We get that set forth in Enoch and in Noah. Enoch was for the pleasure of God, and Noah condemned the world.
J.T. So that the coming of the Lord has reference to the condemnation of the world which has to be set aside.
R.S.S. And for that reason the thought of responsibility is often brought in in connection with the appearing.
J.T. I think so.
R.S.S. The thought of responsibility does not attach to the rapture exactly. It is rather that they were to "comfort one another with these words" (@1 Thessalonians 4:18); it is affection.
J.T. But in connection with the appearing it *is* responsibility. As, for instance, the scripture we had this morning: "To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints". (@1 Thessalonians 3:13)
W.B-s. Then again in 2 Peter: "Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner
{258}
of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness?" (@2 Peter 3:11)
J.T. Yes. The appearing or coming of our Lord Jesus Christ raises the question as to the conditions here; that is, it is a question of God's governmental interference. Peter, for instance, takes up the question of the thread of God's government and traces it from the angelic period, as we may call it, right on to the end of time, and he shows that, wherever evil raises its head, and however long God may have borne with it, in time God dealt with it.
R.S.S. Are you referring to the first or the second coming?
J.T. Both; but the second is more especially in reference to the result in the end; in time the judgment of God finds out the sinner. It is inexorable. It is sure to reach the sinner, and so the present order of things will, when the man of sin appears, be shown to be utterly lawless and opposed to God. Then the Lord will appear. The coming of the Lord is in that way dependent on certain conditions in the world. For instance, God said to Abraham that the iniquity of the Amorite was not yet full; and so in Daniel, transgression had not yet come to the full; when it should come to the full, the opposer and oppressor of the people would appear, and then the Lord will stand up against him. That is to say, God acts in judgment when there is some overt act of evil against Him, and not till then. Now that was true in the case of Jerusalem. God bore in grace with the crucifixion of Christ but when the Spirit was despised and refused, then Jerusalem is overthrown; and so it will be when Christianity is openly set aside, God will intervene in judgment. Therefore the point that the apostle emphasises in his second letter to the Thessalonians is, that that day will not be till the apostasy, till the man of sin, appears, the wicked one, who sets
{259}
himself in the temple of God and asserts himself to be God; but the Lord will consume him with the spirit of His mouth and destroy him with the brightness of His coming.
R.S.S. So that in view of all this there is a moral necessity for the Lord to come.
J.T. That is it. Conditions here make it imperative. Therefore, I believe, Christians should not ignore conditions in the world.
A.R.S. What do you mean by that? Do you mean you should take up these conditions?
J.T. No; but I think we should not be indifferent to them. The book of Revelation was written for Christians, for us; and it gives us an account of things that are about to happen, and of things that have reference to what happens in the world.
A.R.S. The word for us is to be overcomers and not to allow ourselves to be influenced by the conditions of things around us. Is that what you mean by taking account of them?
J.T. We take account of the principles of evil that are at work and stand apart from them. In Revelation it is said, "Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of the prophecy, and keep the things written in it; for the time is near". (@Revelation 1:3) I think that is a very decided appeal to every Christian's heart.
A.F.M. In the character of bondmen.
J.T. Now look at chapter 19:10: "And I fell before his feet to do him homage. And he says to me, see thou do it not. I am thy fellow-bondman, and the fellow-bondman of thy brethren who have the testimony of Jesus". (@Revelation 19:10) I think you have there, in a sense the inner circle of all this prophetic scene. There are those who are the brethren of John and they have the testimony of Jesus. We ought to seek to belong to that circle, to the brethren of John, and
{260}
those who have the testimony of Jesus; for the "spirit of prophecy is the testimony of Jesus". (@Revelation 19:10)
J.L.J. Do you mean that all the Spirit's work seen in the Old Testament was set forth in what came out in Jesus down here?
J.T. All that the prophetic word deals with, these evil principles; they all work out in some way, against Jesus. Then, on the other hand, there are the divine principles of which the prophetic word treats, these work out in the support of Jesus in connection with Jerusalem. Hence the key to all prophetic testimony is love for Jesus. If we love Jesus we can take it up with pleasure and it is food for our souls. What would you say?
J.D. I think that is right.
W.B-s. Does "prophecy" cover the Old Testament, or is it principally what we have in this book of Revelation?
J.T. The book of Revelation supposes all that preceded it. You could not fully understand it without understanding the Old Testament prophets.
W.B-s. It is generally said to be more in line with Daniel.
J.T. I think you will find in it allusions here and there to the whole field of prophecy, and in order to understand it you must understand the Old Testament.
A.F.M. It becomes an incentive to us to read the Old Testament.
J.D. I suppose it is a book of issues in connection with divine ways.
J.T. Quite so, a book of results: the working out in result of all the principles that had been before manifested by God; and, indeed, of the evil principles as well.
W.L.P. I suppose we should be intelligent as to all these principles by becoming familiar with the Scriptures.
{261}
J.T. You will find allusions to Genesis in Revelation; for instance, "that old serpent". That supposes that you know Genesis.
J.B. Sodom and Egypt also.
J.T. Quite so; "the great city, which is called spiritually Sodom and Egypt". (@Revelation 11:8)
W.L.P. If we were in the spirit of this book what is going on in the world would not disturb us.
J.T. We see in it the end. It has an establishing effect as well as a separating effect, because you know the end of everything. You know the result of every principle that is at work.
A.F.M. I do not want to divert from this, but I should like some further reference to 2 Peter in connection with sin as away from God and sin in the presence of God. Would it have a bearing on what we have had in connection with the world system?
J.T. Peter treats of sin working in the presence of God. Jude treats of sin more as manifesting departure from God. Jude is apostasy; that is, departing from God, although the other character of sin is seen in Jude also. Sin has the two effects, that of evil working *before* God, and of departing *from* God, which is apostasy. For instance, in one part of the epistle you see evil men creeping in; that is to act before God in order to corrupt the saints before God; and then in John you see them *going out*. In both principles it is apostasy, only apostasy is more strictly falling away, whereas sin in its most daring form is seen acting in the presence of God, and that is what will mark the man of sin. He sits in the temple of God; he does not go away. He comes boldly to the temple of God and sits there as God. That is the height of iniquity. Then God strikes. Peter treats more of sin working in the profession of Christianity, whereas Jude speaks of
{262}
the angels who *left* their first estate. Peter simply says that they sinned.
A.F.M. That is very striking. Now it is in that condition of things that we have to move today. It has not yet risen to a head.
J.T. No, not yet. The mystery of iniquity works, and it is important that we should see what it is that is working.
A.F.M. What is the mystery of iniquity?
J.T. I suppose it refers to spiritual corruption in the professing Christian system.
J.D. Do you distinguish it from that which is imperial, and does not exactly belong to what is inside that which has the profession of God? You are referring now to what is inside the sphere of the profession of God.
J.T. The old empire was covered up under a Christian name, and it is in that connection that the mystery lies. The wickedness of the old empire has not diminished at all, but it has simply been covered up under a Christian garb; but it will work out in the end under imperial form, and then it ceases to be a mystery.
B.T.F. Are not the things spoken of in Revelation after chapter 3 all in the future? We can only see the principles of these things at work now.
J.T. I am not prepared to say they are all in the future. For instance, John, speaking of the beast, says that one of his heads then existed, and I have no doubt the seventh head of the beast has come and gone since, @Revelation 17:10. However, in the main, they do refer to what is in the future.
B.T.F. The thought has been expressed that, in regard to the rapture, the indication of it would be found in the affection of the saints.
J.T. I think that the internal condition of the assembly is the best guide as to the event of the Lord's coming; I mean the rapture. But I think
{263}
we have to take account of external conditions, although the actual conditions that involve the coming of the Lord will not appear till the assembly is removed.
R.S.S. As to the effect on the saints today of the truths of the rapture and of the appearing, do you not think that what we have been dwelling upon and showing, namely, that God is going to take account of the existing things in the world and publicly to judge and set them aside, would have an exceedingly purifying effect on the saints? If He is going to judge the world, then if we are to be with Him, our skirts must be clear, just as it says in Corinthians: "Know ye not that we shall judge angels?" (@1 Corinthians 6:3) It is put on that ground. They are taken to task for their conduct in view of the fact that the time would come when they should judge angels; on that account they should be characterised themselves by pure hands.
W.C.R. He "that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure". (@1 John 3:3)
J.T. In the book of Revelation you will find many thoughts having a practical bearing upon ourselves. For instance, "Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins". (@Revelation 18:4) That has a direct voice to Christians. I refer to that to show that we must not conclude that all that follows chapter 3 has no direct bearing on ourselves, because the whole book is written to Christians. And then we have, "Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do follow them". (@Revelation 14:13) I mean expressions like these have a bearing on ourselves, and there are many such.
R.S.S. And then again the catching up of the Man child, the rapture is included in that. That was a thing that had already taken place.
J.T. In the same chapter you have war in heaven,
{264}
and Michael and his angels fighting with the dragon, and the dragon is cast out of heaven. That has reference to us, because it is to make room for the assembly. In fact, the assembly is included in the Man child, in a sense.
J.D. Would you judge that we are in the days when the principles of the last beast are working?
J.T. I am sure of it.
J.D. It is not so much a question of the days when the power is there, but we know the principles that form the power of the man, his working.
J.T. I am sure the spirit of centralisation and unionism is that, in whatever form it takes, whether wealth or labour. Now the mystery of iniquity has taken an ecclesiastical form; that is to say, all the evil of the old empire is there and God has His eye upon it for judgment. The beast is taken account of from its first appearance. The whole history of the empire is before God in the Revelation. God does not simply deal with the last feature of it, but the whole is seen and the judgment is upon the beast. Now all the evil of the old empire has taken an ecclesiastical form. It is covered up in an ecclesiastical form, but then it is not covered up to God. Its history is before God, so that we shall find the blood of the martyrs of Jesus, and His apostles and prophets are found therein. The Roman Catholic church did not put the apostles to death, but the beast, the empire did, and so the responsibility remains with the Romish system; the whole responsibility of the empire remains and God deals with it *in toto* in its last form.
J.D. That gives the Roman Catholic church an awful character.
J.T. It does, but that is the truth. I believe the mystery refers to the fact that it now assumes to act in the name of Christ.
J.D. So that the harlot rides the beast. The
{265}
principles that are found in the beast are in the ecclesiastical system.
J.T. And all these wicked principles are to take form publicly. That is, the veil, the ecclesiastical garb, is thrown off, and they begin to work in imperial form again. We have had a prelude to it in the French empire. They threw off the ecclesiastical system, but not the evil; the wickedness remained.
A.F.M. It shows that the principles of evil remain.
J.T. Yes. Now the word to Philadelphia is, "I also will keep thee out of the hour of trial". (@Revelation 3:10) It will come on all earth dwellers, not simply on those who have actual part in the mystery of iniquity, but on all earth dwellers. Those that despise the heavenly position come in for the judgment.
J.D. Imperial and ecclesiastical power will form the final apostasy. It never before so struck my mind. Then God comes in in Christ.
R.S.S. Is not the ecclesiastical power destroyed by the imperial power?
J.T. She is actually destroyed by the beast, according to the testimony of @Revelation 17, and 18. A great millstone is cast into the sea, and it is said, "Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all". (@Revelation 18:21) But the empire remains and the beast and the false prophet and the kings of the earth come up against Jerusalem. That is chapter 19, and then it is that the Lord appears.
J.D. The empire has nothing that is of God about it.
J.T. It appears in its naked character at the end.
J.B. As to the ecclesiastical system; the evil power is all there, only covered up, but it will yet come out.
J.T. Yes, it is covered, up in the ecclesiastical system of Rome. If you take account of the different
{266}
nations, they have not been specially opposed to God. Wherever there has been opposition to the testimony, it has been at the instigation of the mysterious system. It is the mystery of iniquity that has instigated every great attack against the testimony, not the nations as such; and that only shows that the great centre of evil against God is in that system.
G.A.T. Would you say that the Devil has it labelled with the name of Christ now?
J.T. That is why the system has a name written on it, "Mystery", @Revelation 17:5. All the evil that was against the apostles and prophets is now against the testimony, but under the Lord's name.
J.B. The rulers at the present time seem to be seeking the support of ecclesiastical power.
W.B-s. Do we not get a picture of all this in @Ezekiel 8, where the abominations are seen repeated three times, and these things are done in the dark?
J.T. It is mysterious, that is it; but then it finds agents to carry out its designs, and the violence with which the opposition to the testimony of God has been carried has been terrible.
W.B-s. Will not Jerusalem, in a time to come, be the seat of iniquity when the abomination is set up?
J.T. Jerusalem will be re-established in unbelief, and they will make a covenant with this awful western power to shelter themselves, but Isaiah says the refuge of lies shall be carried away in the flood. But then God has laid "in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste". (@Isaiah 28:16) That is where the remnant will find a refuge.
B.T.F. We are speaking of the forces of evil now when the Spirit is gone. What will there be in testimony at that time?
J.T. The testimony will then centre in Jerusalem. We see this from @Isaiah 28 and other scriptures.
{267}
The faith of the remnant will recognise the purpose of God in regard of Jerusalem. It is not any longer a testimony to the heavenly truth or to those that have despised the heavenly calling; there is no more hope for them. People say, Will not the people that inhabit these countries where the gospel has been, have another opportunity? *They will not;* those that *dwell on the earth*, those that despise the heavenly calling which the gospel announces, come under judgment, because they received not the love of the truth.
B.T.F. Are you thinking of them individually or nationally?
J.T. Both. There is no hope for any one who despises the gospel.
W.B-s. What is the gospel of the kingdom?
J.T. That goes out to the nations; not, I judge, to the Western nations, but to those who have not heard.
A.A.T. Like China and Japan?
W.B-s. There is another gospel, the everlasting gospel; to whom is that preached?
J.T. I think it refers to God's creatorial rights simply, @Revelation 14:6, 7.
L.T.F. "Come out of her, my people". (@Revelation 18:4) How does that work out?
J.T. If you belong to any human system, either Babylon or one of her daughters, you must come out; all these Protestant systems have grown out of her. They are simply human organisations. The voice to come out of her has that bearing, that if I am found in any organisation that is not of God, I must come out of it.
A.F.M. In regard to our position, the point is to bring before us the importance of viewing things as they are according to God, so that we are separate in heart from human systems, as the godly remnant
{268}
by-and-by will be separate from all that is around them and looking for the Lord to come.
J.T. Quite so. However, they will be at this disadvantage, they will not have the Holy Spirit. They will have to go through the fearful oppression of the beast, coupled with the unbelief of the nation at large; "the many", as Daniel puts it; that is to say, the mass are in unbelief, and they make a covenant with this wicked power, so that we can understand how terrible it will be for the true saints. But then the book of Revelation shows where they will be. They are seen on mount Zion with the Lamb. They are seen as sealed in chapter 7 and formed in affection for Christ in chapter 14, so they are *with Him*. They are there in testimony in the faith of their souls. The Songs of degrees show that mount Zion is the great thought before them.
A.A.T. They are the godly Jews.
G.A.T. Would you say that in @John 10 the Lord goes into this system and leads His people out of it?
J.T. Yes; the conditions that will arise in the last days around Jerusalem will be something similar to what the Lord found there; an unbelieving state, but God working in their midst, and souls becoming exercised and gathering up the mind of God from the Scriptures that refer to their position. God is going to make Jerusalem a centre, and therefore Jerusalem will be the great thought in their souls. Now Daniel speaks of these as "the wise", and he says, "the wise shall understand"; but he says, "none of the wicked shall understand". (@Daniel 12:10) The great mass will be wicked and will have no understanding about the things of God. But that only adds to the sufferings, of the faithful ones.
J.D. That is applicable today.
J.T. In the principle of it.
E.H.T. What about "thou sufferest that woman Jezebel"? (@Revelation 2:20)
{269}
J.T. That is the responsible angel at Thyatira; they allowed her, and the Lord says He had this against them. We should feel the existence of Jezebel, such awful wickedness in that which bears the name of Christ.
J.L.J. All the evil you are speaking of is working in the midst of the assembly in an outward sense.
J.T. Every believer ought to feel that.
W.B-s. Jezebel assumed to have the mind of God.
J.T. She called herself a prophetess.
G.A.T. Do you think Moses had the idea when he went outside the camp and called the people out?
J.T. Quite so: "Come out of her, my people". (@Revelation 18:4) Our salvation from her is to leave the system.
J.D. In @Daniel 9 a very wicked prince is described: "the people of the prince that shall come". (@Daniel 9:26) Is that the "man of sin" alluded to in Thessalonians?
J.T. Yes. There is a Western and an Eastern prince. We get the Western in chapter 7 and the Eastern in chapter 8. I think the Western prince is described in Thessalonians.
J.D. That supports what you said as to what the Lord found when He was here; the same conditions prevail at the end.
R.S.S. May we have a little on the other side now: "When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory"? (@Colossians 3:4) I was only thinking of that side of things, that this is really what engages the heart of God's people. Our dear brother, Mr. Raven, said, when dying, that he was looking forward to *coming out* with the Lord in the day of His appearing. It was peculiarly interesting and beautiful, and it showed how he was looking forward to the Lord's appearing.
B.M.L. When told that a sister whom he had known well had gone, he said, 'I do not say *gone*.
{270}
I say she has gone *in*, to come *out* with Him when He appears'.
S.T. Did not the apostle Paul have that in view? Speaking to Timothy of his departure, he says, "Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing". (@2 Timothy 4:8)
J.T. Yes. That is the point. It is those that love His appearing. That is to say, the coming of the Lord involves His peculiar glory, the period that He looks forward to, and we love it; we enter into His own thoughts as to it.
E.O.E. What is the difference between Jesus as the "bright and morning star" and as the "root and the offspring of David"?
J.T. I think that passage raises the whole question of the assembly's intelligence. The Lord announces Himself according to what He is personally, and the assembly understands it. She understands what the "root and the offspring of David" involves, and she understands what the "bright and morning star" involves. He does not stop to explain, it is assumed that she knows, and she *does* know. She says, "Come". The One whom she desires to come is the One whom she understands in relation to the whole purpose of God. He is apprehended in relation to the purpose of God. The root and offspring of David really involves that He is God. He is David's Root, but He is also David's Heir, David's Son, and the assembly knows that. Now the leaders of Israel did not know that. The Lord put that same question to them and they could not answer Him. The assembly understands it by the Spirit; the assembly is brought to know Christ. You remember the Lord's question to which I allude?
R.S.S. "If David then call him Lord, how is he his son" (@Matthew 22:45)
{271}
J.T. How could He be both David's son and David's Lord? One has noticed how frequently the question of the Lord's Person is raised amongst the saints, and I think it is very important that it should be, because it maintains amongst us a true intelligence as to His Person, which is most essential, for if we lose sight of His Person, the power of Christianity is gone. In @Revelation 22:16, He says, "I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies". Here He does not speak to the angel of the assemblies, but to the assemblies themselves. It is no longer the assemblies representatives, but the assemblies themselves, showing greater nearness. He says, "I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies". And then He announces Himself, "I am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star". The bright and morning star has reference to the period before the day. It is Christ known *now*. Would you not say that?
J.D. I think so. Do you look for brightened affections in the saints before they are able to say "Come"?
J.T. As we go on to the end, the sphere may be more limited, but I think the light becomes clearer.
J.D. Affection asks for the appearing not in the way of relief, but as bringing in Christ as the centre of divine counsels. The assembly can connect Him with the central part of the divine counsels in connection with prophecy.
J.T. The more the purpose of God is seen, the clearer the light.
G.A.T. Which should be most before the saints now, the appearing or the rapture?
J.T. I think the appearing is the great goal. The saints "love his appearing". The great burden in Scripture is the appearing; the rapture is blessed, but it is not so much spoken of; it is brought in in
{272}
the way of comfort in an elementary epistle, in @1 Thessalonians 4.
B.T.F. What does the word "Come" especially refer to?
J.T. I think it is the expression of the assembly's affections for Christ.
B.T.F. For the rapture?
J.T. No, for the Bridegroom to come to enter into His glory. The import of the titles in which He announces Himself is in the mind of the Spirit and the bride.
B.T.F. That is, that the whole scene of glory has been pictured out to the assembly and the desire of the Spirit and the bride is that all that scene of glory should appear.
J.T. Or rather that *He*, should appear and enter into it.
R.S.S. The breaking of bread is in view of the Lord's coming. It is not the rapture but the appearing.
J.T. The appearing is before us.
R.S.S. It is exceedingly important that our souls should get hold of that. If it were the rapture it would simply be for our comfort, but if it is the appearing it involves the glory of Christ.
J.T. I do not know that there is much to say beyond that. I do not exclude the rapture, but I think the appearing is prominent; it is the testimony of the assembly that the Lord has been put to death, but that He is to appear.
R.S.S. From the fact that the breaking of bread will cease when the rapture takes place there is the natural tendency to connect it with that, but it surely goes beyond that.
J.B. Is it not important that it is to the *assemblies* that the Lord testifies that He is the root and offspring of David; it is not to Israel but to the assemblies.
{273}
J.T. *It* would help us greatly, if we took it in, that the book of Revelation is for the assembly.
G.A.T. Does the church say He is the chiefest among ten thousand? (@Song of Songs 5:10).
J.T. That describes the exercises of the remnant of Israel. You can use it as an analogy to the assembly's affection.
O.J.O. Would you not say His coming is in view of the place He has by right, which the saints are holding for Him?
J.T. We are testifying that whilst the world has put Him to death, we are committed to that death as our fellowship, but it is "till he come". We have no part nor lot in what the world has done. Our fellowship is a condemnation of the world, and it is in view of the Lord's appearing when our fellowship *in this* sense will cease.
O.J.O. He will then get His right place here.
J.T. His rights have reference to the whole creation.
R.S.S. You announce the Lord's death till He come. It does not say to whom it is announced.
J.T. We commit ourselves to the Lord's death as a sign of our fellowship, but then the world put Him to death, therefore the issue is between the fellowship and the world. The issue that is between us and the world is the occasion of the judgment in the future; and *we are on the Lord's side*.
A.F.M. The assembly, then, holds a place for Christ in testimony till He comes back.
J.T. It is well to see that.
J.D. The fellowship is approved of God.
G.A.T. Noah building the ark condemned the world.
J.T. Our fellowship is equivalent to that. Baptism too, is a judgment of the world.
A.R.S. What is the meaning of the verse, "unto them that look for him shall he appear". (@Hebrews 9:28) Does that
{274}
give the idea that all of His people will look for Him?
J.T. There is really an appeal in that as to whether we *are* looking for Him. It is futile to talk about the Lord's coming unless we are *looking* for Him. "What I say unto you I say unto all. Watch". (@Mark 13:37)
A.F.M. I should like you to enlarge on the expression "I come quickly". It is often applied in connection with Philadelphia.
J.T. I think it is intended to encourage the heart of the overcomer. The book of Revelation contemplates that there are fearful difficulties to be overcome, and the Lord at every opportunity encourages the heart of the overcomer. Now "behold, I come quickly" is intended for that.
A.F.M. Once that word is given you could not think of its being in vain, so that what is in Philadelphia is maintained to the end, and is seen at the end in power.
J.T. It is very encouraging to see that the assembly is seen at the end, and seen in the bridal character.
A.B.S. What does that mean? It looks there as if the Spirit and the bride were in unison.
J.T. That is what it means. They had been out of accord. We would all have to admit that, but the effect of the Lord's gracious dealings with us, and of His ministry to us, is to bring us into accord with the Spirit. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come".
A.F.M. That is very striking.
A.A.T. Will that be so practically?
J.T. Unquestionably. It is not a question of the number, but the character and state.
J.D. It is like Rebekah putting her veil on. The moral grandeur of the man had appealed to her at the end of the wilderness journey.
R.S.S. Is that true today?
J.T. I think in measure it is since the midnight
{275}
cry has gone forth. The virgins have gone forth to meet the Bridegroom, and in principle it has existed ever since.
E.H.T. It is wholly a question of affection.
J.T. But it is intelligent affection. The bride knows who the Person is.
J.A.R. Is the blessing pronounced in chapter 1, for reading this book given as encouragement, because we thus know what will be the result of all things?
J.T. I think so. It is the one book in Scripture in regard of which a premium is offered for reading it.
A.R.S. It is strange that so very few have taken advantage of the premium.
A.F.M. It is the service of the bondman; see chapter 1 and 19:10.
R.S.S. What does that mean?
J.T. "Bondman" sets forth the character in which the servants are taken up in the book. We are all entitled to that position. You would not like to exclude any true believer from it. Any one who loves Jesus is a bondman of Jesus, but we have to *answer to the character*. And there is a great end for bondmen in view of the conditions that are found in the book, so the angel is one of them. "I am thy fellow-bondman, and the fellow-bondman of thy brethren who have the testimony of Jesus". (@Revelation 19:10) I think we should all covet to be in that circle.
A.F.M. The testimony of Jesus is the bond.
J.T. It is a wonderful circle to be in, a circle of bondmen, and brethren of John, who have the testimony of Jesus.
J.D. Morally.
J.T. Yes; John says, "your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus". (@Revelation 1:9)
E.H.T. That aspect remains, does it not?
J.T. Yes. It is one thing to be a brother in
{276}
Christ, it is another thing to be a brother of John's; one who is suffering for the kingdom.
W.G.B. You were saying last night that we should do well to consider the gospel of John. Why?
J.T. I think it produces a worshipping spirit, because it impresses you with the greatness of the Person, and it shows you what we are as to dignity. Then the reading of Revelation has the effect of separating you from the world and bringing you into sympathy with Jesus. It is very touching the way John presents Jesus in the book of Revelation. He is the suffering One. John's gospel sets forth His personal dignity. He is, not the sufferer there. He is supreme over everything, so that your heart becomes drawn out to Him in adoration. But the Revelation draws you out in sympathy. You want to be in sympathy with the One who suffered. He is in the midst of the throne as the Lamb. A lamb has no power of defence. The Lord accepts that position and it draws out our sympathies.
R.S.S. Why is He spoken of as the Lamb in connection with the exercise of great power?
J.T. He has power, of course. He is the Lion of the tribe of Judah. He has power as having been through death, and having risen, to open the seals; but the Lamb is the Sufferer as far as men are concerned. He was led as a lamb to the slaughter. As the Lamb He died.
R.S.S. I see that; but He is spoken of as a lamb in another case, which is rather difficult to understand. For instance, chapter 6, the power is spoken of as the wrath of the Lamb.
J.T. Men speak of things in that way. Chapter 6:15 - 17. The Person that has been in suffering comes out to execute wrath, of course; but then when He comes it is as "King of kings, and Lord of lords". (@Revelation 19:16) The nations think of the wrath as immediate, but they are mistaken.
{277}
J.B. In the heavenly city, God and the Lamb are there. What about that?
J.T. The Lamb is invariably the position of the Lord here as a sufferer. The bride is the Lamb's wife. He who suffers reigns. The Lord presented in that way in the book of Revelation draws out the sympathies of the saints.
R.S.S. In that way it is like the Lord presented as Son of man. As Son of man He was the Sufferer and as Son of man He will reign. "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up". (@John 3:14)
J.T. So in chapter 14: "These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth". (@Revelation 14:4)
G.A.T. What of the Lion of the tribe of Judah?
J.T. That is Christ viewed in all His strength, but when He actually takes up the work of redemption, it is as a Lamb slain that He is seen in the midst of the throne. To open the seals He must take a Lamb's position and die.
E.H.T. Are the rewards in connection with the rapture or the appearing?
J.T. Rewards are in display.
E.H.T. "My reward is with me". (@Revelation 22:12)
J.T. He brings them all with Him, but they are public.
R.S.S. There is a scripture in that connection in @2 Timothy 1 in regard to Onesiphorus. Paul desires that the Lord might show him mercy in that day. Why should mercy come in in that day? That is evidently the appearing, is it not?
J.T. It is a remarkable connection of mercy. I think what the apostle had in mind was that the Lord should reward him in view of that day. The Lord's mercy is displayed in that day in that man. As a matter of fact, if you are there it is a question of the mercy of the Lord.
E.H.T. I had a question in view in connection
{278}
with Paul: "Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing". (@2 Timothy 4:8)
R.S.S. The appearing is the introduction to the kingdom.
J.T. @Revelation 19 presents the Lord coming out, but He comes out in regard of the evil that is here, He comes with all His imperial titles, King of kings, and Lord of lords; and the beast and the false prophet and the kings of the earth come up, and the Lord destroys them. The beast and the false prophet are cast into the lake of fire alive, and the others are slain with the sword. The dragon gets all his titles, he is "that old serpent, the devil, and Satan", (@Revelation 20:2) and an angel takes him and binds him for a thousand years; and that makes room for the thrones to be set in chapter 20. "And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years". (@Revelation 20:4) So that chapter 19 and the first paragraph of chapter 20 clears the scene. There are thrones, and they sit upon them, and judgment is given to them. That refers to the place of the saints of the present dispensation. Then the souls of those beheaded, on account of the testimony of Jesus, and the word of God, and those that had not worshipped the beast, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. That is to say, all those suffering under the beast after the assembly is removed, they also come in for a place in the reigning.
B.T.F. They do not come in as of the assembly.
J.T. But they have a place on the throne. "They
{279}
lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years". (@Revelation 20:4) They are not omitted. The fact that they do not go up with the assembly does not debar them from reigning.
J.L.J. They come in in the first resurrection.
J.T. So it says, "Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years". (@Revelation 20:6) That is the great end reached. The remaining part of the book is a description of the city, and the last chapter is a sort of appendix. The great final adjustment is seen in chapter 20 and the opening of chapter 21.
A.F.M. Would not the passage you have referred to in chapter 20:6 take in the heavenly side of things, not the earthly? They have all passed through death.
J.T. The Revelation deals more with what occurs during the Lord's absence and the great result to those who have part in His rejection and sufferings, than with those who will inhabit the millennial world *on earth*.
A.F.M. The latter is just brought in incidentally.
J.T. The point is to encourage the assembly and those that suffer under the beast when the assembly is taken; so all these are seen on thrones at the end.
{280}
CHRIST AS DEFENDER OF HIS PEOPLE
@Zechariah 3:1,2; @2 Timothy 4:16 - 18; @Luke 7:36 - 47; @Luke 10:38 - 42; @John 12:1 - 9
What I have in my mind to speak about is the manner of the Lord's protection of His people, a subject that ought to be of real interest to us all, for we are still, as we may say, in the enemy's country, and, as there, we are bound to be made to feel his unceasing opposition. At times the Lord may be pleased to give a season of quietude to His people, for if our ways please Him He is able even to make our enemies to be at peace with us. They may not cease to be our enemies, but peace is enforced on them. The enmity may remain, alas! whilst open opposition ceases. That often occurs in the history of God's people, and we are all entitled to look for it. It is one great incentive for walking in ways that please God. He makes our enemies to be at peace with us, but then, as I said their enmity may remain, though only to express itself as the Lord permits it.
I have read this chapter in the Old Testament in order to call attention to the continuous presence here of the adversary. The word in the passage in @Zechariah 3 rendered Satan is *adversary*. When Joshua appeared before the angel of the Lord the adversary was there. The angel of the Lord was there, and Joshua was before him. I only allude to it briefly. As Joshua appears before the angel the adversary appears there to resist him. And then the Lord says unto Satan, "The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan; even the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee". Now *there*, is the great centre of all prophetic testimony. The situation is in that verse condensed. Jerusalem, Joshua the high priest,
{281}
Satan. The great subjects of prophetic testimony are brought together there. I am not going to engage you with prophecy exactly, although I do not hesitate to take up prophecy, for it is said to be the *testimony of Jesus*. Who among us who love Jesus can fail to appreciate, and indeed desire, to understand that which is *His* testimony?
Now Jerusalem, in the Old Testament, stands for the testimony, and if you are acquainted with the book of Zechariah, you will remember that in chapter 2 the angel is directed to "run, speak to this young man saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls". (@Zechariah 2:4) Zechariah was the young man, one who had a heart for the testimony. If you have a heart for the testimony you will be instructed in regard to it. Take Daniel, for instance, a young man, he had a heart for the testimony. Think of him there in the kingdom of the Medes, president among the princes of the realm, responsible for the huge business of the kingdom, think of him finding leisure three times a day to open his windows towards Jerusalem, for prayer. Jerusalem was everything to his heart, and he opened his windows three times a day, and that was in the teeth of the opposition of the princes. What a word for every young man here! And then we have Daniel's prayer, a prayer that we should all study, and in answer to it he receives light; an angel is directed to enlighten him in regard to his people and his holy city; chapter 9. He is to be made to understand how many weeks are determined for the bringing in of everlasting righteousness and for the anointing of the holy of holies. Daniel is also made acquainted with the character of the opposition. In chapter 7 the history of the Gentile monarchies is outlined to him, ending with the great western power with which we have all had to do. In a certain sense we come under it. We have all had to do with the western power, and
{282}
it was that great western power that had to do with the Lord Jesus. It was that power that cut-off Messiah. I only refer to it in the briefest way so that you may understand the nature of the opposition of the adversary. The history of the monarchies is pursued till the fourth power is seen acting against Christ. Then in chapter 8 you have the history of the same monarchies only in their eastern bearing, and their history is pursued till in the end a man of "fierce countenance" arises and he attacks Christ, the Prince of princes. In other words, the world-power in its eastern and western branches is seen at the end energised by satanic power against Jerusalem and against Christ. That is what is coming in. When God will revert to Jerusalem, as He will when the assembly is removed, for He has never given it up, He will be as a wall of fire round about it, as we learn from this prophet; and He will bring in man and clothe him in Jerusalem. So that you have the city defended, and man in it clothed. That is the purpose of God in regard to Jerusalem. The energy of the Gentile world will be directed against it, but only to meet with the great Defender of Jerusalem, "The Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee". I cannot go into the detail of the results to these Gentile powers, but that will be the great end. The prophetic scriptures are full of it, full of what God will do for Jerusalem, and how He will establish in Jerusalem that which is according to Christ, as represented here by Joshua.
Now I wish to turn to what I had specially in view, and that is, to show you how God, for the moment, has turned aside from the literal Jerusalem, and has placed His testimony among the Gentiles. He has turned from the earthly Jerusalem and He has set up His testimony in another way among the Gentiles. I hope to come to details presently, but I wish to show you how that for which Jerusalem
{283}
stood is now connected with the assembly, and that directly the true bearing and character of the assembly comes to light the world-power attacks it. I have, therefore, referred to the apostle Paul, because he was the great vessel in whom that testimony came to light. You will remember that in @Acts 26, in the detail of his conversion, it is said that a light above the brightness of the sun shone from heaven round about him. There had been light set at Jerusalem, but it is a wonderful thing to be illuminated from *heaven*. Now we may say that heavenly light shines about us; the light shone all about Paul; and when Christ was born the glory of the Lord shone round about the shepherds.
Now, it is one thing to have the light *about* you and it is quite another thing to have it *in* you. In Paul's case the light entered *into* him. The light of Christianity, we may say, is all round about us. It is a wonderful thing that God has been pleased to shed light from heaven, and it is all around us. But it is one thing that it should be all around us, and another thing that, as I said, it should be *in* us. God's thought is that it should be *in* us. It entered into Paul, so that Paul became a luminous body; that is to say, he became a reflection of the testimony. He says, "not as Moses, who put a veil over his face". If there was a veil, it was not over Paul's face. If there is a veil anywhere it is on men's hearts; that is where the veil is. The god of this world has placed it there, he has placed the veil on men's hearts so that the light of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God, should not shine for them. In Paul there was the reflection of the testimony; he was the witness of it, and so he comes in contact with "the beast". The four Gentile monarchies are likened to four beasts.
Now beasts are made to be taken and destroyed, but God, in wonderful forbearance, bears with these
{284}
beasts till they commit some overt act against the testimony. In this there is an important principle for us. We are not to interfere with the agents of evil. We know they are there. We know they are ravenous beasts, but we are not to interfere with them. Neither does God interfere with them until they commit some overt act against Him. He allows them, in wondrous patience, to continue their course. The wicked man described by Daniel, who practised and prospered, is allowed to pursue his course until he stands up against the Prince of princes and then he is "broken without hand". The fact is, that in the future the whole world-power will combine under one head. The beast, the false prophet and the kings of the earth will all be gathered together against the Lord, but only to meet their final doom. The Lord comes out of heaven with His glorious titles. He has imperial titles. The only one entitled to imperial titles is Christ. He is King of kings and Lord of lords. He will come in imperial and heavenly glory. The beast and the false prophet, the great representatives of worldly power, are taken and cast alive into the lake of fire. Think of the power the Lord has! Consider the power of the angel who sat at the Lord's tomb, of whom it is said, "his look was as lightning ... and for fear of him the guards trembled and became as dead men", (@Matthew 28:3,4). If all the navies and all the armies of the world were put together, how easily God could smite them with lightning!
Now the Lord Jesus Christ controls all that power. The beast and the false prophet will be taken and cast alive into the burning lake. If all the power of the nations were concentrated under one head, what is that in the presence of Christ? The beast and the false prophet are taken alive; Napoleon was taken alive and imprisoned, but he escaped. He broke through the power of Great Britain and escaped, but
{285}
will the beast and the false prophet ever escape? No, they will be taken, alive and cast into the lake of fire. And then this great adversary, whose titles are given to us in @Revelation 20, will be bound; an angel comes down with a chain; what irony is in that figure; and that great adversary, the Devil and Satan, is chained and cast into the bottomless pit to remain there for a thousand years. Such is the power that is in the hand of Christ, the great Defender, of Jerusalem and the great Defender of the assembly.
When the "beast" attacks Paul, he says, "The Lord stood with me". (@2 Timothy 4:17) There was not another to stand by him; he says, "all men forsook me". How searching that is! How we recoil from "the mouth of the lion"! Paul did not; he says, "Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion". (@2 Timothy 4:17) The lion was not destroyed, nor is he yet destroyed. Indeed, Paul was afterwards, as it were, given to him, and it was Paul's glory to give up his life for Christ, but the Lord did not allow him to be sacrificed to the lion until by him the preaching is fully known. If the preaching is fully known, Paul can depart; he can have the honour of martyrdom. But the power is in the hands of Christ, and the lion's mouth must be closed until the preaching is fully known. Thank God, Paul was retained here until then. The Lord was the great Defender of the testimony and the preaching must be fully known and all the Gentiles must hear, and then Paul can depart.
All the apostles, I doubt not, suffered martyrdom. That was an honour which they all coveted. Peter said, in writing his second epistle, that he was about to put off his tabernacle, as the Lord had shown him; but this was not until he had finished his testimony.
{286}
He was not communicating anything new; he wrote to remind the saints of what had been already ministered. He puts off his tabernacle when he has finished his ministry, and not before. And so with Paul; the lion's mouth is stopped, so to speak, till the preaching is fully known, till all the Gentiles hear. We are among the Gentiles, and, thank God, we have heard. But the lion is going to open his mouth again. The great western persecuting power is really continued in the ecclesiastical system that has replaced the empire, and it will reappear in an imperial character and it will attack Jerusalem; but only to be broken, never again to be revived. The beast and the false prophet are taken alive and cast into the lake of fire.
Well now, I want to come to the three, scriptures in the gospels which I read. I wish to show you how the power of Christ that will be exercised in the defence of Jerusalem, and has been exercised in the defence of the testimony set in the assembly, is now exercised in the defence of the saints individually. I want to show you, if I can, how He defends us in detail. Many of you may think that you have no part in that which is to be defended, and that you understand little or nothing about the testimony. Well, I would say this to you, If you are a believer in Christ, you are a lover of Christ, and if you are a lover of Christ you are sure to come under persecution. Every lover of Jesus suffers. This woman in @Luke 7 was a lover of Jesus. I refer to her only in this way. Every lover of Jesus expresses his love in some way. It is futile to talk about loving Christ if you do not express it; I could enlarge upon that, but as you express your love to Jesus, you come under persecution.
Now, what I wish to show you is, that Jesus defends you. We all know that British sovereigns assume the title of *Defender of the Faith*. That is
{287}
a very great title to assume, and it is questionable if that has ever been true of a wearer of the British crown. The great Defender of the faith is the Lord Jesus Christ. Now this woman had faith, and as having faith, she had affection. She had love for Jesus, and, as having love for Jesus, she expresses it, and thus came under persecution; but the Lord defended her. What a glorious defence it was! How complete! Simon himself is compelled to defend her. In answer to the Lord's question as to who would love Him most, he says, "I suppose that he to whom he forgave most". (@Luke 7:43) That was the woman. How the Lord stops the mouths of our opposers! He only can do it. Leave it to Him. *You* cannot do it. Had this poor woman been left to defend herself in the presence of Simon the Pharisee she would be under a great disadvantage. She had no title to be in his house, but Jesus had been invited there. Simon could not but recognise the Lord, for he had invited Him, and Jesus seizes the advantage and defends the one who loves Him. He silences her opposer. I suppose there is not one in this room tonight who would not profess to be a lover of Jesus; if you are, He will defend you.
Now, suppose you are a *listener* and *learner*; that is what Mary was. I trust we are all here as learners. No one, I trust, has come to this meeting out of mere curiosity, but as a learner; the Lord defends the learners. Christians need instruction, and the Lord Himself is the great Instructor of His people. If you sit down, as Mary did, to listen to Jesus, you will be persecuted. It may be by one near to you in the flesh; it may be by a wife or a husband. It may be said to you, Why can you not stay at home, instead of going to the meeting? How often that question is raised. If Jesus is teaching we must be learners from Him, and we must allow nothing to interfere with us in this. Would to God the saints
{288}
could listen more to the Lord! Mary was listening to Him. We are told that she "was listening to his word". We are not told what He was saying, but if you are listening to Him you will find that He is always speaking. Mary was listening to Him and Martha condemned her. Martha was a remarkable woman. She owned the house. It is spoken of as belonging to Martha, and evidently she was a hospitable woman; indeed, she was a true saint of God, but she was a persecutor of Mary. Your Christianity may not save you from being a persecutor. You remember that Ishmael, who, although brother to Isaac, was Isaac's persecutor. Relationship of that kind does not save you from becoming an instrument of evil; though it may be in a very small way. But the Lord defends Mary; and how perfect His defence is! He says to Martha, "thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that *good*, part, which shall not be taken away from her". Mary is defended by the Lord. What He said justified Mary. He not only uses His authority to stop the mouth of Martha, but He shows that Mary was right. Mary was going in for what was eternal; Martha was engaged with the temporal. Mary was wise. In fact she was a child of wisdom; she was justifying wisdom, and the Lord justifies *her*.
We find Mary again in the gospel of John, the same Mary, and there she is a worshipper. I believe that Mary's act in @John 12 may be regarded as worship. The whole atmosphere outside was charged with murder. Mary felt it. She is not now engaged with the death of Lazarus. She sees those holy feet of Jesus, the same that had been anointed by the woman in @Luke 7. Their journey on earth is closing. The Lord's heel was about to be bruised by the serpent; the serpent dominated the situation for the moment at Jerusalem. Mary's heart felt all
{289}
this and was drawn out to the Lord's Person. It is not now listening to what He is *saying*. She *knows Him* now. She *has* listened to Him; she has seen His power and has felt His sympathy. He had walked with her in sympathy to the sepulchre of her brother. She had seen His power in the resurrection of Lazarus, but now *He* is going to die, and her whole soul is drawn out to Him in worship.
I would impress upon you, dear brethren, the importance of meditating on John's gospel so as to be imbued with a spirit of worship. If there is anything on earth that Satan hates, it is a company of saints worshipping the Father. But what a triumph for the Father to have secured in a world of opposition a company of worshippers! Well, Mary illustrates what God seeks. She is a worshipper and she is attacked, but the Lord defends her. He undertakes for her. He points to Judas. This time Judas is the accuser and opposer; the Lord points out the truth and Satan comes to light; the accuser is a thief. You may depend upon it that whilst opposition may begin in a very simple and small way, and you can hardly understand why it is there, or what induces it, in due time it will become exposed. What is the secret of Judas¬ opposition? He was a thief and had the bag, and bare what was put therein. That was the opposer of the worshipper of Jesus. But the Lord defends her. He says, "Let her alone: against the day of my burying hath she kept this. For the poor always ye have with you; but me ye have not always". How we should take advantage of the presence of the Lord! Mary embraced her opportunity. He was about to die; but while He remained present she showed her appreciation of Him. She spent her all upon Him and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment. This, as we have seen, draws out deadly opposition, but the Lord defended Mary.
{290}
Well, dear brethren, that is all I wanted to say. You can easily see what I have had before me, especially in the gospels. We find there the *lovers* of Jesus and they are defended by Him. There are also the *learners* of Jesus, and He is their defender; and there are the *worshippers* of Jesus, and they too are defended by Him. So that in every way we may reckon on the lord's protection until the end.
May the Lord give us to refuse to defend ourselves, and to nestle under the wing of *His* protection.
{291}
Pages 291 - 363-"A Dispensation of Blessing"
Belfast and elsewhere, 1913 (Volume 19)
A DISPENSATION OF BLESSING
@Romans 12:14 - 21; @Romans 13:1 - 14
J.T. These verses show the character of Christianity in a very special way. There was to be no curse, it was to be all blessing. The idea of cursing and blessing seems to have arisen in @Genesis 9. "Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be". (@Genesis 9:25) The idea of cursing is hardly in keeping with Christianity. The apostle, in writing to the Corinthians, said: "If anyone love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema maranatha", (@1 Corinthians 16:22) but it would take place at the coming of the Lord.
T.M.G. Cursing is certainly not the way that God has dealt with us. His way with us is all blessing.
Ques. What do you say about the Anathema maranatha?
J.T. It leads on to the coming of the Lord.
Ques. I have often wondered why it comes in there.
J.T. Well, I understand that the apostle carefully guarded the dispensation. He maintained its character. Curse is not attached to this dispensation; it is a time of blessing; but then the time of the curse is coming, and in the end, if anyone love not the Lord Jesus Christ after all these long years of grace, let him be accursed. So that this verse in @Romans 12 would guard that too; it would maintain us in keeping with the dispensation to "bless and curse not".
T.M.G. A dispensation of blessing, and not of cursing. The curse, as you say, will come, and the dispensation will be over then for those who have rejected the blessing..
J.T. No doubt the curse has reference to the
{292}
Canaanite; wherever he is discovered it has reference to him.
W. What does the Canaanite set forth?
J.T. I think the Canaanite is marked by disregard of divine authority. "Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren". (@Genesis 9:25) It is the family of Canaan in view of Israel; but, spiritually, the Canaanite is really Israel. Israel finally occupied the ground of the Canaanite. Having light from God we see it now at the present time. But God holds all still on the ground of blessing, as I understand it. The apostle deferred the thought of cursing until the coming of the Lord: he maintained the character of the dispensation in that sense; so that the Lord's attitude is that of blessing, and He wishes us to be in keeping with that.
T.M.G. I suppose that is the great point here.
J.T. I think it is. This chapter, beginning with the mercies of God, has in view that we should be in keeping with what God is, as revealed. The Canaanite having been brought to light, instead of the curse being executed at the beginning, grace is offered. The Lord said, "that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem", (@Luke 24:47). Saul of Tarsus is a very notable example; instead of being destroyed, he was blest. I think that from Noah onwards there is the idea of a vessel for the communication of blessing. He took the ground of blessing others; he blessed Shem and Japheth. Then afterwards you have Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob blessing. The character of God should come out in the saints. That is evidently the idea in this chapter. You cannot find it unless first of all you are in the light of the revelation of God, and then you are subject to the will of God, when you have "proved what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God", (@Romans 12:2).
{293}
Rem. The thought of the one body occurs further on in the chapter.
J.T. I think the one body is in keeping with the principles of the chapter. If you disregard your own will then you are fit for the body; so you find the expression "the Lord's body", in connection with the Lord's supper.
Rem. I think you were connecting it with light here not blessing exactly.
J.T. I was thinking of having our wills set aside; then you get your place in the body.
Ques. How do you connect it with the Supper?
J.T. "By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once", (@Hebrews 10:10). Evidently our sanctification is the setting aside of our own wills. Then Paul goes on to say in @1 Corinthians 10:17, that we, being many, are one body.
Ques. For we are all partakers of that one loaf. Is it that unity is seen in the partaking?
J.T. It is expressed in the fact that we all partake of the one loaf.
W. What is your thought in connection with the cup of blessing which we bless? It comes in here, too.
J.T. Well, I have always thought it had reference to the Spirit. The bread is symbolical of that in which our wills are set aside and then there is an allusion to the blessing into which we are introduced in the unity.
W. "Bless them that persecute you". (@Matthew 5:44) How does the blessing come in? Is it that the one body is the vessel of light, and there is only blessing connected with the one body?
J.T. Yes. It is assumed here that you are in a position to bless.
Rem. That you come out here in the character of God.
{294}
J.T. Yes, that is it; you come out in God's character.
Rem. You get it exemplified in Stephen when being stoned: he knelt down and prayed saying, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge". (@Acts 7:60)
J.T. One has nothing in one's heart but blessing, even for our bitterest enemy.
Rem. The man who manifests that spirit is recovered for God.
J.T. Yes. God is very jealous as to the dispensation, and His long-suffering is seen in the fact that it is continued. He is very desirous that we should be sympathetic with Him in it. The point of the chapter is to bring the saints into correspondence with the Man who is come to light in it.
Rem. I suppose eternal life is the result.
J.T. In result I think it is the great thought that God has in His mind for man; "there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore",
(@Psalm 133:3)
Rem. That is in connection with the conditions established there.
J.T. Yes. The conditions must be brought to pass before you can have the thing practically. But I think it is important to take account of the fact that from Noah onwards there is a vessel in which there was to be blessing. Then after Noah you get Abraham. Anyone that blessed Abraham would be blessed. "I will bless them that bless thee", (@Genesis 12:3). Such was the way God intensified the importance of Abraham; if any one blessed Abraham that one would be blessed, and if any one cursed Abraham that one would be cursed. I have no doubt it points to the position of the Lord. His presence here tested everything.
C. If the saints were walking according to the principles here, they would be a test to everything around them.
{295}
J.T. Exactly. So in the parable of the sheep and the goats in @Matthew 25. The sheep are on the Lord's right hand, and the goats are on His left; and they get there on account of what they have done to His brethren.
Ques. Is not what is manifest here in the saints really the response to the blessing we have received ourselves?
J.T. I think so.
Rem. So in connection with eternal life; if one's soul is not in some measure in the light of what that is, one could not come out in blessing.
J.T. No. Now, when you come to Isaac you have the full blessing intimated, because He blesses Jacob *and Esau*.
Rem. You mean Esau forfeited all title to it, yet he is blest?
J.T. That is it. That shows us who Isaac is a type of.
Rem. He blesses as being a type of Christ, the risen Man.
W.H.M. In that way he would answer to the present dispensation.
J.T. That is what I thought. It is a very grand position in that way, because Israel having forfeited all blessing, comes into blessing in Christ finally.
T.M.G. As Esau came in for blessing.
J.T. Yes; they had really acted profanely: they had despised their birthright. All that God had for them was presented to them in Christ in the power of the Spirit, and they despised it. But for all that Esau comes into blessing. In Hebrews it is said that he sought the blessing and did not get it. This refers to the special blessing he had forfeited, but as a matter of fact Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau. Esau did not get the blessing of the first-born.
W. Is the blessing connected by the Spirit with eternal life?
{296}
J.T. Surely. It is enjoyed by the Spirit. Therefore, what is in view here is more general. It is a very great thing, I think, to see how God has risen above all the difficulties in the world, above all the lawlessness of men, of the Canaanite; and the blessing is there. So the apostle says "Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us, for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree: that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ: that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith", (@Galatians 3:13,14). In other words, Christ having brought everything to light, He bore the penalty Himself, and it is that we might receive the promise of the Spirit; that the blessing of Abraham might arrive at the Gentiles.
Ques. What do you say the blessing of Abraham is?
J.T. It has often been spoken of as eternal life. The gospel was preached before to Abraham saying, "Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee". (@Hebrews 6:14) If death is upon man here, the great thought must be to have life, and it is easy to see that those who had any thought about it looked for that; they looked for life.
G. Abraham looked for it.
J.T. Yes, in some sense. I think all the Old Testament believers felt that life was the great thing. Take Hezekiah; he was a man specially singled out by the Spirit to show how much he valued life when God announced that he had to die. What you find is that the Old Testament believers, after Abraham, each one took account of the light communicated to Abraham; that is to say, God said He was God Almighty, and that He could raise the dead. So Joseph's faith is, I think, a remarkable illustration of the kind of faith that looks for the resurrection of the saints. Abraham believed in the resurrection of
{297}
Christ, and Joseph believed in the resurrection of the saints, based on that. If one believes in the resurrection of the saints what is the ground of it? Of course, we have the apostle's words now for it, but he bases what he has to say on the fact that God had raised Christ, @1 Thessalonians 4:14.
Ques. You say Joseph believed in the resurrection of the saints; is that shown in the charge he gave concerning his bones?
J.T. Yes; he made mention of the departure of the children of Israel; he did not give any commandment in connection with that: that was not his ministry: that fell to Moses. Moses had all the commandments in regard to the departing of Israel out of Egypt; but Joseph has another object in view. Joseph was put into a coffin, or ark, in Egypt. Sarah was put into a grave. If people believe that God is going to raise them there is no need to build huge things over their graves. In Egypt monuments would rather point to unbelief. The world is marked by infidelity in regard to the power of God.
T.M.G. Joseph had not a great tomb.
G. The Egyptian idea was to preserve the body from decay.
J.T. Yes; it was to last for ever. It is rank infidelity. The Egyptian mummies that can be seen today, after a lapse of thousands of years, are really a testimony to infidelity. Whereas, if you believe that Jesus died and rose again, that is light to your soul, and if you believe that, then them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him.
G. A saint's funeral is a very important occasion.
J.T. Quite so. Nothing can be more painful than an unconverted person's funeral; there is deep gloom and darkness; whereas faith reckons on the power of God, who raised Christ from the dead. God says, "I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob". (@Exodus 3:6)
{298}
G. He is not the God of the dead, but of the living.
Rem. So that the burial of a saint is really a scene of victory.
J.T. The great thing for the saints is to be equal to the light communicated to us in the gospel. If Christ be not raised there is no resurrection; but if He is, there is a resurrection.
Rem. God first gets His portion in this chapter, and then man. "Present your bodies a living sacrifice ... unto God". (@Romans 12:1)
J.T. Yes, that is one thing you have that you can always present to God. God is pleased to take our bodies in that way, and use them. There is a certain moral greatness indicated in verse 15, "Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep". I suppose it is easier to weep with those that weep than to rejoice with those that rejoice. Naturally, we could go in with those that weep rather than with those that rejoice, because envy is so liable to be found in us if another has occasion to rejoice.
Rem. If we can rejoice, it means that we can disappear.
J.T. Yes, you are thinking only of the good that God is doing; and if you see that, you can disappear, you have no thought of yourself. It is important to see that what we are called to as Christians is in itself much greater than anything that could be in the way of service here; and if you lay hold of that you will not be carried away by anything here.
Rem. The thing that one is after is really greater than any evidence of what is coming out in you.
J.McF. The 15th verse is in keeping with the 5th; "we being many are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another". (@Romans 12:5)
J.T. Quite so. It brings a brother closer to you, and it enhances his value in your eyes if you see the truth of the body. "Members *one of another*" brings it home to you. Thus I am not liable to have
{299}
any feeling if you are honoured, because what you may have in the way of light or gift is for me and for all the saints.
J.McG. What is the thought of "having the same respect one for another?"
J.T. I suppose it would imply that there were to be no preferences.
Rem. I think what follows explains that. "Not minding high things, but going along with the lowly; be not wise in our own eyes".
J.T. The closing verses show, I think, in a way, what Christianity is as a moral power in the world. "Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good". It is the moral victory over the world: you must have the good to overcome with it.
J.McF. That would be bringing in principles that do not belong to this world; they are principles of another world.
Rem. It is much like Abraham when Melchizedek brought forth bread and wine. Abraham was furnished with it, and he could refuse everything that was offered to him by the kings of this world.
J.T. A Christian never needs to move on account of evil.
G. That is very important.
Rem. It is really a testimony to the Man that is going to displace the man here.
J.T. It is a question of moral superiority. Shutting yourself up is not the idea; stand your ground, and God will support you. Bring your Christianity into the circumstances of life.
W. That is where the blessing comes in.
{300}
BAPTISM
@Romans 6
J.T. It helps, I think, to bring the types into all these epistles, because they are divinely intended, to supply what is in many instances passed over as to detail in the New Testament. I think this chapter fits in with @Exodus 15.
Rem. They all were baptised to Moses in the cloud and in the sea.
J.T. The principle of baptism was seen in Moses at his infancy, and the parents¬ action in regard to it. But the formal type of baptism is really the Red Sea; and it is remarkable that it does not say that Moses crossed the sea. What we read is that by faith *they* crossed, the people crossed. So therefore the Red Sea teaches us what the import of baptism is. As we grow up, and recognise that we are baptised, the time comes when it must become a matter of faith to us each one. It is a very remarkable thing, to my mind, that it is the only instance in which it is said of the people that they did *anything* by faith. If baptism is not a matter of faith, it is obvious that it must be a dead letter to us; of no moral value at all.
Ques. When you point out that it is not specially recorded that Moses crossed the Red Sea, is it to be inferred from that that he had already passed through it in principle?
J.T. Yes. What is said of him is, that he celebrated the passover by faith; and it does not say it was for himself alone, but that the destroying angel should not touch *them*; as if he recognised the great penalty of God that lay upon them.
G. "By faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them"; (@Hebrews 11:28) he had the people in his
{301}
mind. So that Moses, in that sense, typified the Lord; he went into death typically when placed in the river by his mother.
T.M.G. So they were baptised to Moses, their leader, and he was typically Christ.
J.T. I think it helps us to see the position of Moses in regard to the people; how he really, before he left Egypt, took the place of the destroying angel; he slew the Egyptian. He acted before the time; he never had been assigned that work at all; the work of judgment was not assigned to Moses; he was to be the *deliverer* of the people; and what we are told after that is that by faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king: that is to say, he had light in regard of divine power; he did not fear man's power. And when he returned after forty years (he had learned of God during the forty years that the penalty really rested on himself as much as on the Egyptian) there is no thought of destroying the Egyptians: what he does recognise is, that the destroying angel is approaching, and the only shelter even for the Israelites is the passover, and the blood. So you can see the Spirit of Christ in Moses; it does not say he thought of his own shelter, but of the people's. When you com to the anti-type the Lord is the passover. He went into death in order that the destroying angel should not touch us.
T.M.G. Christ our passover is sacrificed for us, therefore let us keep the feast.
J.T. Well, now, by faith they crossed the sea; and that is where I think the teaching of baptism, is seen in the type; we have all to come to the matter as in faith; in other words, what is the light you have as to your baptism?
C. And here we have it, "reckon yourselves dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord", (@Romans 6:11).
{302}
J.T. Yes. "As many of you as were baptised unto Christ Jesus were baptised unto his death". He there brings in the import of baptism.
W.M. It is the way out of the place in which we were into a new position, is it not?
J.T. I think so; it is change of position. It is a great thing to see that it was a matter of faith. The parental idea is also taught in Exodus; the children must not remain in Egypt; everyone must go; but then, everyone *in time* must know in his own soul the meaning of baptism.
Rem. So that you would say it is the spirit of it, more than the thing itself?
J.T. Well, as to the outward form, the two ordinances, baptism and the Lord's supper, must become dead letters if there is no faith. By faith Moses was hid by his parents. That is all very well, that is very beautiful. Moses did not have any faith there, he was a babe. So with each of us, we may be baptised in that way, but then the chapter is for *adults*. It is not a question here of household baptism, it is a question of the import of baptism for believers, for "as many as have been baptised".
Ques. What would lead us to accept the truth of baptism?
J.T. If you are in the light of the death of the Lord as sheltering you from the destroying angel who is hovering over Egypt, you feel you must leave that sphere; judgment applies to it.
C. And that is why baptism comes in. There is a great deal, typically, in the slaying of the lamb, and the roasting with fire; the bitter herbs, and the unleavened bread: all that had its significance. But all that took place in Egypt.
Rem. There is more than faith and the act of the parents in regard to the children.
J.T. Well, you have to count on God to work in them; but in due time the child has to awaken to
{303}
its responsibility. The parent's care cannot always be counted upon.
Ques. What about the truth of it in one's soul; does it disconnect you with what is past?
J.T. I think the force of baptism is to deliver you from the order of things in which you are found. It is a public change of position; baptism is a public thing.
T.M.G. That is clear in @Romans 6.
W. You were originally connected with Adam, and baptism severs you from his headship.
T.M.G. Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? There is a *new* sphere and we are baptised to the One in that sphere.
W.K. Just as in the type of the Red Sea, they had come completely out from under the power of the bondage of Egypt into liberty and peace; and they could sing that God had brought them to His holy habitation.
J.T. Yes; you can readily see what a great change it was for Israel to be baptised to a new leader. Pharaoh's influence was broken, and the spirit of bondage under which they were in Egypt was broken, and now they were under Christ typically. But then, the point here is that, as baptised to Christ, you are baptised to His death, and you must be in keeping with that.
Ques. Are there not two sides in @Romans 6? We are baptised to His death, and baptised to Himself, who is in this new sphere. Baptism to His death separates us from the old sphere, so to speak.
J.T. They were baptised to *Moses* in the cloud, and in the sea. I have no doubt that the cloud now, in Christianity, is the presence of God.
Ques. Is it not the Leader?
J.T. Yes; but the cloud also signifies the divine presence. You are baptised into all that; as in Matthew you are baptised to the name of the Father,
{304}
Son, and Holy Spirit: that is the full revelation of God. But then, it is not only the light of that; you are baptised into the sphere where the presence of God is. That is a wonderful thought.
Ques. Is it not unfolded in that verse, "as Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father, so *we* also should walk in newness of life".
J.T. I think the idea of the cloud is that the glory was there.
T.M.G. Signifying the presence of Jehovah.
J.T. Quite so. On the mount of transfiguration there was the glory cloud. Here He is raised from the dead by the glory of the Father; so you are baptised into all that wonderful favour.
T.M.G. And we have a new platform, if one might say so, for us to walk upon.
W.M. To "walk in newness of life".
Rem. You would say that the teaching of grace is more general, whereas mercy is towards the individual.
J.T. Yes. Of course, you have the statement here, "shut up all in unbelief that he might have mercy upon all"; (@Romans 11:32) but mercy is connected with sovereignty, I think. Another point that I think, is important is, that the "old man" is the medium of sin.
Ques. What do you understand by that?
J.T. Well, I understand that the "old man" is a collective thought; it contemplates the race really, the whole race. I think you could not have the idea of the old man in one individual. The power of sin increased with the increase of the race.
T.M.G. It is the whole thing totally gone.
J.T. Yes.
W.M. It is Adam's race.
J.T. Yes. Take Israel; God had committed Himself to that nation; but it was a nation of men
{305}
in the flesh. God had committed Himself to it: the result was that sin was at its height there, and it must remain that way unless Christ dies, because God was connected with that nation as it stood.
W.M. Will you kindly open that up a little for us?
J.T. Well, the "old man" was that which God recognised. It had been taken up in Israel in a formal way, and many divine privileges had been conferred upon it. Now God was publicly committed to that, but the privileges that God had conferred only *strengthened the man*; and as the thing increased sin increased. It has to be considered a little bit: if you go into the world, and talk to one unconverted man, an ungodly man, and a few others come together, you will find that the power of sin increases as the company increases. Now, if men are set up and endowed with divine privileges, as is seen in Israel, see what power there is.
T.M.G. Is not the principle of it seen in large societies: the importance of people brought together. That is where you get the power of sin at its height.
J.McF. Is that where you get the idea of the body of sin?
J.T. Yes. Take the case of a godly man in Israel; he had to suffer from that; he could not get out of it; the only way he could get out of Israel was to apostatise.
Rem. Israel was not manifested to be the "old man" until after the coming of Christ.
J.T. Quite so; then the thing came out; but it had been there. Now, when the Lord appeared in the midst of that He had to suffer. The power of sin was there, and that had to continue, and would continue, unless Christ died.
Rem. For a godly Jew, after Christ died, faith in Him became the door out of that order of things;
{306}
and there is a new platform in the resurrection of that One, where fruit for God comes forth.
Rem. And you are in an entirely new system. Our "old man" is crucified with Him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.
J.T. There is no excuse for anyone serving sin now, because you can leave the system.
T.M.G. And that is really @Romans 6, that you leave the scene in which sin is.
J.T. It is a very notable thing that where you get men banded together, especially in a form that has an outward appearance of divine sanction, there you get the power of Satan.
Ques. Does not that all come out fully at the cross?
J.T. Yes, the sin in its totality came out there.
W.M. We have looked at the "old man" as applying to ourselves individually, not collectively.
J.T. But it is a collective idea. The power of sin was far greater in the world when Christ appeared than it was in Eden when Adam fell.
T.M.G. I was thinking of the apostle's expression in Galatians, "I am crucified with Christ". (@Galatians 2:20) Was not he then in the good of what we have in @Romans 6?
J.T. I think he was; and further, Christ lived in him.
T.M.G. Of course, that follows; but I mean it was there seen in the individual.
Ques. Do you mean that he personally had entered into what @Romans 6 sets forth for all?
Ques. It says, "If we are become identified with him in the likeness of his death". Does that involve that we have entered into the good of baptism?
J.T. It is a hypothetical statement. If you accept the likeness of His death you will be in the likeness of His resurrection.
J.K. The *if* does not imply doubt.
{307}
J.T. It is a statement in which one thing is made to depend on another; but it is brought in in the way of encouragement for the heart.
J.K. And does it not suppose that all addressed are in it?
J.T. It is put with an "if". The answer to our being in the likeness of His death now is that we shall be in the likeness of His resurrection.
W. I suppose one cannot get the truth of this without one's affections being engaged, and travelling the way He travelled.
J.T. Yes. You have the Person before you, and so you accept His death.
T.M.G. We have it following on what is presented in the previous part of the epistle.
J.T. Yes. It is what you might call the start of the wilderness path here.
T.M.G. We are brought up to a certain point, and we have Christ as the One who was in death, and is out of it.
Rem. It says in verse 7, "he that is dead is freed from sin".
J.T. That is just a statement, a truism. Christ, when He died, He died unto sin once; that is, He died to that thing once for all; "in that he liveth he liveth unto God". When He was here, He strove against sin, but He finally died to it.
Ques. To whom does he refer in verse 7?
J.K. Anyone. When you come to the application, in the next verse, it is plural; "Now if we be dead".
J.T. The question is raised at the beginning. "Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound"?
T.M.G. As if he asked, where are you going to live?
J.K. Will you continue in *that* condition?
J.T. Well now, the happy thing is that you are entitled to reckon yourself dead indeed unto sin,
{308}
but alive unto God in Christ. In the Lord's case death was actual; in our case it is moral; so it works out this way: are you glad to be relieved from the world, or are you in any circle of it? If you are in any circle or fellowship of the world you are in sin, and it has power over you.
T.M.G. Do you not get it in @Acts 8 in the case of the eunuch; Philip had preached Jesus to him. "His life is taken from the earth", (@Acts 8:33) and the eunuch gladly says, 'I go with Him; I drop *everything* here; I go with the One who has won my heart'.
Rem. I suppose it puts us in a position that we are ready for translation?
J.T. You are just now ready to be raised up; you are buried, and you cannot raise yourself up; God has to do that. I do not know that baptism is a figure of death and resurrection; it is really a figure of death.
J.K. And burial.
J.T. Yes. Baptism and a funeral are very much alike. We put a person in the waters of death; that is, he disappears from view. "Enoch was not". You *are not* as regards this world.
J.K. Is it not putting you out of sight? And what that means is, that I do not figure in any part of this world. If you do, you come under the influence of sin.
W.M. In verse 11 you are to reckon yourself dead indeed unto sin and alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
J.K. Must you not put verse 10 first; that is, what happened to Him in fact? You *reckon* that to be true of yourself which is literally true of Him.
J.T. Yes; it is a reckoning of what is literally true in Christ; it is taken up by us in a moral way. People say, what do you live on? we live on this and that. One could understand people in the world belonging to societies and the like; they cannot do
{309}
without such things. Well, now, can you do without all that? You can; and the secret of it is that you live to God. Take Paul; he says, "whether we be beside ourselves, it is to God". (@2 Corinthians 5:13) I think it is the greatest moral victory, that one can live in the presence of things one would desire naturally, and that one could acquire; but live without them because of living to God. In the wilderness God said, "Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles¬ wings, and brought you unto myself". (@Exodus 19:4) The answer to this in us is, that we are for God; we live to God.
G. It is a wonderful thing to be borne on eagles¬ wings.
J.T. Yes; and then He proposed to make them a company of priests; and He said, "all the earth is mine". (@Exodus 19:5) That is a great leverage to the soul; you do not need to go in for the earth now. It is a great testimony to what Christianity is when you can live outside the things that the world offers, even although they are within your reach.
The book of Ecclesiastes is one of the most interesting books, because it shows us a man that had abundant means to acquire the world, and found it only vanity and vexation of spirit. Well, there are many men who have that today, but there is one thing they have not got that Solomon had; that is, if they go in for the world today they will not have the wisdom of God in it. The writer of Ecclesiastes went in for it to the full measure, but he was endued with wisdom, and that never failed him, even when he went in for the things of the world. If we go in for it, we do so at our own charges; we cannot have God in it.
W.H.M. He sums it all up as vanity and vexation of spirit.
J.T. Look at the wisdom he had; and God enabled him to use it. We might have untold millions,
{310}
but we may depend upon it we can never get out of it what he got, yet he calls it vanity and vexation of spirit.
J.McF. "All the rivers run into the sea yet the sea is not full"; (@Ecclesiastes 1:7) they could not fill his heart.
T.M.G. Our portion is above the sun.
J.T. What I was thinking of specially was, that even though people have means they have not what Solomon had in going in for the world. If *he* could not get anything satisfying out of it, no one could.
W. Is there not a responsibility on the part of the saints to be true to their baptism?
J.T. It is an inconsistent thing for saints to live in the world if they are baptised to Christ. There is in the world the profession of being baptised to Christ, but people are not in the truth of His death.
T.M.G. The One to whom we are baptised is the Lord, the One to whom everything belongs. We are His, and all that we have is His; so that what we are and have belong to Him.
J.T. So that your baptism covers not only yourself, but all your belongings. One point that is noteworthy is that the cattle that belonged to the people had to go; not a hoof remained; but there is not a word said about the cattle going into Canaan.
C. Everything went through the sea.
J.T. Yes; so that baptism covers everything, not only yourself, but your family and your whole belongings.
J.K. Hence the apostle says here, "How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?" Now, another thing is that you are under the Lord, and you are under Christ, so that sin shall not have dominion over you.
T.M.G. A few years ago I remember hearing of a dear old Christian in Co. Tyrone, and he had a troublesome neighbour. This Christian had a wife and children, and a little bit of land, and it took
{311}
him all his time to support his wife and children. However, his neighbour was very troublesome, and he was practically an infidel, and used to jibe at the Christian about his Bible, and so forth. And one day he said to him, 'Don't you profess to believe the Bible?' and he replied, 'I do, thank God: it tells me of my blessed Saviour who has loved me, and died for me, and I like to read my Bible'. 'And do you profess to obey what it says?' 'Oh, indeed I do', said he; 'however I may fail in it, I believe that what it tells me to do I should do'. 'Well, does it not say that you are to give to him that asketh of you?' 'Yes', said he, 'the blessed Lord said that, and I believe that that is right'. 'Well', said he, 'I want your cow'. '*My* cow!' said he, '*my* cow! she is not mine'. 'Not yours? Did not I see you buying her in the fair?' 'But she is not mine'. 'To whom does she belong?' 'She belongs to the Lord Jesus Christ, and He lent her to me to support my little family, and I cannot think of giving her to you'.
J.T. That is very good.
J.K. He had the spirit of the thing.
G. Would you say a word or two about reckoning.
J.T. Well, reckoning is the result of light as to Christ's death. You would scarcely reckon a thing unless you wanted to; and if you are enlightened as to what the world really is, and the import of the death of Christ, you are very thankful that you are entitled to reckon yourself dead to sin; and then what follows is that you are in keeping with the death of the Lord. You have a body, and that body is to be devoted to God.
W.M. "Yield yourselves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God", (@Romans 6:13).
J.T. Yes; it is such a happy deliverance. Now I am clear of the world, it no longer has dominion over
{312}
my spirit, and I belong to God. I have members, hands and feet, and so forth, and I can use them for God. And as the chapter goes on, it connects what we have been dwelling on with eternal life, not from the divine side as in chapter 5, but from our side; but the road to it is just in that way: "ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord". A wonderful end to reach!
G. Is that our side?
J.T. Yes; chapter 5 shows how it has come in: grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. This chapter shows how we touch it; and I think what we have had before us already as to eternal life is very important. It is not introduced where it is a question of the internal formation of the assembly, but it is used in connection with what is external. It is introduced in this section of the epistle, and I scarcely think you find it afterwards.
Ques. In view of what?
J.T. In view of God's victory here on earth, and what God brings men into. Chapter 6 places us in correspondence with chapter 5. Thus the question of life is settled. Chapter 7 deals with the one other proposition, the law.
W.M. Eternal life is not wages?
J.T. No; it is on the principle of gift; it is too great a thing to be a compensation simply; it is presented thus in a sense in chapter 2:7, but really it is a question of God's purpose for man.
Ques. And that goes further than what Adam lost?
J.T. Yes.
W.M. Is it not important to notice that it is given us in Him; it is an "act of favour ... *in* Christ Jesus our Lord".
{313}
Ques. What did you say about an act of favour?
J.T. It is an act of favour; it is *"the* act of favour of God"; showing, I think, that it is the full divine thought of blessing for man. The result of Joseph's administration was that the Egyptians were all bought over for Pharaoh, not only their land, and their cattle, but themselves: and so here the effect of Christ's administration is that we are bought over for God, absolutely.
{314}
MARRIED TO ANOTHER
@Romans 7
J.T. This chapter has been likened to a Psalm as to the structure of it; the earlier verses show what the divine thought is, and the remaining verses of the chapter show how it is reached experimentally by us. The divine thought is clearly that we should "be to another".
Ques. What does that convey to you?
J.T. It conveys several thoughts. One thought is that marriage involves the establishment of a new system: "For this cause shall a man *leave* father and mother", (@Matthew 19:5); that is, leaving the relationship in which one stood to one's parents in that household, and the establishing of a new one.
W. What is the connection between this and what we had last night in the sixth chapter?
J.T. The sixth chapter, as to the types, answers, I think, to the position in the wilderness after the people had crossed the sea, with eternal life in prospect, with the end in view; whereas the seventh chapter takes us to mount Horeb; that is the mount of God where the covenant was made. Whilst as to the law we are regarded as having died to it, yet underlying the marriage relationship is the new covenant; it is that we should "be married to another"; this involves the new covenant, but it is not developed. The seventh chapter takes us further than the sixth. Where God spoke to Moses was on mount Horeb, and the people were to serve Him *there;* and their happiness depended on the observance of the terms of the covenant made with them.
W. The experience, then, in chapter 7, would be the experience of the people, typically speaking, between Sinai and the brazen serpent?
J.T. Quite so: hence you have the brazen serpent
{315}
in the next chapter. The chapter shows how the soul is transferred from the legal system, which mount Sinai stood for, into the new system of things where you are in Christ. The way out is by the Deliverer at the end of chapter 7; but the end you have reached is stated in the opening verses of the chapter. It is a very important thing for souls to have clearly before them the end to be reached; then the experience that leads to that end is not so difficult.
Ques. The end to be reached is "to be to another". What have you in your mind in regard to it?
J.T. The laying of the basis of the truth of the assembly.
Ques. Is that why you thought of this scripture, as going a little further than the question of eternal life?
J.T. Yes. The relation is formed with One who is raised from the dead, to the end that we might bring forth fruit unto God; that there should be *something for God*. When you see that the marriage relationship is formed in the wilderness between Jehovah and the people, you get some inkling of the point of view here. By the death of Christ that bond is broken, but then there is a new one formed, and in order that that new bond should be really enjoyed in our souls, the experience has to be gone through by which we are practically delivered from the rule of flesh and sin. The sixth chapter is the rule of sin *outside* of us, and the seventh chapter is the rule of sin *inside* of us.
Ques. You would say the sixth chapter has more reference to our relation with God; whereas the seventh is our relation with Christ?
J.T. Yes; the sixth chapter sets forth what is due to God; but the seventh chapter is our relation with Christ, only that there are results for God in it even as in a new household.
{316}
J.McF. There is fruit for God.
J.T. Yes; there had been none under the old bond, but now there is, because of our being married to One who is raised from the dead.
Rem. Before we could have the gain of that you say we have to go through the experience in the latter part of this chapter; that is, I suppose, finding out the bondage we are in as under law?
J.T. Yes; the law, as divinely given, had a very great hold on the awakened conscience of a man, yet it has to be seen that the law has no longer any authority over the soul.
Rem. And that the being married to another involves affection and faithfulness.
J.T. Yes, and you have a wholly new Husband whose rule is a benign, liberating rule, such as the Lord is to us, in contrast to legal requirements. The difference is that between an abstract code and a living Person who loves you. An abstract code, although holy, and just, and good, has not affections. The law was an abstract code without affections.
J.McF. It demanded affections, but the new Husband supplies the love.
J.T. Yes, "we love him because he first loved us". (@1 John 4:19) That could not have been said of the law.
W. The new bond is more than faith.
J.T. Oh, it *is* more than faith; it is really by the Spirit. It involves that we have affection, too. The figure of marriage in Scripture is very interesting; as I said at the beginning, "For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and be joined to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh". (@Ephesians 5:31) There is a definite leaving of something that one had been heretofore in, as a system or establishment; you definitely leave that; "and he shall be joined to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh". (@Ephesians 5:31)
W. The Lord becomes a law to you.
J.T. Quite so. He takes the place of the old
{317}
legal bond, and I think anyone can see, by considering it, the difference between a code, however holy, and just, and good, and a living Person, One who has affection and sympathy for you; One who loves you and supports you.
Rem. The figure of marriage is a perfect figure. There must be a definite move of soul.
J.T. You can easily see the force of it if you consider a Jewish Christian; he would be entitled in the light of this chapter to regard the whole Jewish system, and all in connection with it, as not having any longer any authority over his soul. But whilst it stood, and before the Lord's death, he could not do that; but now he can, because there is a new system established in Christ in resurrection. A very interesting thought in connection with marriage, is that the wives of those to whom the promises were made were related to them after the flesh - their wives were their relatives.
J.McF. What do you see in that?
J.T. The point was that the wife was to be on an equality with the husband; she did not in any way detract from him. Rebekah did not detract from Isaac's dignity: she could not, because she was his equal as to rank, and it was very essential in her case, because she had to occupy Sarah's place, which was a very great place. I only refer to it as to the figure of marriage introduced here. In this early stage in the development of the truth lies the ground for the assembly; it is not the body here, it is each individual married to Another.
Rem. I see the necessity for the foundation.
J.T. It is remarkable how as the Scriptures develop the truths, they prepare you for what may follow as you advance; so, when you come to the truth of the assembly the marital idea is not new. The knowledge of eternal life fortifies you against all tendency arising from the presence of death here,
{318}
and the power of Satan; so that you are now equal to the truth of the assembly; the truth of the assembly is really founded on it.
S.L. Would it be right to say that the bride occupies a very dignified position?
J.T. Yes; considering the place Sarah had in the ways of God; and you can see how essential it was that Rebekah should be on an equality with Isaac, for she had to take Sarah's place. Sarah had entertained the Lord, one may say, in a wonderful way. She received Him in a very becoming manner indeed in the tent. Now, Rebekah was brought into Sarah's tent. That was prophetic; it was not simply incidental; Isaac brought her in. It was according to the mind of God that she should grace that tent; so the assembly takes the place of Israel.
S.L. Then you would say it brings us very great blessing to realise what the position of the bride is?
J.T. Yes; I did not intend to bring forward the assembly exactly, but to show the true bearing of the marriage relationship.
J.McF. What is the idea of a husband?
J.T. I think the idea of a husband is sympathy and support; he also provides for and protects the wife. How perfectly these things are found in Christ risen from the dead!
J.McF. In contrast to the law having dominion over a man as long as he lived.
J.T. Your soul is set free, and you are formed according to Him. And then there are the rights that go with the husband. You will remember what is said in @Numbers 27 of the daughters of Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, who had died in the wilderness. Zelophehad had no sons, and his daughters laid claim to the inheritance. Well, the question had to be solved, and Moses took it to the Lord, and the Lord said they spoke what was right. They were entitled to it. As a matter of fact, it was a question
{319}
of appreciating the inheritance; that is, of what is in Christ. They got the inheritance, but then the question arose as to what would befall the inheritance if they married outside the tribe of Joseph. The inheritance would then leave the tribe, so that was another question to be solved; and in the last chapter of the book, this very point arose, when the dangers of it were presented by the elders of the house of Joseph. They raised the question with Moses, and there was a decree that they should not marry outside their own tribe; they should take husbands in their own tribe. Now, that sets forth a point that one might introduce here, and that is, that the saints should see to it that none other than Christ has that place with them; because if any other has, the inheritance will pass away from under the Lord's influence.
T.M.G. What do you mean by the inheritance passing out of the Lord's influence?
J.T. Well, you see it in Christendom; has it not been carried out into the world? People gave their affections to another, and so in a sense, the things of Christ were connected with the world.
J.K. You mean in regard to political matters and worldly things?
J.T. Yes. Suppose you are a child of Christian parents, and you are a believer; well, you have come into a wonderful inheritance. That is how I take account of Christianity; it is an inheritance. I am an heir to it, but the question is, what am I going to do with it? It is good to see you claiming the inheritance, but now, are you going to connect your affections with any other than with Christ? I think, if you do, you will carry the inheritance out of the tribe to which it belongs.
Ques. Is that like what Hezekiah did in showing the vessels of the house of the Lord to the heathen king?
{320}
J.T. I think there it is more that Hezekiah initiated the stranger into the mysteries of God; he gave away the mysteries. We ought to be very careful about the inheritance. The Lord has died in order to make it good to us, and it has come down to us, and we ought to be very particular as to whether we connect it with anyone else but Christ.
Rem. That is a matter that should exercise us very much at the present time.
J.K. Perhaps we do not recognise that these things are not common to everybody; they are sometimes treated as if they were common property, whereas they are not: they are for believers alone.
J.T. I think if one connects himself as a Christian with a human organisation, one is carrying the inheritance outside its proper sphere.
Rem. And you cannot retain the freshness of the things of God in what is not of Him.
J.T. The elders of the house of Joseph, I think, stand for the Lord's claim: that was a just claim; they wished to maintain intact what belonged to the tribe. The Lord exercises that claim for us. So that if you go outside, you sacrifice your kindred and you do distinct wrong to the Lord, and to the other heirs of the property.
Rem. Rebekah was of the kindred of Isaac, and you belie that if you go outside.
J.T. Yes; just so.
Rem. The dignity of belonging to the Lord has to be maintained.
J.T. Oh, yes; but I think it is also well to notice that one does distinct violence to righteousness, because the elements of right and authority lay with the elders; they were responsible. And there is that element amongst the saints, the element of responsibility; and you do violence to that if you connect yourself as a Christian with any other thing, with any other authority but Christ.
{321}
J.McF. It is a most important thing to appreciate the inheritance.
J.T. The point in the last chapter of Numbers is what you are going to do with your affections. Well, if you go outside the tribe you are doing wrong to the tribe.
J.K. Do you mean by "the tribe" the sphere ordered by God?
J.T. Yes. Christianity has prescribed limits as an order of things here, regulated by the authority of Christ, and if you pass over these limits, you are doing violence, you are doing wrong, to the other heirs of the inheritance.
Rem. Many a one has brought discipline on himself nearly all his life by trespassing the limits.
Rem. We are to have an appreciation of the inheritance, as being heirs. It is a spiritual sphere bounded by spiritual lines.
J.McF. That we should be married to Another, even to Him who is raised from the dead. Does that fix the limits in any way?
J.T. Yes, I think so.
W. Would the realisation of this bond in chapter 7 deliver us from the sin in chapter 6?
J.T. Yes, it does, only it is not the point in chapter 6; the point there is baptism. What baptism sets forth delivers you from the world system; but you can understand that affections are needed for the marriage relation. This chapter shows how the affections are relieved of all other claimants, so that you are now free for Christ.
Ques. Would you say that the exercise contemplated in chapter 7 on account of what we are, really brings about the appreciation of the Husband?
J.T. I think so: you come first to the Deliverer as to your experience; the Deliverer becomes the Husband?
{322}
Ques. Would you say chapter 6 is more the faith side, whereas chapter 7 is the Spirit?
J.T. Well, faith is required in chapter 7; that is, what the man personified there first required was *light*; he needed light as to the Deliverer, and that being supplied, he lays hold of the Deliverer. Chapter 8 gives you the Spirit; the great point there is what the Spirit is to you. Chapter 7 is the Deliverer and the Deliverer becomes your Husband. The book of Ruth is a very beautiful outline of the experience of one who comes to approach the Deliverer, so that he might do the husband's part.
J.McF. It shows the way the affections are formed?
J.T. Yes. You remember in chapter 2 of that book Ruth is found in Boaz's field, and she takes the place of a poor Moabitess; she asserts no claim to Boaz at all; she was a Gentile stranger, and she accepted it; but he acted in wondrous grace towards her. The whole chapter is to typify the grace of Christ in the way He meets the soul. In chapter 3 she goes down to the threshing floor; and in chapter 4 she claims him, and asks him to spread his skirt over her. She recognised that he was a mighty man of wealth, and he was related to her husband. I refer to that to show how on our side the experience of this chapter leads to the Deliverer, and the marriage relationship being formed. What we find when *we* come to the Lord is that He has not to do the husband's part; for He has already done it.
Rem. The bitter experience and the Deliverer are really necessary to the appreciation of the Husband.
J.T. You are set free in your affections from all legal influences; set free for Christ.
Ques. Is it not in His death that you are set free?
J.T. Yes: we have become dead to the law by the body of Christ.
{323}
Rem. It is the light of the death of Christ brought to the soul that sets you free in that way, so that you turn to the One who becomes Husband.
J.McF. "To be to another who has been raised up from among the dead". That is a bond formed that remains. It is a link formed in life.
J.K. Our relationships and associations are in that life.
J.T. Quite so: hence there is fruit for God.
J.McF. I suppose those relationships and associations can never be dissolved?
J.K. Because they are in life.
J.T. How differently a person moves who knows that the bond is formed with Christ; how different his demeanour is from one who is simply legal, governed by the law. There is a peculiar sense of security and confidence where the bond is actually known to be formed. There may be affection before, but now the affection that is enjoyed is the known formed bond. The idea of divorce never represented the mind of God in Scripture; it is an idea foreign to God. The true idea is a permanent bond formed, and that gives us rest of heart with the Lord; it never can be dissolved. We are to have our affections so free as to enter into it, and reciprocate the love of Christ.
J.McF. It is the way we get deliverance, and we see where the deliverance lies, in the One who has been raised from the dead.
Ques. Would you say that this would touch the prayer in @Ephesians 3:17, "that Christ might dwell in your hearts by faith?"
J.T. It lays the ground for Ephesians. That is one point of importance in Romans; it lays the basis in the soul for Ephesians.
J.McF. What is the thought in serving in newness of spirit?
J.T. I think it shows that it is a question of the
{324}
*spirit* of things; it is "newness of spirit", not now a code. You are formed in the light of what Christ is; and when that is so, how different your spirit is, and how different you are in every respect.
Ques. What is the thought of the new covenant?
J.T. The new covenant underlies this chapter.
J.McF. It is a spiritual relationship.
J.T. I have no hesitation in connecting the Lord's supper with this chapter, because it sets forth the body of Christ. In the Supper our affections are free for Christ.
Ques. You would take account of @John 13?
J.T. Well, that is the idea. You are to do as He did; you are to serve in newness of spirit; it is the spirit in which you do things that tells. You serve in newness of spirit; that is the new way to serve; that is @John 13. See how the wife and children would learn from the Hebrew servant! They would know him in a new way. He had the wife and children before, but now he is prepared to go before the judge, and be pierced with an awl. Normally that would have a great effect upon them.
J.McF. It would be a great delight to them.
Ques. To delight in the law of God after the inward man, is that the new covenant?
J.T. Well, it is delight in the principle of law simply; the law is righteous: so the next chapter says "the righteous requirements of the law are fulfilled in us". (@Romans 8:4) We cannot allow that the first covenant can be done away, because it has a spiritual side which the new man delights in.
J.McF. The result of the marriage relationship is fruit for God.
J.T. Quite so; God gets the fruit.
{325}
ETERNAL LIFE
@John 3:14 - 21
J.T. I think it is well to say that, in a general way, where eternal life is presented in the Old Testament, and in what we call the synoptic gospels, it is presented as something future; whereas John treats it almost invariably as having reference to the present time. It helps, perhaps, to note that both Paul and John take account of the lifting up of the brazen serpent. Paul connects it with the wilderness life; the Christian's path in the wilderness. John connects it with the land; that is, with Canaan, with eternal life the great end in view. @Romans 8 alludes to it, saying, "what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit". (@Romans 8:3,4) There he has in view the maintenance of the spirit of the law, in the wilderness. John says, "as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up; that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life". That is, he connects it with the great divine end that God had in view.
I think, that in regard to any subject that the Scriptures present, if we get a hold of it in its general bearing, the application of it in detail becomes perfectly simple; and the *general* bearing of Scripture in regard to eternal life is in connection with the age which is to come; not with the present age. John connects it with the present, so that we have to consider how it is laid hold of *now*. But I think it steadies our minds as to it when we lay hold of the general bearing of the Scriptures on the subject.
{326}
Ques. Does the blessing of Abraham find its fulfilment in the age to come?
J.T. Yes. All the families of the earth will come into it; so that it cannot be connected with any special family of men. It is a general divine thought and it necessarily underlies all the ways of God, for whilst death is on man it is clear that God cannot carry out His design; man must *live*. So at the end you find the remnant speaking in faith, saying, "Come, and let us return unto the Lord, for he hath torn and he will heal us; he hath smitten and he will bind us up. After two days will he revive us; in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight", (@Hosea 6:2). They lay hold of the divine thought, that upon the third day they shall live in His sight. So that clearly faith had in view men living here in God's sight in righteousness.
Rem. Then I suppose before we could come out here in power we must lay hold of that.
J.T. Yes; I think so. We have to see how God has solved the question of life for man. Then, inasmuch as it is a divine thought for all men, we have to see how *we come into it*.
Ques. Do you make any distinction between life and eternal life?
J.T. The Scriptures, I think *do*. Life is power *in* us; eternal life is more objective; it involves a sphere of things into which we enter. But who can enter into it? Entrance into it requires a certain constitution, and that constitution is to be acquired by a certain kind of food. I think this chapter shows the divine thought, and how it is possible for God to bring it in, that is, by the lifting up of the serpent. The next chapter, 4, shows the *power* of it; chapter 5 introduces the *sphere* of it; and chapter 6 is the *food* that is essential to it.
Ques. What is the sphere of it?
J.T. I think it involves that men are to be
{327}
together in love, in the Christian circle, as has been said.
Rem. I suppose @Psalm 133 would show that?
J.T. Yes.
Ques. How would you define the present aspect of the possession of eternal life?
J.T. Every believer has title to it. Faith gives you title, but you require the Spirit for the enjoyment of it. That is -- "the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life". There is something into which the well springs, "springing up into everlasting life". (@John 4:14) It is characteristic of the Spirit to spring up. The Spirit lays hold of the affections of the believer; the affections that would have lived in the world. The affections of man naturally flow out without restriction, and would run riot. Now, these affections are taken up by the Spirit and diverted into new and holy channels.
Rem. The Lord says, "the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life". (@John 4:14) Is there not a special thought in that?
J.T. Yes; it is a fountain springing up; but it is well to take good note of chapter 3 as indicating *how*, and *why*. First of all, how? That is the lifting up of the Son of man; and then, why? That is a question of God's love.
T.R.D. What is the difference between these two well-known statements; "even so must the Son of man be lifted up", and "God so loved the world?" Both of them end in eternal life.
J.T. Well, seeing *how* it is possible for men to have it shows that the Son of man *must* be lifted up. The "must" has reference, I think, to the nature of God, and the actual state of man. It was a necessity; but when you go on further you get higher, and that is the cause *why* it is so.
{328}
J.K. With this difference, that love is not put as a *must;* the *must* refers to man's conditions and God's claims.
T.M.G. I thought it was a necessity of the love of God.
J.T. The *must* raises the whole question as to God's nature, and man's state; this latter came out typically at the end of the forty years in the wilderness. God had shown what He was to the people, not only in delivering them, but in accompanying them through the wilderness, and caring for them, so that they lacked nothing. They had every evidence of what God was; and yet, we are told that they spake against Moses and against God. So that in the case of man there was no remedy; there was no hope for him in himself.
W. Is the eternal life connected with the "heavenly things" referred to in verse 12?
J.T. Well, I would say yes, *in a sense;* because the blessing of necessity is heavenly in character. Everything is, really, you might say, tinged with blue: so it is the Son of man who brings it in, and He is from heaven.
Ques. Are we in the good of the lifting up of the serpent in the wilderness while we are down here?
J.T. The wilderness was the spot where man's state was disclosed, and there it must be that the Son of man must be lifted up; and the matter was settled there for good. Now, the apostle Paul shows that the testimony is maintained here, in the saints, in answer to that; the righteous requirements of the law are maintained here. But John is not engaged with the effect in the wilderness as a testimony in the saints; all he states is that the Son of man is lifted up in the wilderness, because it was there that the state of man was fully disclosed. I think that the answer to the blessing is Canaan; that is to say, that is how God reaches Canaan for man.
{329}
T.R.D. I think that is very important. The end of the testing, the serpent lifted up, and the man removed from before God in death. Then there is progress; they go on to the springing well.
Rem. I do not quite see the distinction between @Romans 8 and @John 3. Would you not say that the same individuals, in which the righteous requirements of the law are fulfilled, are also those that reach Canaan?
J.T. Yes, they are. What is in my mind is that the apostle Paul is thinking of the testimony where the law entered; the ground is maintained, not only in Christ, but in us now, who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. John does not touch on that here: he is engaged with the greatness of the divine thought, and how God can consistently bring it in in spite of what man is.
Rem. Paul shows us the power to go through the wilderness according to God, and John brings in more the sphere in which the life is enjoyed.
J.T. That is it. Paul is engaged with the moral need for the testimony, and to maintain it. The righteous requirement of the law being fulfilled in the saints shows that the saints are brought into accord with Christ as the ark of the covenant. The man in @Romans 7 says he delights in the law of God. That is a great point; it shows how the saints are brought into accord with Christ, because that is what He said, in principle; "thy law is within my heart". (@Psalm 40:8) @Romans 7 shows that the believer loves God's law, he delights in it; but when you come to chapter 8, he not only delights in it, but he has power to carry it out. Here, in @John 3, it is God's purpose, it is what is in God's mind for man, and in chapter 4, it is the Spirit, so that we may enter into it now.
Ques. Do you look at eternal life as outside of the responsible man?
{330}
J.T. Yes, I do.
T.M.G. In @John 3 the love of God is emphasised, and it is that the love of God might have its own way.
J.T. Yes, and that which fully expressed it, as to blessing, is eternal life.
T.M.G. Yes, the purpose of God.
W. Is it not the love in @Romans 8 that enables you to enter into it?
J.T. Quite so, but it is in view of testimony here. I do not think, that @Romans 8 shows you how you enter into life; the point of view there is the wilderness. Romans does not take you out of the wilderness. We are left here and have the Spirit, so that every divine requirement may be fully answered to. Now, John takes the other side; he passes over the plains of Moab. The point is, if the Son of man is lifted up in the wilderness, the answer is eternal life. The responsible man, whose state is exposed in the wilderness, is set aside.
T.M.G. And that is what is here in @John 3.
Ques. Do you view the brazen serpent in @John 3 as showing how God has effected the removal of the man, so that we might be free to be more for His pleasure?
Rem. In John it is the way the Son of man has been lifted up, in order that God might effect His own thought in opening up a sphere for us in connection with His Son, a sphere in which we can live.
J.T. That is exactly the thought.
J.McF. "He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life", (@John 3:36). Does not that give you the idea of another sphere, and order?
J.T. I think it does. The brazen serpent in @Romans 8 is in view of righteousness down here, and @John 3 is in view of life.
J.McF. You were saying the Spirit comes in in chapter 4 in order that our affections might be carried into that.
{331}
J.T. Yes; the woman there is brought forward to show where man's affections really have been, how discreditable man had become. The Spirit takes up those affections and forms them so that they become centred in another and new channels are opened up for us.
T.M.G. Mr. Stoney used to speak of it as the region of satisfied desire.
J.T. The woman's state is presented to show how unsatisfying the world is, even if you allow your affections to flow around as loosely as ever possible, if you throw off restriction. Young people sometimes feel that they are hampered because of the Lord's people; they feel they have not the same liberty as others, there is more restriction, but afterwards they discover that that restriction is their salvation. Even if you remove that restriction, and give a person as much licence as his lust desires, he will find out that there is nothing in it; and this Samaritan woman is taken up to show how utterly unsatisfying it is. The Lord proposes to give you something that will be permanent, and it will itself act for you, it *springs up*.
Rem. The woman had the experience of five husbands.
J.T. It was a very great proposition that the Lord made to her. He could take her up just as she was, and set her up *there* without sending her anywhere; and the result shows that she got hold of His thought for her. I have often pictured that woman. She must have been coming out from the city when the disciples were going in. They left the Lord alone. I think it is intended as a reflection on the apostles.
T.R.D. On which of the apostles?
J.T. On all the apostles; because one or two might have been enough to go and buy bread; it was not needful that all should go. You would not have left the Lord, nor should I have left Him, I trust. He was left alone there.
{332}
T.R.D. I think that is very striking. We are indebted to the Holy Spirit for that interview; it was not recorded by one who was with Him, but it was recorded by the Spirit.
J.T. This woman was a person who had taken all the licence anyone might desire in the world, and she is an outcast. Now, the Lord proposes to re-establish her *here*. I do not say to give her a *place* in *this* world, but to set her up in independence of the world and its resources.
T.R.D. "Is not this the Christ?" (@John 4:29) That was the expression of a full heart.
J.T. Yes; but there was more there. Chapter 3 shows the situation; that is, the Father gave all things into the hand of the Son. You will notice that John generally avoids officialism, although it is right in its place, of course. What he emphasises is relationship in love. It is not here the Lord as the anointed Man, it is the Son: "the Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand". (@John 3:35) That is chapter 3. Then chapter 4 is what the Son gives. If you understand chapter 3 you would *ask*. "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him and he would have given thee living water", (@John 4:10).
T.M.G. If she had known the One in whose hands everything was she would have asked.
J.T. Yes; not only was the Son there, but He was there administratively; He was there to give. The Father had given all things into His hand. That would have encouraged her heart, and she would have asked. Then He says that He would have given her living water.
Luke in @Acts 3 gives us the official side. "That same Jesus, whom you have crucified, (is) both Lord and Christ". (@Acts 2:36) That is the official side. John gives us the same fact, only he speaks of what is in the
{333}
hand of the *Son*, it is relationship of equality and love.
T.M.G. What does eternal life really consist in? In what way is it brought before the soul?
J.T. Well, I think the Father is brought before the soul as the "true God", in contrast to all that is false in the world; and Jesus was the Sent One, @John 17:3.
T.R.D. He is the true God, and eternal life.
J.T. Yes. I think it is God presented to us in Christ. The true idea of God is revealed in Christ; and then on the other hand, the true idea of eternal life is revealed in Man also, as before God.
W. What about the sphere in chapter 5?
T.R.D. We see the Lord in manhood here, and all the motions of love coming out in Him. The life was manifested; "that eternal life which was with the Father ... was manifested unto us", (@1 John 1:2) John says.
J.T. Yes; I think all that God has in His mind for man, all that should characterise the man that should live before Him, came out in the Lord. Christ as Man was the delight of God's heart here. Now, that order of man is continued in the saints. "He that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son hath not life". (@1 John 5:12) I think the point is that it is in *that* Person. But it must be borne in mind that John does not teach sonship as applied to us; whereas Paul does, and he generally connects everlasting life with the future.
Ques. You say John does not teach sonship, and Paul does?
J.T. Paul's point is to bring in the truth of the assembly, to show how it is formed; he develops the truth of the body of Christ, which is to occupy the heavenly position.
Rem. Eternal life is God's thought for man, and for man here.
{334}
J.T. Yes; *here* where death has been. And it is for all men. God does not restrict it; in result all on earth shall live.
J.McF. What is characteristic of the enjoyment of eternal life now is the knowledge of the Father and the Son; would you not say so?
J.T. If we take the Scriptures as they stand, and the Spirit of God makes no error, this is what He says, "this is life eternal that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent". (@John 17:3) Now, no one could deny that the Father and the Son are there speaking to each other; that is unquestionable; but, at the same time, we must recognise that the Spirit says, "the true God and Jesus Christ"; mark, it is not *Thy Son*, but "Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent". (@John 17:3) Why should the Spirit use these expressions? Surely there is some meaning in them. In chapter 5 it is, "He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that *sent me* hath everlasting life". (@John 5:24)
T.M.G. He is passed out of death into life.
J.T. The man in @John 5 is raised up, I do not say from the dead, but he is made to walk; he gets power, and that is essential to the truth of eternal life; one has to have power. I have no doubt the Spirit is the power, but then there is the thought introduced, that "he that hears my word, and believes on him that has sent me, has life eternal". (@John 5:24)
Ques. I suppose the sphere is connected with His person, and comes into existence as He is apprehended.
J.T. Well, when you come to the epistle it gives us more detail; the truth is broken up for us in the passage reading, "We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren". (@1 John 3:14) I think there it is very practical, and it indicates what the sphere is, where the conditions of life really exist. Take any circle in the world, you could not
{335}
live in it. As has been said, there are elements necessary or essential to the life.
Rem. In the world to come it will be different, because death will be set aside.
J.T. Quite so, and the brethren will be there. It is clear that God's intention was not simply that man should live before Him in isolation; His intention was that men should live before Him in relation to each other in love.
T.M.G. Death characterises this scene.
J.T. Yes; every circle in the world. There are many circles, but the very best of them does not afford an atmosphere in which you live.
Ques. Would you say the sphere God has formed for every family to live in is formed by the light of the revelation of divine Persons?
J.T. Undoubtedly; and it is not His intention that man should live in isolation on the earth; he is to live in relation to others: even the law supposed that, in saying "thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself". (@Leviticus 19:18) This relationship must be governed by divine affections. Then when you come to this chapter, the Son of man came down from heaven. He is the One who came down to give His flesh for the life of the world. His coming into the world brought in the sphere in a sense, only He had to die to make it available for us.
Ques. Will you say a little as to the food in chapter 6?
J.T. Well, if the saints were all feeding on that, see what a moral power they would be; that is to say, if they were feeding on a Person coming down from heaven and dying.
Ques. What does that convey?
J.T. It conveys that you have to surrender. Coming down and dying *conveys* the thought of surrender.
{336}
T.M.G. It is not merely the historical fact that He came down?
J.T. The point is that He *came down and died*. It is a wonderful thing to understand the signification of the food, the "bread of God". "Labour not for the meat which perishes"; (@John 6:27) that is, the Lord is set forth in that way for a certain purpose by the Father; He gives this bread to the world; it is not here for the saints only; it is that the world might live. If you bring in the Son of man you have the whole race before you; if it is the Son of God, in relation to man, then you have a heavenly family.
Ques. What about @John 7?
J.T. There you come to the testimony, but it goes beyond chapter 6 in this sense, that the Son of man, Jesus, is referred to as to be glorified. The Son of man necessarily stands in relation to man. You have to go through these chapters to see what eternal life is, and practically it is very important to see that our affections have to be regulated. It is useless to talk about eternal life if we allow our affections to flow out loosely in this world. And then we must have *power*.
If the question of righteousness is not answered to by us, practically we cannot take up the question of *life*. John begins with the brazen serpent.
{337}
THE GROUND OF GATHERING
@Exodus 33:4 - 11; @John 12:31 - 33
J.T. The thought I had was that we might consider the ground of gathering, and what that involves is the ground on which the assembly stands in the world. There are two settings in which we can take account of the assembly: first, the light in which it is in the world in testimony, and then, the light in which it is in the counsels of God. This passage in Exodus helps as indicating that gathering necessitates separation. Before we can stand in relation to what is of God, we must be detached from what is not of God. We have to come out to principles. I believe many come out to the company that is gathered, instead of to principles; and, consequently, if the company goes wrong, they go wrong -- they do not stand.
Moses on the mount received light as to the mind of God, but when he came down from the mount, the question was as to whether he could connect these thoughts with the people in the camp. Evil was there, and so these thoughts could not be connected with the people in the camp. There had to be separation from evil; and if we stand by the principles, God will bring in the people; of course we have to seek them also. The book of Revelation shows that however few there may be at a given moment, God will have a complete number, and there will be many. God will bring in the people; and so we get the great multitude which no man can number, @Revelation 7:9. As to how He will do so and when, we have to wait upon Him.
Ques. What do you mean by standing for principles?
J.T. Moses did that here. He pitched the tabernacle outside the camp. It was not the tabernacle of which he received the pattern on the mount, but
{338}
it represented it in his mind, and he gives it a name; he calls it the "Tent of meeting". This implies that there would be people. He had not a command for what he did as far as we know, but he acted on principle.
Ques. Must you not have persons as well as principles?
J.T. The working out of principles necessitates persons, but the principles necessarily come first in the mind. There was no room in the world for the working out of divine principles, but the Lord says, "I, if I be lifted up, ... will draw all to me". (@John 12:32) Those that are drawn to Christ become the people in which the principles are worked out.
Ques. Do we not come out to the Lord?
J.T. Of course, we do: we are to "go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach", (@Hebrews 13:13). This passage indeed corresponds with what we read in @Exodus 33. It is because of the allowance of evil in the camp that you come out. What compels you to leave any association is the allowance of evil in it. It is the working of principles in your soul. The lifting up of Christ shows there was no place for Him here. God had owned the Jewish world, but He had to abandon it because of evil; but now He has another world, and it is brought to pass in testimony now on the principle of gathering. One would not minimise in the least measure the place the Lord should have in our affections. We are to go forth to Him without the camp bearing His reproach - but bearing His reproach is a principle. If there is love to Jesus, you take account of the world in regard to its treatment of Him, and that is where the principles lie.
It is magnificent to consider Moses coming into the camp in all the light of the mind of God with regard to the people, and then taking the tent and pitching it outside the camp. Separation from evil
{339}
is one of the first divine principles. It is negative, but in this sense the assembly is set up on that principle. It is not a principle peculiar to the assembly, for as we are saying, it is seen in Moses, and also in Abram. God called Abram out. When we come out, the Lord gives indications by which we are guided. Directly Israel began to move, the glory came down -- there was guidance. Moses anticipated all this here, as we see it later in Numbers, when he called the tabernacle the "Tent of meeting". He could not have had in his mind how many would come. His concern was to act for God, and in doing so he did the best thing for the people; he had faith, so he called it the "Tent of meeting". If you come out on these principles, there is room for the working out of the features of the assembly.
Ques. How does the light of purpose affect the position of separation?
J.T. I do not think that you come into the light of the assembly according to purpose, until you are in the light of it apart from the world on moral lines here upon earth. The assembly is founded on the judgment of evil. The original word for assembly signifies that it is formed of a people "called out"; and this is really because of evil in that out of which it is called. The assembly viewed in the light of divine purpose is not in connection with evil, it has no past history of evil; but in the assembly as called out of the world, evil is recognised as existing, but it is rendered ineffective by the presence of the Holy Spirit, @Leviticus 23:17. "He that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one" (@Hebrews 2:11) -- that is the assembly viewed in the light of purpose. It was a wonderful triumph of God to have a company, and sin recognised as there but with no power to act. This side of the truth is contemplated in the epistles to the Corinthians, but @Hebrews 2:11 refers to the heavenly side and underlies Colossians and Ephesians.
{340}
Ques. Is it the idea you have of purpose that shapes your course here?
J.T. I think so; you take heavenly ground as anticipatively there, but as actually down here, we recognise that leaven is in us individually, but it should not have any power. How can you arrive at the divine thought as to the assembly unless there is separation from evil?
Ques. Must we not see something on the side of purpose before we separate from evil?
J.T. As judging sin I am on the moral line, worked out in Romans, especially chapters 1 to 7; I reach holiness. It is a question of what God is in this connection: "Be ye holy for I am holy". (@1 Peter 1:16) They were called out from Egypt to go to Canaan, but then separation from evil is that God may have a dwelling place here where evil is recognised; He dwells here in spite of this.
Ques. Why does this separation take place at Horeb?
J.T. Because of the sin that occurred there. They had worshipped the calf there. It was the spot at which the service of God was to be commenced. It is important to distinguish between going to heaven, and the question of God's tabernacle. The former renders you a pilgrim and a stranger; but when it is a question of God's tabernacle, that is another thing; evil has to be faced and judged, not only in myself but as it is around me. You do not simply judge the evil and stay in the association; you leave the association because evil is allowed there. It pleases God to leave the assembly down here as a provisional order of things, as that in which He sets forth His order as a testimony to what is coming. It is what you get in Numbers -- it is not a question of the land, but of what God has here now. Exodus is the saints taken out of the world as such and set in relation to the tabernacle on the ground
{341}
of the covenant. Numbers is the people in relation to the order of God publicly. Leviticus is occupied with the priesthood, and approach to God. In Deuteronomy it is a question simply of God and the people -- they are His sons -- there is very little about the tabernacle or the priesthood in Deuteronomy.
Ques. Does the additional covenant given to Israel in @Deuteronomy 29:1, supersede the first, or is it a development of it?
J.T. It is "Besides the covenant that he made with them in Horeb", (@Deuteronomy 29:1) but it is also a development, if is to prepare us for the land. In Deuteronomy the expression "As the Lord commanded Moses" is not prominent as it is earlier -- the point is what Moses said or taught. Deuteronomy is almost headship, although this properly attaches to David as a type. Moses is preparing the people for the land according to the wisdom he had. Christianity initially was marked by the recognition of authority. The believers continued steadfastly in the apostles¬ doctrine and fellowship. It was a question not only of what was taught but of the authority of the apostles. But when you come on to spiritual growth in the saints, it is Christ as Head. Joshua is a type of Christ as the spiritual military Leader of the saints. Moses represented the authority of God right up to the banks of the Jordan. David is a type of Christ as Head -- in wisdom arranging the service of God, etc.
Ques. In what way can we leave the camp now?
J.T. @2 Timothy 2 instructs as to this. You withdraw from unrighteousness, largely seen today in organised religion. The camp applies to Judaism primarily, but there is today organised religion on the earth which corresponds to the camp, and you must go forth to Christ outside the camp. The assembly and the breaking of bread stood in relation to Judaism at the beginning, and Judaism was a divinely-organised system, but notwithstanding the
{342}
grace shown, as seen in Acts, persecuting hatred to Christ and the assembly became manifest: thus there was nothing for the faithful to do but to leave it -- to go outside the camp. There is no room for the working out of assembly principles in organised religion; but when you find two or three loving one another, there is room for the development of the assembly. The sum of the law is: "Thou shall love thy neighbour as thyself", (@Leviticus 19:18) and you have there the thought of local responsibility. It is your neighbour you have to love; your brother might live very far away but he would not be your neighbour. It is the one beside you that tests you. That is where the working out of assembly principles comes in, and if that is not answered to, you cannot have the principles of the assembly. You may have the principles as a matter of light, but you want material - those with whom you can work them out.
Fellowship not only supposes that evil in the ordinary sense is here, but that murder is here. It is the fellowship of Christ's death.
It is very interesting to see how the collective thought is introduced in John's gospel; the individual thought runs on to chapter 9. In chapter 10, He gathers the sheep together; in chapter 11, He dies to gather together in one the children of God.
As a sheep, men despise you and take advantage of you, just as they did with Christ; they will take away your wool. But you accept the killing - and it is "all the day long". "For thy sake we are killed all the day long". (@Psalm 44:22) When you come to the thought of children of God, you are hated, because you exhibit the nature of God; the children of God are marked by righteousness and love. In @John 12, you get a universal thought, "I, if I be lifted up ... will draw all to me". (@John 12:32) It is the kind of death He died; and it is on the ground of that He is a centre of gathering for the whole world.
{343}
HOW WE MAY BE TOGETHER AS BRETHREN
@Psalm 133; @Hebrews 3:1 - 14; @John 13:17
E.J.McB. I think that in this Psalm you have the idea proposed; then in @Hebrews 3 you get the sphere in which the idea is exercised, and then in @John 13 you get the spirit in which it is exercised. I thought these scriptures might lay the basis for a little useful help on this subject. We are all agreed, I trust, that a little real brotherly love, and an amount of fellowship and interest in the precious things of Christ, would be a great gain to us all. In that way you open the door for the Lord to command the blessing. I speak of commanding the blessing in a practical way. There is no limit to what we might have if a few of the saints could have that condition of things obtaining amongst them at the present moment.
J.T. It is very remarkable that the law did not propose that we should love our *brethren*, but that we should love our *neighbour*. It occurs to me that perhaps the difficulty in realising the fellowship lies in the fact that we do not love our neighbours.
E.J.McB. You mean the brethren that live next to us.
J.P. I would say "amen" to that.
E.J.McB. I take it that the thought in your mind is that the brother who lives nearest to me is the one who tests me.
J.T. The commandment was, "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself"; (@Leviticus 19:18) and I think there is bound to be in that the principle of local responsibility; because the assembly and its privileges, and responsibilities, were all intended to be realised, and carried out in localities.
E.J.McB. You may speak of loving your brother at a distance, where there is no real practical proof of
{344}
it. You might find it easy enough to love me, living in England, but if I came to live in South Africa I think you might find it a little difficult to love me. I think the practical test is, it brings out how far I have drunk into the spirit of Christ.
J.T. A brother who lives at a distance, really, is not your neighbour; therefore the carrying out of, assembly principles takes a local form; it puts us to the test as to how far we are formed in the divine nature; because the brother nearest to you will test you most.
E.J.McB. I think we can all appreciate, in a very special way, the subject that is before us at this present juncture; for while we have been together we have got on uncommonly well; but when many of us return to our localities, how will we go on? The same question applies to the brethren we leave behind us. How will they go on among themselves?
J.T. The assembly economy through Paul's ministry took form in localities; so it will be observed in the epistle to the Corinthians the plural is used frequently. "So ordain I in all the assemblies". (@1 Corinthians 7:17) We may have the unfolding of the assembly, and its privileges, but the question is, Are we able to carry this out?
E.J.McB. Well, it is very profitable to one's own soul to ask as to how far the assembly, in a locality, does work out. There is not the slightest doubt the thought is to be brought down to my neighbour; that is, that the brother nearest to me is the great test as to how far this truth is laid hold of.
W. In what way is one's neighbour a test?
J.T. If you are living near your neighbour, you will see his discrepancies.
W. Would he not be an encouragement?
J.T. If he is formed in the divine nature he will; but if he is not, that is the test.
E.J.McB. I think the very fact that he is an
{345}
encouragement is a test, for the man who is going on best tests me more than a man who is going on badly.
J.T. God is so concerned about brotherly relationships being maintained, that He will not accept your offerings unless you are right with your brother. "If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift", (@Matthew 5:23, 24). God will say to you, as it were, Well, now, you have passed by your brother. You cannot pass your brother by, and come to God.
Ques. How does this work out?
J.T. The Lord has the saints in His affections. He entered in before God according to the type with the breastplate, on which were the names of the saints. The answer to that in us is, that we are priests. Wherever Paul went, he had the saints on his heart, he loved them.
Rem. There might be an outward system of things carried on, and yet there might be that which would not commend itself to God.
J.T. God knows if you pass by a brother in coming to Him. It is very striking that at the outset that question is raised. God says to Cain, "Where is Abel, thy brother?" (@Genesis 4:9)
Ques. Would you say that an instance of leaving your gift before the altar might be ceasing, for the moment, to break bread till the hindrance would be removed?
J.T. The breaking of bread is not a gift, nor a sacrifice. I see your point, however. I think a gift is that which costs us something; and God has respect to it. He does not undervalue the gift, even though you have passed by your brother in coming. He says, 'Leave your gift here, and go back, and be reconciled to your brother'.
{346}
Ques. I will put it in another way. Would I be justified in coming and breaking bread if such a condition of things existed?
J.T. I think not. If one has anything in his heart against his brother, or if he knows his brother has anything against him, he should see his brother at once. "If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift". (@Matthew 5:23,24)
Rem. I suppose the principle would apply even more strongly in connection with the Lord's supper?
Ques. Would coming to the Supper not lead to self-judgment; whereas neglecting to come might defer it?
E.J.McB. Do you not think we might put it in a very much easier way to be understood? So far as I see from Scripture Israel at first appreciated the practical proof of the presence of Jehovah amongst them. I take it that if that state of things which you suggest existed, there was not that practical proof. Now, as to ourselves. Are we content to go on, Lord's day after Lord's day, nominally breaking bread, and singing hymns, and so on, when not conscious of the presence of the Lord? I think we should come with the anticipation of having the blessing. If you ask me what the blessing is, I should say the conscious sense of the presence of the Lord. But the conditions are these, that you get right with your neighbour.
W.K. Supposing you are conscious that those conditions are not existing, what would you do?
J.T. I think it would be as well to admit it before the Lord.
J.P. I think it *would* be just as well to admit that they did not exist.
J.T. I think the next thing is, the Lord pours
{347}
out "the spirit of grace and supplications", (@Zechariah 12:10) so that there comes self-judgment. That is how Israel is recovered in the end; the Lord will pour out the spirit of grace and supplications, and they will look on Him whom they have pierced and they will mourn every family apart, and their wives apart. Self-judgment is an individual matter.
E.J.McB. I think @Hebrews 3 is extremely helpful in connection with our brother's question. If we honestly admit that the conditions do not exist as they ought to exist, what can we do better than to go to the One who orders the house, in the spirit of self-judgment? We shall then find that the Lord has a way out of it.
E. Do you mean those who are not definitely and individually implicated in the trouble?
E.J.McB. Well, I quite agree with the thought; but personally I would consider myself implicated. I do not like the spirit of acknowledging that the thing is wrong, but that I am not part of it.
Ques. Does that suppose that the brother has made it known that he has ought against a brother?
J.R.K. It says, "If thou bring thy gift ... and there rememberest". (@Matthew 5:23)
J.T. It is very likely you will be reminded of it in the presence of God.
Rem. Very probably you know about it without anyone telling you.
J.T. I think it is a very great principle as regards the Priest in the sin offering. All the males were to eat it. I think the males among the priests represent those who were responsible. Let any saint say that he is *not* responsible, then we will know where he is; but if he assumes to be responsible, then he must accept responsibility, and eat the sin offering, if there be sin.
E.J.McB. I think one feels the force of that, because nothing is more helpful to the remedy of a
{348}
thing like that than the consciousness that it exists; and being spiritually exercised as to its existing, you are not prepared to go on with it.
J.T. Yes, and do you not think that if we accept the responsibility before the Lord, He is sure to come in for us?
E.J.McB. I do. I think we could count on that. I think Israel's history shows that where they accepted their responsibility and turned to the Lord, He always met them, and made a door out of it for them. I would raise the question as to how far we genuinely value the blessing of God?
J.P. I would like you to go a little further on that line.
E.J.McB. What I would say further is, that the exercises we have are peculiarly inducive to the blessing of God.
W.K. In what way?
E.J.McB. Imagine a company of saints in Belfast really going on in unity. What liberty and power in the Spirit there would be! What movements of the Spirit of God!
Rem. You are touching a root cause of a great deal of trouble at the present time. Feelings come in among the saints, and they are allowed to remain.
E.J.McB. May we go a little further, and see if we are exercised as to the privilege of having a neighbour?
Rem. I think the blessing of God is really valued. It would be a sad thing to think that it was not.
W.K. You seem to attach a peculiar meaning to the expression, the blessing of God. Perhaps you would say what it means?
J.P. I think it was stated a little while ago.
E.J.McB. I consider the blessing of God in this connection, is to be in the conscious enjoyment of the presence of the Lord. I can conceive no greater on this earth.
{349}
W.K. Do you attach that to the meeting, or to the individual, or to both?
E.J.McB. To the local company of saints.
J.T. In connection with that, God enters into covenant with man. If the terms of covenant are kept and answered to by man, there is always a place and an opportunity for God to come in. He entered into a covenant with Adam; the tree of knowledge of good and evil represented a covenant; and we know God did come into the garden, but Adam was not there, he had not kept the terms of the covenant. You get it also with Abraham. God made a covenant with Abraham in @Genesis 17, and in chapter 18 God came to visit Abraham. When He had made a covenant with Israel, at mount Sinai, He added toil: "In all places where I cause my name to be remembered, there will I come to you, and there will I bless you". He would be true to His word. "In all places where I have recorded my name -- (or where I cause my name to be remembered) -- I will come unto thee and will bless thee;" (@Exodus 20:24) and so here in @John 13 to 16. In the former you have the spirit of the new covenant; in the latter you have "I will come to you".
W.K. If it was so at all times previously, there is a good basis for us to assume that we shall find it so now?
J.T. That is the point; but it depends upon our being true to the terms of the covenant. You could not realise it on any other ground.
E.J.McB. Might we touch now on one of the practical difficulties? If we are going to make it a thing that exists as everlastingly there, we have done away really with the covenant conditions.
Ques. Make what thing everlastingly there?
E.J.McB. Why, the blessing. Is not this very sad that God walked in the garden in the cool of the day, with a heart that was full of affection to Adam;
{350}
but Adam was hidden. Did Adam, in hiding himself, change God? No; but look what he missed. That was the thought in your mind, Mr. T.?
J.T. Exactly.
E.J.McB. I do not think that we undervalue the blessing; but the question is whether we have had the practical side sufficiently before us; and in that way have been exercised as to practical conditions.
J.T. You are living in a locality, and you may be alone; but one and another comes to reside in the same locality, and you have the opportunity of working out assembly principles, and of enjoying all the privileges that attach to the assembly.
S.L. Your point is that Adam should have been there to enjoy the blessing.
E.J.McB. Why did he hide himself?
Rem. The question of the neighbour was not so much in evidence in Adam's case, as it was when Cain came on the scene.
E.J.McB. As you go on a bit in the knowledge of the truth you might perhaps get jealous of a brother who is a little ahead of you. It is a point of moment to be exercised that the company exists. It is a mercy from the Lord that He awakens us. I take it that it was a mercy from the Lord that the saints were awakened at Corinth.
J.T. Exactly. In the first epistle Paul endeavours to show them the bearing of the Supper; that it was the covenant that was in it; what God was to them. Well, then, in the second epistle, he shows in himself what the spirit of the covenant is.
Ques. If these conditions do not exist that command the blessing, I suppose it is a very serious thing to go on keeping up an outward show?
E.J.McB. Yes. And then you find, instead of life and fellowship, there is dullness.
Rem. If there are a few in the company who go
{351}
down under the thing, and accept it as their own, the Lord will come in.
E.J.McB. Yes; and it is very interesting if you take the revivals in Israel, they began with one or two exercised as to what was suitable to Jehovah, and they very soon exercised all the people.
Rem. It is absolutely certain that the blessing is there to be realised.
Rem. Referring to what we had last night. I suppose if a brother morally disappears, he is not likely to quarrel with his neighbour.
E.J.McB. I am quite sure of that. I thought we are best qualified to *appear* when we disappear.
W.K. Well, have we got to the remedy?
Rem. Yes; to disappear.
E.J.McB. I think I may say I know nothing that is more beautiful than the fact that if we do get exercised, and are awakened, through the Lord's mercy, to see that there is something unsuitable to the Lord, nothing is finer than to know His capacity, and readiness, to make things right. I think it is perfectly beautiful to see the way the Lord regulated that little company around Himself; in detecting various things that were at work amongst them, and exposing them in a way that did not shame them.
W.K. That is a very important point.
Ques. Is not that the value of the Supper, really?
E.J.McB. I think it is; but I read @John 13, with the point in mind, "If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them". (@John 13:17) It is beautiful to be a doer according to the spirit of Christ; what a holy, helpful, effect it has on a company of saints.
Rem. If each of us loved our brother, and judged ourselves as we judge him, things might be different from what they are, generally speaking.
W.K. Of course, it is free grace that keeps us on the road.
{352}
Rem. I was thinking of the passage in Corinthians: "Let each one examine himself, and so let him eat". (@1 Corinthians 11:28)
J.P. If I understand aright, all this that you are speaking of now, is in view of the blessing; and I have felt for some time, in a little measure, that the blessing has been lost sight of; and we have been content to go on walking in the way you have spoken of; outwardly everything all right, but there has not been the sense of the blessing; and we have been content to go on. If there is not the sense of the blessing we shall not take account of things that appear to hinder.
E.J.McB. Well, I think I have made the remark before, that what has done us the greatest possible damage has been an idea that has come into our minds that the Lord's day morning meeting is a "worship" meeting. It has had a most baneful effect upon us; and if it could he dispelled, it would be a great help to us.
J.P. What do you mean? Is it not a "worship" meeting?
E.J.McB. No, it is not. We classify meetings: prayer meetings, and reading meetings, and so on; and it has had a most injurious effect.
W.K. Describe the effect.
E.J.McB. Well, you come to try and worship; the expression has got hold of the mind of saints, and they naturally come, and try to worship.
Rem. It is to remember the Lord we come together.
E.J.McB. Ah, that will do.
J.P. You are speaking of the breaking of bread, I suppose. But I have understood that after the breaking of bread, we have worship.
E.J.McB. I think your remark answers itself. If you have the breaking of bread in its true and proper sense, you will have a worshipful spirit afterwards.
{353}
Ques. I suppose that is the only meeting in which we have worship?
E.J.McB. That may be so. There are two things that govern us when we come together on Lord's day morning: one is you desire to see the Lord, and the other is you are glad to meet the brethren. I consider they are both important. I cannot conceive of anyone being glad to see the Lord, if he is not glad to see the brethren. It cannot be accepted that you are glad to see the Lord, if there is a single brother, or sister, you are not glad to see in the room. What I wanted to show was the danger of classifying.
J.T. In regard to the Supper, it has often occurred to me that the great point is to be governed by the light that governs the position at the Supper.
Ques. Will you explain that, please?
J.T. Well, there are certain principles, or facts, that govern our position at the Supper, and one is that the Lord is absent; otherwise the Supper has no significance; and another is, that He died here, and that we are where He was put to death. So that these facts become governing light to us.
Rem. There it is, "Till I come".
J.T. It is a very affecting thing that the One to whom we owe everything, died here; and that He is not here.
E.J.McB. I like the thought that that fact becomes light to your soul, and governs the position.
W.K. Are we to understand that these facts are to control us while we are there?
J.T. Yes; as to the Supper, we come together to break bread; and these facts are incontestable, and become light to us; and to be intelligently there you must recognise them. But then, we are entitled, if there is spiritual power, to take up the position of worshippers, and the title lies in other facts, namely, that Christ has taken up a position on high, and He has associated us with Himself as brethren.
{354}
E.J.McB. And, I might add, you cannot rise to that light if you do not accept the light that precedes.
J.T. Exactly. If the Holy Spirit is in us, we have power to be lifted up out of the wilderness to the sphere of heavenly associations.
Ques. How do you bring in the light as to the second passage you spoke of?
J.T. It is the light of the message sent by the Lord to the disciples by Mary; that light remains here.
E.J.McB. I think it is perfectly clear that the heavenly position of the saints came to them through the Lord.
J.T. As in @Hebrews 3, "holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling". (@Hebrews 3:1)
Ques. Speaking of the blessing in the way we have done, would you make a little plainer how it comes in with these two thoughts?
J.T. Well, I think Mr. McB.¬s thought is that the blessing is bound up with the presence of the Lord.
E.J.McB. I think one can see how it is connected with the two thoughts. What governs you in coming to the Supper? The absence of Christ; and you are coming into the presence of others who are governed by the same thing. But you are entitled to the position in which He is. Now, how does He bring you into it? By way of light.
J.T. The disciples would have had no title to take up the heavenly calling, if the message had not been sent to them. You need power for it, but you must be governed by light.
E.J.McB. It is a most important thing for you to recognise this -- that the power is adequate to any light you get. The point is, what light are you in?
Ques. The first effect of the power would be to awaken the affections, would it not?
J.T. Yes.
{355}
E.J.McB. I think in the face of this, one covets more and more to go on rightly with the brethren next to one, lest there might be anything that would interfere with the sense of this.
J.T. If I might refer to a type for a moment; in the wilderness guidance for the people was by the tabernacle. After the gift of the Spirit in type in @Numbers 21, the tabernacle is not in view; you have the Spirit now, and that refers to the inner movements of our hearts in regard to privilege.
E.J.McB. Yes, up to that moment you have the tabernacle idea.
Ques. Does the first answer to the thought of the Lord?
J.T. The tabernacle refers to the presence of the Lord here in flesh. In the Lord's death, the tabernacle was taken down, as it were; there is guidance in that; and it must necessarily govern you; but then the Holy Spirit leads you to what is inward and what is heavenly.
E.J.McB. You cannot have the world as your hope and object for six days of the week, and then enter on this on the remaining day; or, to take the other line -- if you begin your first day with one system of things, you cannot go back for six more days into another system. I think that is where we want practical help.
THE LIGHT WHICH GOVERNS THE POSITION
@1 Corinthians 11:23 - 28; @John 20:19 - 26
There are certain facts that regulate us in the way of light in taking the Lord's supper, and then there is certain light that regulates us after the Lord's supper. One element of light after the Supper is that we are His brethren. We want to get into heavenly relationships after the Supper.
{356}
The light which governs the position in the Lord's supper is that the Lord is absent, we love one another, and we are in the scene of the Lord's death, in the scene of contrariety where He died, where He was rejected.
Then Mary's message is the light that governs the other position; we are entitled to move in that light; that is what we may call heavenly light. "Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God". (@John 20:17)
We remember Him as His disciples, as those called out of the world. The world has forgotten Him, but we have not forgotten Him. The history of the church shows the necessity for the Supper. The Lord has been forgotten. "As for this Moses, we wot not what is become of him". (@Exodus 32:1) Hence His request, "Do this in remembrance of me". (@Luke 22:19)
The light that Mary receives brings in the thought of brethren and of the Man who ascends, and that His Father is our Father. That light gives us the other position. We are in the sense of the heavenly position, and of His Father being our Father. If we keep in the light which governs that position we are saved from confusion.
Think of Him breathing into us and imparting to us His own life! @Acts 2 is the external side; this is inward. Here (@John 20) it is all pattern; it has reference to the fact that we have the same life as Christ has. John has the heavenly light -- "Heavenly light makes all things bright". This is normal Christian privilege. "Arise, shine, for thy light is come" (@Isaiah 60:1) is *Israel's* light, and it is a great thing to rise to the light that is for *us*.
Ex Reading at Dublin, May 14th, 1913.
{357}
RESPONSE TO THE MINISTRY OF CHRIST
@2 Samuel 6:12 - 16; Song of @Songs 6:10 - 13; @Revelation 22:16
What I wish to say is in the nature of an inquiry as to how far the presentation of Christ affects our hearts. My thought is, if you will suffer it, a word of exhortation, and to speak to you in the form of an inquiry, as to how far our souls are affected by the presentation of light, by the presentation of Christ?
Ministry, to be effective, must be a presentation of Christ; and therefore ministry is of necessity *light*. It may come to us in gracious words, according to the measure of the minister, but of itself *it is light*. The true measure of ministry, I need not remind you, is the Lord Himself. He is *the Minister*. As anointed by the Spirit, you will remember in @Luke 4, that His hearers marvelled at the words of grace that proceeded out of His mouth. The light vouchsafed in the ministry of Christ, as it reached souls was clothed with the grace of Christ; His lips were anointed. And so, beloved friends, the *exercises* of the minister would be to commend the ministry; but the *object* of the minister is to produce a response.
Now, the Lord's ministry was such as He Himself describes as "piping"; He says, "We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced". (@Matthew 11:17) Now, that is the thought in my mind. I believe there has been, in some degree, a measure of "piping" by the Spirit. There has been ministry, and the inquiry is, What is the response to it? The passages I have read from the Old Testament, you will have observed, allude to "dancing". It is very remarkable that the Spirit should take up such a figure. Indeed, in the parable of the father and the prodigal in @Luke 15, the Lord sets forth as figures the two things; there
{358}
was not only music; there was that which is responsive to the music, namely, dancing; that is what goes on within the father's house.
The Lord's ministry when here was equal to the music within the house, but there was no response to it outside. Anointed by the Spirit, He stands up in the midst of Israel, and His ministry was most wonderful heavenly music! He says, "We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced". (@Matthew 11:17) Did not the Lord feel it? Surely He did. Many in Israel doubtless thought they patronised the Lord by listening to Him; *did they*? At the end the Lord takes them to account. Do you not think the Lord will take us to account for every bit of ministry that He gives us? He will, beloved friends. He says, "We have piped to you, and ye have *not danced".* (@Matthew 11:17) Did he not feel that Israel had not danced to His piping? He *did* feel it. But then, there is the music *within the house*; the son has returned; the lost one is found; the dead one is alive and is within the house; the music is *there* and the dancing is *there*. What the Lord's ministry did not secure outside in Israel is secured within the Father's house.
Well now, to revert to the second book of Samuel; in chapter 6 is a picture of recovery. And what was recovered? The great central feature of the recovery was the ark installed in Zion. The true king was there. What was in the heart of David before he was a king? He says, "We heard of it at Ephratah;" "we *heard* of it", (@Psalm 132:6); he had not found it, but he heard of it. What did he hear of? He heard of the ark. He had heard, doubtless, of many sorrowful things in connection with the reign of Saul; he knew many sorrowful things, but he alludes not to these, save that they were the occasions of his afflictions. The psalmist says, "Lord, remember David and all his afflictions: how he sware unto the Lord and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob,
{359}
'I will not give sleep to mine eyes or slumber to mine eyelids until I find out a place for the Lord; an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob'." Then he says, "Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah". (@Psalm 132:1,2,4 - 6) There *the ark*, the great central object in Israel in the mind of David was. He says further, "we found it in the fields of the wood"; (@Psalm 132:6) in Kirjathjearim, I suppose.
Now I ask, have *you "* heard" of Christ? Light as to the Lord Jesus comes to us in the gospel. The Lord sees to that. Tidings of the ark *moved* David. The ark was the great controlling principle of his life. Light as to it came into his soul at Ephratah, doubtless when he tended his father's sheep in the wilderness; but he not only *heard* about it, he *found* it. Light as to the Lord Jesus has come into your soul; but have you *found* Him? For twenty years the ark of the covenant had remained at Kirjathjearim, and David himself declares it had not been inquired after all the days of Saul. Now, if you ask what does that signify, what I would say is, that while the will of man rules, Christ as the Ark of the covenant has no place, whether in the individual or in the company; whilst your will is admitted there is no place for the Ark. The Ark of the covenant and man's will are utterly incompatible; you cannot put them side by side. Now, David had the *light* of it; and directly he had the opportunity he *found* it. I pass over for the moment his error in putting it on a new cart. I do not excuse it, of course, but the desire was there in the heart of David to take it to mount Zion.
I appeal to you whether you are affected by the ministry which the Lord gives through His servants. We never think for a moment that we are doing God a favour if we get the benefits of the rain and the sunshine. God is favouring us in giving us rain and sunshine, and ministry is His divine favour. What, then, about the reckoning day? It is coming; in
{360}
the history of every soul here tonight there is a reckoning day. See the history of Christendom; see the moral wrecks that are strewn along the coast, from disregard of ministry, disregard of the voice of the Lord. The Spirit says, "*To-day* if ye will hear ... harden not you hearts". (@Hebrews 4:7) *To-day* God is speaking. I am not now referring to any particular ministry, but as to what the Lord graciously favours us with. What is the effect of it? The divine effect of it would be that you find a place for the Lord. Every other consideration is secondary to that, even the sleep which the body needs. Think of the energy a man like David, refusing his eyes sleep, or his eyelids slumber until he found a place for the Lord!
Well, the ark is taken to Zion, and one loves to dwell upon the exercises of David's heart in the presence of it. It was now in its own place; and faith is never satisfied until it sees Christ in His own rightful place. What is His rightful place at, the present time? What does God think about Jesus? He has placed Him at His own right hand in heaven. That is God's estimate of Jesus now, and that which the Lord is entitled to, is His rightful place, *in your heart;* and true love for Him is never satisfied until it sees Christ in His own rightful place, and that place is in the heart of the saints.
Then the ark is taken to Zion, and when it is there David dances before it, and, we are told, he did so "with all his might". I need not dwell upon Michal's attitude. She is but Saul reduced to narrow limits. It is a very great mercy that what was expressed in Saul when he was all-powerful was reduced to narrow limits. We can thank God for that. Man's will had been powerful; the ark of the covenant had no place; but, thank God, the day arrives when Saul is no more; but he is represented by Michal; reduced, as I said, and the more reduced the better, if not wholly eliminated. All Michal can
{361}
do is to despise David in her heart. Thank God that is *all* she can do. It is a bitter thing to be despised, and the man who delighted in the ark is despised by the daughter of Saul. That is all she can do, and she is childless to the day of her death; there is no issue. The principle which marked Saul becomes extinct for ever; and the house of David continues, not only for the moment, nor for a generation, nor for many generations, but *for ever*; the house of David is established for ever. You have to see that the will of God is established in your heart, that your own will does not rule or intrude. Your will in religious things is like Saul; you must see that *that will* is reduced, is nullified in you by the power of the Spirit.
Well, now, Solomon is the great issue from David. Solomon is a man of peace; and Solomon is the great love-singer of Scripture. That is seen in the Song of Songs; it is really a love song. We have often dwelt upon that. The house of David becomes powerful. There was no adversary nor evil occurrent. Such is the position Solomon is in, and in that condition of things he becomes the great love-maker, and so he is a type of the Lord in the way in which He will woo Israel in the latter days. One need not enlarge upon the conditions that will be found in Israel in the last days, but the spirit of grace and supplications will be poured upon them, and they will repent, every family apart, and their wives apart, and they will mourn for Christ. Divine sensibilities will arise in their hearts, and they will remember the lowly Nazarene. We read in @Zechariah 12 that "they will look upon me whom they have pierced". (@Zechariah 12:10) They will mourn for Him as a man for his only son. Think of the affection that will be begotten in them. The result will be, that a formative principle takes place in them, and the Lord will see His own character gradually formed in the remnant, only in a feminine way, speaking
{362}
figuratively. The Shulamite is, I understand, the feminine of Solomon; it is the counterpart of Solomon. What the assembly, the heavenly bride, will be in a heavenly way, Israel will be in an earthly way; she will be His counterpart here upon earth. Well, I do not intend to dwell upon it; I only allude to it to make the position clear. The Shulamite is called up to "return", @Song of Songs 6. She is ennobled by the name. Solomon, as it were, imparting his own name to her, in that way dignifies her. That is the point we all come to; in Christ's name we are ennobled.
The next thing is, she is called upon to return. He gives you great boldness and confidence in returning when you are ennobled by His name. The word "return" is used four times, twice before her name, and twice after, showing how intensely it is in the mind of the Spirit that Israel should return to the Lord: "Return, return, O Shulamite; return, return, that we may look upon thee". "Before I was aware, my soul set me on the chariots of my willing people". He is in the chariots of His willing people. Now, what will you see in the Shulamite? It is, "As it were the dance of two camps", David danced before the ark.
Now, Judah and Israel will be re-united; but how? In the dance. What a remarkable testimony to unity; they are united in the dance. You remember how the elder brother of the prodigal refused to have any part in the music and the dancing of the father's house; he would not come in even, in spite of his father's entreaties. But in the latter days Israel will be brought so under the influence of Christ, through whatever means it may be, that they will be united in the joy of the dance. I scarcely can conceive of a figure so expressive. It is unity enjoyed, in the exquisite delight that is produced in our hearts by the presentation of Christ to us. It is the "dance
{363}
of two armies". I am sure the Lord delights in the dance. He says, "We have piped to you and ye have *not* danced". (@Matthew 11:17) Now the two armies dance. What a triumph for Christ! That which He was denied when He was here personally, He will receive not only in Judah, but in the whole of the tribes of Israel.
I will just go on to one point further: He says, "How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O prince's daughter". (@Song of Songs 7:1) What a name! It is really, How beautiful are thy *footsteps*. It refers, doubtless, to what He saw in the dance. The Lord first takes account of our feet, I believe, for if the feet do not move there is no movement at all. The Lord takes account of our feet first; but then in what a glorious connection! "How beautiful", He says, "are thy footsteps, O prince's daughter". (@Song of Songs 7:1)
Now, I would appeal to you as to the effect of the presentation of Christ to your hearts in the ministry of the Spirit. What a pleasure to His heart it is to see the effect of His gracious dealings with us. How patiently He deals with us and ministers to us in one way and another, so that He may get His own rightful position in the affections of His people. "The chariots of my willing people" is His rightful place; and as the heart that loves Him gives Him that place it dances, as it were, before Him.
{364}
Pages 364 - 482 -- "Jesus Christ come in Flesh".
Indianapolis, January, 1914 (Volume 20)
THE BIRTH OF CHRIST
@Luke 1: 5 - 35; @Luke 2:22 - 38
J.T. The Lord's manhood has to be considered by itself first. We come in on the line of "as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly", (@1 Corinthians 15:48) but the subject of Christ's humanity must be considered by itself; and what strikes one in Luke is, that he introduces the subject in a priestly atmosphere. That is why I suggested the account of Zacharias and Elizabeth; they were of the priestly family. The priestly atmosphere is thrown around your mind and spirit as a sort of safeguard, directly you are introduced to the Lord in Luke.
R.S.S. That we should approach it in a worshipping spirit.
J.T. Precisely. Matthew is rather like *"the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy-seat".* (@Hebrews 9:5) Luke presents the priests as prepared to receive Him. The circumstances into which the Lord was born were priestly. In Matthew, it is the cherubim of glory; a matter of protection from violence. So you find in @Matthew 2 the expression "young (or 'little') child" nine times. He is dependent on God for protection, and is exposed to violence. There is no violence in this respect in evidence in Luke.
R.S.S. What is the thought of the cherubim in Scripture?
J.T. Protection; a symbol of God's government.
A.F.M. The mother is linked with the Child in Matthew: why is that?
J.T. "Take ... the little child and his mother", (@Matthew 2:13) that is God's way of protecting Him. No one could protect better than the mother at that juncture, so
{365}
the mother is to take Him; Joseph was to "take ... the little child and his mother". (@Matthew 2:13)
A.F.M. Would that be the form the cherubim would take?
J.T. Yes. God uses ordinary, or natural means. He did not intervene miraculously to protect the Child, but used Joseph and Mary.
R.S.S. As was said last night, God usually acts mediately, not immediately.
J.T. Wherever He can He acts mediately. He will do anything He can through us, so that Joseph and Mary become the means of divine protection for the Babe, though it is not presented as if *they* did it.
W.J.N. Do the overspreading wings of the cherubim convey the thought of protection?
J.T. I think so.
A.F.M. Would you say a word about John and Mark? You do not get the birth, of Christ in Mark, but it is referred to in John "The Word became flesh". (@John 1:14)
J.T. It is not an infantile thought in John. He does not present that side, but that He took that condition. It is an act of His own. So both in John and Mark there is no need of protection. He is there Himself in the fulness of manhood.
A.F.M. I was wondering how it would apply to the mercy-seat and the ark as well as to the cherubim. What is in your mind in that connection?
J.T. We can see how carefully the Spirit of God introduces the subject of the Lord's humanity, and that, as it were, He throws out a priestly atmosphere so that there should be no defilement introduced. You are struck with that. Ordinarily there would be, but the circumstances were such as to preclude corrupting thoughts, so that Zacharias and Elizabeth suggest that it was the priestly state the Spirit had in His mind.
W.G.R. "That holy thing which shall be born
{366}
of thee shall be called the Son of God"; is that a similar thought?
J.B. The cherubim are also in the veil as well as the mercy-seat.
J.T. That is in His flesh as walking and moving about here. The principle of divine government was there, in the Lord's Person as Man. We know, in fact, that all judgment is committed to Him, because He is the Son of man.
E.S.T. That is part of the mystery, is it not? The Lord has not given us to understand all that.
J.T. The incarnation is inscrutable, but the facts given are sufficient to enable us to have spiritual intelligence of it; indeed how can you confess Jesus Christ come in flesh unless you have that intelligence?
J.L.J. Does the meat-offering in Leviticus go with this?
J.T. The meat-offering is, of course, founded on the incarnation, but it represents the character of the Lord's humanity.
A.A.T. At the time of His birth, did the official priesthood know who the Person was?
J.T. No, but here is one who feared God, Zacharias, and his wife of the daughters of Aaron, a pious woman. They were more than *official* priests. There was reality about them; that is why so much is made of them here.
R.S.S. "And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless". Your thought is that no matter how poor the circumstances were into which the Lord was born, that it was a moral atmosphere of that kind.
J.T. One has likened it to sterilisation. You would sterilise a room where anything was to take place that would be endangered by germs. It is well to have an atmosphere like that in a *spiritual way* so that our thoughts should not be corrupted
{367}
in approaching the Lord's humanity. You see the priestly atmosphere even in Simeon. He came *by the Spirit* into the temple, and took the little Child in his arms; he was a priest, truly. It is not the idea of the cherubim. The idea in Luke is *holiness*. In Matthew it is more protection from violence. Here it is protection from evil elements that the enemy would use to damage.
A.F.M. Zacharias is seen in a very peculiar light, as by the altar of incense, as if it were the highest view of his priestly service.
J.T. The priestly state precludes all corrupt thoughts. In Numbers, the Levite was not allowed even to look on the holy things, much less to touch them. They were to be looked upon and carefully covered by the priests. That is what you get here. It is not levitical service, but priestly affection and care.
W.G.R. In connection with Joash you see him protected by Jehoiada from Athaliah; the priest preserved him and Jehoiada was greatly honoured for that act.
J.T. And Jehoiada was the priest.
R.S.S. And Jehoiada was buried amongst the kings.
A.A.T. Was there not a break-down in the priesthood historically? Were Zacharias and Elizabeth not of Aaron's family?
J.T. There had been a break-down, but these two were righteous before Jehovah, so that they were in the spirit of what was there.
R.S.S. They belonged to the remnant of that day. I am sure we have all been greatly impressed by the marvellous grace and condescension of God in giving us the details we have read in regard to the Lord's birth. When you dwell upon it you feel how gracious it has been of God to go into this detail in
{368}
this marvellous and simple way, and you can only approach the subject with holy thoughts.
G.A.T. In @Genesis 3 the Lord said to the serpent: "I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel". (@Genesis 3:15) Had God this in mind? It was not the seed of the man, but of the woman.
J.T. The woman is prominent in connection with the birth of the Lord. I think it is important we should see, in order to understand the subject, that you require the priestly state. It is by the Spirit, and we ought not to be afraid to draw near to it. We may draw as near to it as possible in the priestly state; but you are precluded from drawing near otherwise. God would encourage us to draw near to it thus, and the more you draw near the more wonderful it is, so that we can intelligently confess Jesus Christ come in flesh.
A.F.M. Is there not a great contrast between the opening of Luke and what you get in Malachi? The priesthood was corrupted, but directly you get the few fearing Jehovah there is the promise that the Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in His wings; and what is consequent on that is what we find in this passage: "to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just".
J.T. Whilst the Lord exposes through Malachi, the true state in the priesthood, He also brings out what a true priest should be, saying, "the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth". (@Malachi 2:7)
A.A.T. The name "Son of God" is declared in connection with his birth.
J.T. That is a guard. "That holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God". It is a guard lest the Person should be attacked.
{369}
Whilst dwelling on this holy subject, you always remember that His deity is underlying it, but with all that, we should be prepared to draw near to this wonderful theme and not to dread it. The only thing to dread is your own state regarding it. As priests, we are entitled to draw as near as possible to it.
A.A.T. What have we in the tabernacle that answers to it?
J.T. The ark of the covenant is the answer, the type of it.
W.C.B. It says: "Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus". (@Hebrews 10:19)
E.S.T. What is the thought of "great is the mystery of godliness"? (@1 Timothy 3:16)
J.T. It is that which the true soul cherishes, and it is the secret of right behaviour in the house of God. The key to these chapters lies in the expression "that holy thing". It is an expression a true priest would understand.
G.B.M. Would, you say the necessity for the peculiar priestly guard that you speak of is due to the fact that the Lord comes to humanity recognising the corrupt condition that is found there?
J.T. He takes His place amongst men in the most obscure circumstances, and He grows up in these. The point to get hold of is, that in them He answered in every possible way to what man should have been for God; so when God owns Him publicly He owned the One in whom He had been glorified; not only that He was a divine Person, but that in humanity, He had answered to every divine thought as to man. So when God opened the heavens upon Him, He opened the heavens on a Man in whom every thought He had as to man had been answered to.
R.S.S. Is it not wonderful that God found in Him everything that He looked for in man, and that
{370}
in every kind of human circumstances here, even from a Babe, or "little child", or a Boy, as Mr. Darby translates it? God had delight in His Son in those conditions. I rather think we are apt to confine our thoughts to the Lord's manhood; that is, as one grown up, but the detail that is given in regard to His childhood is deeply interesting. No matter how young we may be, the Lord at one time in His history was exactly the same age, and God looked for and found what was seasonable in Him. When His parents found him in the temple, He was amongst the doctors of the law, not teaching them, for that would not have been seasonable, but He was hearing them and asking them questions. It does say that they were astonished at "his understanding and answers", but He did not take the place of a teacher.
J.T. And then after that "*he went down with them ... and was subject unto them".* (@Luke 2:51) These are the things that Luke presents, and we should feed on them. "He shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground". (@Isaiah 53:2) That is, He drew nothing from the outward soil. There was nothing from which He could draw sap, and yet there He grew up as a green tree; in fact, He so speaks of Himself afterwards; "if they do these things in a green tree". (@Luke 23:31) There was that which God could look on with pleasure where all else was sterile. The prophet Zechariah had spoken about a "Branch", and that is what Luke presents to us. One that was wholly dependent, as a branch is. He was the One that should sit on the throne, and build the temple and should be a Priest upon His throne. That was the dependent Man.
J.B. Speaking of "that holy thing", did you refer to that which perfectly distinguished Him as a Man from all other men?
J.T. Yes. It was important that the thought of
{371}
holiness should be there and that Mary should receive it into her soul. She was the first to have to do with the Child and it was important that she should receive into her moral being the idea of a priest. She was the first to have to do with the "holy thing". Aaron never touched a holy thing like this. This is the One to whom the holy things had reference, and Mary was to have to do with Him first, and in the most intimate way. How important that she should be a qualified priest. The angel's address was intended to qualify her as a priest. "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God".
G.A.T. Do you mean by that that a sister could be a priest?
J.T. All Christians are priests, and we are all given to have to say to the Lord, it is our privilege to be near Him, and near to Him in the sense of His holiness. We are also called "holy brethren".
E. Would you think the Lord came in the Aaronic order of priesthood?
J.T. No, He was of the house of David, as it says here, but we, as Christians, who are the true priests now, can see the priestly state that marked the introduction of the Lord into this world.
E. But the Lord was a Priest, was he not?
J.T. Officially, He is a Priest in heaven. "If he were on earth, he should not be a priest", (@Hebrews 8:4).
R.S.S. But the point is not exactly what the Lord was, but the atmosphere into which He came.
J.T. That is it, and I think it is a very great thing to see that Mary was to be qualified. She was to be qualified to have to say to this holy matter.
G.A.T. Was it not a great cheer to the heart of God to have a man like Simeon here in this atmosphere into which the Lord came, so that he could
{372}
welcome Him, and because of the way he was affected by Him, he could desire to depart?
J.T. Simeon's presence in the temple was another divine arrangement; but Mary was to be qualified. She was to be honoured above women, but it was important that she should be qualified spiritually.
W.C.R. Were not Simeon and Anna qualified? Simeon took Him up in his arms and blessed God.
J.T. I suppose so, as far as they had to say to the Lord, but they were not to have to say to Him in the same capacity as Mary. Think of the intimacy and familiarity with which Mary had to do with the Lord! This address of the angel was intended to qualify her for that service. What an impression it would have left on her mind! She was to have to do with the Son of God as a Babe.
J.B. Does not the salutation of Elizabeth correspond with this: "the mother of my Lord should come to me"? (@Luke 1:43)
J.T. Yes. The whole scene is marked by the priestly state.
A.F.M. Is there a connection between the title here given to Christ, "the Son of God" and sonship, which is the Christian calling?
J.T. I think it is *here* more to guard His Person. It is what is distinctive to Himself here.
G.A.T. Would you say God had bestowed more honour on Mary than on Joseph?
J.T. You could not conceive of a greater honour being conferred on a person than this. Think of the relationship in which she was to stand to the Son of God! How important that she should take in every syllable of the angel's address!
R.M.L. Verse 48 shows that; "for, behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed". (@Luke 1:48) She had that sense.
J.T. It ought to impress us, if we now have to
{373}
say to the Lord, because as Man He is on our side. He has been pleased to identify Himself with us. Luke's gospel presents the Son of man, and that He has come in in connection with man, and inherited all that attached to man and in that way retrieves the race, that which was lost. We may say, He reinstates man before God, but not in Adam.
R.S.S. I think the point you make about Mary, having to care for Him from the moment He was born, is very beautiful. A brother when here last summer, was calling attention to the fact that it was usually women who had to do with the Lord's *Person*. For instance, it was a woman who anointed His feet and washed them with her tears, and a woman that anointed Him for His burial; and women ministered to Him of their substance. I think there are other such instances, where women are largely prominent. Where it is a question of levitical service, *men* are in evidence.
J.T. I would go with that fully.
R.S.S. The same thing is true in regard to the saints. We are here together and we have need of two things, a spiritual ministry, that is ministered by men, by those who are qualified, but there are other things that we have need of in regard to our sustainment here, and that is supplied to us not by men, but by women, by the sisters, so that both have their place.
J.T. In Mary you have that priestly care in ordinary circumstances at home where He was born, and all that was required for Him personally. The intention was that she should be qualified, so that every touch should be priestly. We have to own that she failed in this, because in the end of chapter 2 she says: "thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing", (@Luke 2:48) she is reproving Him. That was not a priestly touch. He says: "wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (@Luke 2:49)
{374}
L.T.F. "Mary kept all these things in her heart". The others did not understand.
J.T. The Spirit of God accredits her with everything, though she did reprove Him; but perfection shines in Him. "I was cast upon thee from the womb". (@Psalm 22:10) There is the perfection of dependence from the very outset of His being there. Then, as a Boy, He is hearing and asking questions in the temple in perfect comeliness; no pretension to teach the doctors; but it was nothing out of the way to hear and ask questions; and when He says, "wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (@Luke 2:49) He asserts, we may say, what He was as the Ark of the covenant. In the temple, God had His priest in Simeon. When the Ark came into the temple there was a priest there to receive it, and that was Simeon. There is no disparity there. He comes into the temple by the Spirit and he says: "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation". He sees the Ark. What Mary did not see, he saw, but it was by the Spirit.
R.S.S. Perfectly beautiful, when you think of the Ark being brought into the temple, because He was really carried by His mother. Of necessity, there must be some one there to receive it. It was morally answered to and Simeon comes in here most beautifully.
J.T. He is on a higher plane than Mary. It is not said that she is filled by the Spirit when she came into the temple. She came to carry out a rite of the law, but he took Him in his arms. Mary was, in a way, superseded.
A.F.M. Where does Anna come in?
J.T. She speaks of Him to *others*. That is the counterpart of Simeon. Simeon spoke to *God*, but Anna "spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem".
{375}
E.C.E. Where would the priestly service be carried out today?
J.T. Priestly service is very wide. The most important function of the priest is to take care of the holy things; they were in his care. That is in the book of Numbers. The book of Leviticus shows that the priest approaches. He has title to approach.
A.F.M. Is your thought that we should answer to these particular persons we have been speaking about, to Mary, Simeon, Anna and Zacharias?
J.T. Yes. That we might see how the priestly state shone in them. They were divinely prepared to receive the Lord as become incarnate.
A.F.M. And we need priestly condition in order to enter into these things.
J.T. Yes; in order to have to say to holy things.
J.L.J. Do you get that thought in @Ephesians 3, in the prayer that the saints might be rooted and grounded in love so as to lay hold of God's purpose, and to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge?
J.T. Yes. But we have to *touch* divine things. One great feature of Christendom is the touching of holy things in an unholy way. People think nothing of touching divine things simply in a natural way with natural ability. The mark of being a priest is that you love Christ. What produces that is the Spirit. If you love Christ, God can entrust Him to you, as it were.
R.S.S. Why do you say the mark of a priest is that he loves Christ? What do you base that on?
J.T. Love is a fruit of the Spirit, and a priest has the Spirit. That is what a priest is. He has the Spirit; but you do not know if a man has the Spirit unless there is an evidence that he loves Christ. The fruit of the Spirit is that you love Christ, and on the other hand, you love the saints. That is a
{376}
mark of a priest. In the garments of glory and beauty, there were the breastplate and the two shoulder-pieces; on each of the shoulder-pieces there were six names of the tribes. On the breastplate the twelve tribes were inscribed; that signifies that the believer loves the saints, and that is the proof that you love Christ. You have them in your heart, and if you have them in your *heart* you will support them on your *shoulders*. That is the evidence of priesthood. That is what marked the Lord. He went into the presence of God with those two things. The reflection of that is to be in us, as with Paul, who had the saints in his heart. If you have the saints in your heart you will support them according to your ability; the shoulders are for support.
W.J.N. When you speak of support, do you mean intercession?
J.T. I mean you use your pocket-book. You pray for them, but then the saint may need clothing, and help. I quite admit that prayer is the greatest thing we can do, but the idea of the shoulder is that you use all the power you have, spiritual or temporal, to help the saints.
G.B.M. With Paul, the care of the assemblies went with having the saints in his heart.
R.S.S. A priest is one that is anointed. That is about the first thing, and as you were suggesting, when it comes to the fruit of the Spirit, the first thing is love. We are all anointed as believers, and the first thing that should characterise us is love to Christ and to one another.
J.T. The proof that we love Christ is, that we love one another, and the proof that we love one another is, that we support one another; so the breastplate and the shoulder-pieces go together.
R.S.S. The Lord was born into an atmosphere of love.
J.T. Yes; you can understand with what reverence
{377}
and affection these persons would hold this wonderful Babe. They were qualified beforehand for His reception. He was laid in a manger, it is true, but the heavenly beings, the angels, are active there. The whole scene taken together shows the wonderful thought of God in regard to the introduction of Christ here.
W.G.R. The shepherds who came to the Lord by night were also qualified.
J.T. I think they were honoured in that it is said that they *kept their flocks by night*, showing the energy they had; the shepherd's heart appears. While all else lay in slumber these people were vigilant, and the angel came to them. Then they went and sought out the Babe.
M. What about the wise men from the East?
J.T. That is in Matthew. It is more the political side in Matthew. They come in quest of the "King of the Jews"; but what is remarkable about them is, that they went to Jerusalem without the star. It does not appear that the star led them *there*. I think they followed the star till they thought they could safely trust their own minds, which many of us do; and their own minds suggested that the King of the Jews must surely be born in Jerusalem; but they were mistaken, for He was not born there; and when they departed from Jerusalem the star appears again. They missed their way, like many a Christian. We are led to a certain point by the star, as it were, and then we think that surely we will find Christ in the religious organisations around us; but we do not find Him there. We find often, alas! opposition to Him there, and when we leave, the star moves on again and leads us to where He is. The great thing is to follow the guide.
J.L.J. That involves love.
J.T. It involves our following the appointed means of guidance. Many a soul says: 'Surely I
{378}
shall find the Lord here; His name is attached to this place'; but instead of finding Him there, you may find murderous opposition.
A.A.T. No priestly atmosphere.
J.T. No. And then they go and find the "little child". That is Matthew. That is a diminutive thought; He is dependent on protection. When they find the little Child and His mother they open their treasures. They worship.
A.F.M. Would you say a word on Zacharias in relation to his prophecy? Is there not recovery in relation to the naming of John and then when he gets into line with God's thought, his tongue is loosed and he begins to praise and the whole subject is Christ?
J.T. Yes. It is not John that is before him, but Christ.
A.F.M. I think you have said somewhere that he really offered the true incense here.
J.T. Yes. He blesses God; it is a priestly utterance.
W.B-s. Does this line of things apply to the Supper as to the suitability to touch these things? We discern the Lord's body.
J.T. I think the Supper is preparatory, in that sense, to coming into direct touch with the Lord. You discern His body, that in which all that is contrary to God was set aside. There is to be the disallowance in our spirits and minds of all that is unsuited to Christ.
A.A.T. Why do you say *His body*? I do not catch the meaning.
J.T. If you eat unworthily you are not discerning His body. As allowing that which is unsuited to the occasion, you are eating unworthily, not discerning the body.
A.A.T. I can see the necessity for the suitable state.
{379}
J.T. I think the Lord's supper is calculated to produce a priestly state in us so that we are now qualified to be in intimacy with the Lord. You are priestly.
R.S.S. When it says, "not discerning the Lord's body"; (@1 Corinthians 11:29) the loaf represents His body, and we should maintain, that thought in our minds and treat it as a holy thing.
J.T. It is that in which all that is contrary to God has been set aside. He has died to it. That is a very solemn thing. If we are eating unworthily it is surely indulging the flesh in some way; the flesh is unjudged in us.
I.N.H. It has been stated that it is not discerning the Lord's body in death.
J.T. That is what is before us in the Supper. The blood is separate from the body. It is a dead Christ in that sense when the cup is there. What brought that about? What was the necessity for it? Because of what we were. How solemn, then, if we are allowing that which brought the Lord into death!
R.M.L. I suppose that those at Corinth who were taking the Supper and acting in a wrong way were not discerning the Lord's body?
J.T. They were not doing things according to order.
E.G.McA. Would you say in the first part of Luke it is guarding His humanity, but in @1 Corinthians 11 it is why He gave up His life?
J.T. That is it. Why is the blood separate from His body? There was nothing in Him to bring it about. He was entitled to live. That is the solemn part of the Supper. The body and blood of the Lord presented separately speak most solemnly of His death. Our communion is in *that*.
W.B-s. The death of Christ is brought before us even in @Luke 2, and in speaking of the Lord as a
{380}
Child things are mentioned which point to His death. He came into this world to die, and He could not put away that which was offensive to God unless He was holy.
J.T. He had title to live personally. There was absolutely no liability to death in Him; that is why there is such a solemn challenge in the Lord's supper.
G.A.T. What effect would it have on us?
J.T. You disallow that which brought about His death.
R.M.L. Would not the effect with us be seen in "let a man examine himself, and so let him eat"? (@1 Corinthians 11:28)
J.T. Yes. God judged everything at the cross; now we judge it in ourselves. We have no title to judge anyone else, but to judge ourselves. The blood being separate from the body speaks of death.
R.S.S. There are four indications of the Lord's death in @Luke 2; His circumcision, the turtle-doves, "a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also"; and when He went up to the passover; these are all in the chapter which treats of His birth.
A.F.M. Why did Simeon want to go?
J.T. I think he understood that things were not to be established in this order of life. They were to be established in another order of life; that is, in Christ risen. Simeon will re-appear. His eyes saw Jehovah's salvation. He said to Mary: "a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also, that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed". That is, all the secrets should be brought to light; but then the thoughts of God's heart should also be revealed, and Simeon had a place there and so have we. If Christ died out of this world, we do not want to stay here. Partaking of the Supper is the acknowledgement of that. We know that we shall re-appear in another order of things.
W.C.R. Did not the eunuch feel like that?
{381}
J.T. I was thinking of him. That is where the assembly comes into evidence. It is said of Jesus, "his life is taken from the earth". (@Acts 8:33) If that precious life is taken from the earth, then the earth is not my place. Christ's place is my place, and His life is elsewhere, so "your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory". (@Colossians 3:3,4) So that in @Acts 8 we read that His life is taken from the earth; in chapter 9, is the announcement of Himself in heaven, and He owns the suffering saints on earth as Himself.
R.S.S. Anna belonged to the right tribe. Her strength was to be as her day.
W.G.R. Her foot was dipped in oil.
J.T. She spake of Him. The Spirit gives her honourable mention, but it is because she spake of Him to those that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.
A.F.M. When Simeon held the Child in His arms, why did he bless God, not the Child? What is the point there?
J.T. I think he is the priest in that sense; like the sons of Aaron with the consecration-offering in their hands. They were sanctified. Simeon's whole soul was filled with Christ, and that leads to God getting His portion.
{382}
THE BAPTISM AND ANOINTING OF CHRIST
@Luke 3:21,22; @Luke 4:14 - 21
R.S.S. I am exceedingly thankful this subject has been suggested to us, because I suppose there is none greater in the whole range of Scripture than the incarnation; everything hangs upon that; the Lord's life here. His death, resurrection and ascension. I think the Lord has pleasure in directing the hearts of those that love Him to Himself in this respect.
J.T. The effect of His public ministry is to bring souls into all that is presented in the opening chapters. The question is raised at Nazareth: "Is not this Joseph's son?" (@Luke 4:22) This indicated the state of mind that prevailed there, but the result of His ministry is to bring in a race who are appreciative of all that is presented at the outset. They are brought to that. Up to the passage we have just read, we have the divine thought indicated. God has accepted this Man, and anointed Him, and His public ministry fully justified the divine acceptance.
R.S.S. So that in @Luke 3 you have God's acceptance and approval of Him; He is anointed for His service, and He identifies Himself with the remnant in baptism.
J.T. And then, as a Minister, He justifies God; that is, He adorns the ministry. Then you have the great proposal to bring man into accord with that. The Psalmist said: "until I went into the sanctuary of God; then understood I their end". (@Psalm 73:17) He saw there the Man that God approves, and he concluded that the man outside had to go in judgment. The conditions outside are adjusted in your mind as you go within, because what you see within is what these chapters present, the Man that God approves.
{383}
R.S.S. There is a great principle in that; if we know what is right, what is wrong will not trouble us much.
J.T. Quite so. It enables you to judge what is outside. In going inside, this is what the Psalmist found. What he found in the sanctuary of God was Christ.
W.C.R. Is this what was alluded to in @Genesis 12, "a land that I will show thee"? (@Genesis 12:1)
J.T. Yes. There are very few people who have a right judgment of things. They may go by the judgment of others, and so far they are safe if they follow the right person, but in order to have a right judgment yourself, you must go inside, into the sanctuary of God, and there you see Christ, who is the accepted Man there. And when you come out, you can say to the man outside, 'I see your end'. He says, "then understood I their end". (@Psalm 73:17) They are not the kind of man that is inside and these chapters really present the inside to us. But in the synagogue of Nazareth you have the outside; that is, His public ministry, in order to bring souls inside, and really that is not reached till we arrive at Stephen. There you see a man looking inside, and what he sees inside is Jesus and the glory of God with Him; that is the terminus of the ways of God in our souls; we reach that point and then we have a true judgment of everything.
R.S.S. It greatly delivers us from the fear of man, for the worst that man can do is to send you to heaven, as they did Stephen.
J.T. It is a wonderful thing to go within. Two great principles appear in the instructions given to Moses on the mount. God opened up His mind to Moses as regards the order of things that He would have for His pleasure, then He gave him *a, pattern*. Now the pattern is for every Christian, and Luke gives us the Pattern, that is to say, Christ. Everything
{384}
must be in accord with the Pattern, and that is the Man.
R.S.S. In fact, God has not any pleasure in anything else. "Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased". (@Luke 3:22)
J.T. There must be no deviation from that Pattern.
W.B-s. Is it found in @Philippians 2?
J.T. That is it; the Man that can go down. Moses himself was to a large extent according to the Pattern, because he was very lowly. Christ tabernacled among them, and came into lowly circumstances. It was a question of descending, and Moses was in measure in accord with that. He was prepared to be blotted out for the sake of the people. He did not think of himself.
A.F.M. Is not the Lord's baptism on the line of going down?
J.T. Yes, it is a downward course from the beginning, He "made himself of *no reputation*". "Being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself". (@Philippians 2:8) It was humiliation to take man's form, but He went below that and "became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross". (@Philippians 2:8) Now that is the Pattern.
E.G.McA. Is that why the anointing follows His baptism?
J.T. Yes. He went to the lowest point; He would carry out the will of God to the utmost extremity. "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness". (@Matthew 3:15) He would not omit any point of righteousness. That is the Man to anoint.
A.F.M. It is in the Jordan, which is a figure of death all through the Scriptures.
W.B-s. Does our brother's thought in his address accord with this? The first section of Moses¬ history he said was connected with *baptism*, and he
{385}
goes into the desert; the second forty years of Moses¬ history answered to *fellowship*; and the last forty to *service*. These principles are seen in the Lord's history also.
J.T. That is very good. You must have the three phases of the position, and baptism is the first. In our case we have to be brought back to it through discipline. The wilderness experience is that which brings us to our baptism. That is what it effects. So the Jordan and the Red Sea coalesce, in that way. You are brought to the truth of your baptism. Fellowship is *with* the people of God, and service follows.
E.I.E. What is the difference between the Holy Spirit descending on the day of Pentecost, and the descending upon Jesus in bodily form as a dove?
J.T. The Holy Spirit coming in the form of a dove was a mark of special distinction. Further, there was nothing in the coming of the Spirit on Jesus to indicate there was anything to displace there. The dove was a symbol that God was restful in that Person.
G.A.T. It is the first time that God had a resting place on the earth.
J.T. It is no doubt an allusion to Noah's dove. It found no rest for the sole of its foot. But here, on Jesus, there is a resting-place for the Spirit.
W.B-s. What is the idea of a bodily form?
J.T. "Bodily" refers to the dove, but the use of the word is significant. The Spirit came *entirely* upon Christ. It came without measure on Him. He came in a bodily form as a dove, not as at Pentecost in "cloven tongues".
A.F.M. Why are there *tongues* in contrast to the dove?
J.T. In order that testimony should reach the whole human family. At Babel God raised up barriers; He divided the race into compartments,
{386}
as it were, in order to preserve them for blessing. The barriers raised up by God between the nations were really a mercy, to prevent combined lawlessness. It weakened lawlessness, and God would never allow those barriers to be overthrown till He did it Himself. Satan sought to overthrow them. I think the principle of imperialism introduced into the world was an effort to set aside that merciful provision on the part of God. Imperialism signifies the unification of the nations, bringing them all under one head. God would not tolerate that. He met it, however, in Christ. He would bring the nations under one Head in, Christ; He is to rule the nations with a rod of iron, and that is what is alluded to in the gift of the Spirit in cloven tongues as of fire. The nations were to be unified in that way; they were to hear about God, "the great things of God", not the great things of Babel, and they were to be brought into unity that way. It is a provisional unity, pending the taking up of the world, in Christ.
R.S.S. Why is it fire?
J.T. To consume that which is contrary. In @Leviticus 23 the two wave-loaves had gone through the fire. The sheaf cut down and presented to Jehovah did not go through the fire. There was no sin in Jesus to consume, but in the two wave-loaves there was leaven, and it was recognised as there, but it was rendered impotent by the action of the fire; so that God accepted the saints at Pentecost in spite of the fact that sin was there. Although sin was there it had ceased to work, and I think the gift of the Spirit in the character stated brought that to pass.
R.S.S. Why do we get *cloven* tongues?
J.T. "Parted". They were not for one nation alone. The end never came to pass really, till Paul was taken up. @Acts 10 sets before us, among other things, that Peter opened the door to let Paul out.
{387}
There were other things in it, but Peter really opened the door so that Paul might go out with the gospel to the Gentiles.
It is through his ministry that you have the "offering up", not of a nation, but "of the *nations".* I think that is how God has reached His thought in a provisional way now. He has secured the unification of the nations in principle, through the gospel and the sanctification of the Spirit @Romans 15:16.
W.J.N. Does the "rod of iron" look on to the last days?
J.T. Yes. But it is important to get into your mind the thought of imperialism. He is to rule the nations with a rod of iron.
W.B-t. Why is that brought in in the address to Thyatira?
J.T. Because I think it is that in Thyatira the apostasy had reached such a point that the head of the so-called church laid claim to universal supremacy. The Pope in those days assumed priority to the kings of the earth, as the Vicar of Jesus Christ. The remnant were to have that place. That is a very great thought.
W.B-t. "But to you I say, the rest who are in Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine, who have not known the depths of Satan, as they say, I do not cast upon you any other burden; but what ye have hold fast till I shall come. And he that overcomes, and he that keeps unto the end my works, to him will I give authority over the nations, and he shall shepherd them with an iron rod; as vessels of pottery are they broken in pieces, as I also have received from my Father". (@Revelation 2:24 - 27)
J.T. The different promises to overcomers allude to circumstances through which the saints were passing at any given period. The overcomer at any period would understand the promise.
{388}
A.A.T. You think Satan's effort at the present time is to bring about imperialism. Is it going on at the present time?
J.T. The elements all exist, and they are working. It only awaits the appearing of some man great enough to take it up and carry it through.
W.C.R. Will Antichrist be that in principle?
J.T. Yes. The point is that Satan sought to set aside the divine provision at Babel. God came down and said, "nothing will be restrained from them which they have imagined to do", (@Genesis 11: 6). He came down to see what they were doing, and He decreed that they should not understand one another's speech. They were not divided up for judgment, but in order to preserve them for blessing, for Paul's ministry, to come to detail.
J.B. And they were to be "acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost". (@Romans 15:16)
J.T. In that way you see how God has now provisionally what He will have absolutely in the future under Christ. He has the nations already. All that is in connection with the gift of the Spirit at Pentecost.
J.B. "Sanctified by the Holy Ghost" (@Romans 15:16) would be in connection with the gift of the Spirit.
R.S.S. So one of the gifts was that they spoke with tongues.
J.T. And in such wise they all understood; the different languages were represented at Jerusalem and the people heard them speak in their own tongues the wonderful works of God.
A.F.M. I notice in @Romans 15 that the apostle says: "Now the God of endurance and of encouragement give to you to be like-minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus; that ye may with one accord, with one mouth, glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ". (@Romans 15:5,6) So that the
{389}
confusion of tongues is overcome and you get unity of speech, with one mouth glorifying God.
G.A.T. Would you repeat what you said about Peter in @Acts 10 opening up the way for Paul?
J.T. In order to understand @Acts 10 you must read @Acts 11; that is, Peter's account of what he saw, and the impression it had upon him. @Acts 10 is the Spirit's account of it. Both are by the Spirit of course, but the account of the matter in chapter 11 is given as Peter's; and he enlarges on the thought that a certain vessel had come down from and gone up to heaven three times and finally remained there. That was a very remarkable occurrence. It had impressed Peter's mind with this fact that God was about to do something which would result in being taken up to heaven; and really it first came out of heaven. Luke's gospel supports that, for Christ came out of heaven, and what goes back into heaven is morally of Him. Now that is one point. The sheet was filled with creatures of all kinds. That is what they were *externally*, but the voice from heaven said, "What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common". (@Acts 10:15) And what had God cleansed? Mankind. The one point emphasised there is cleansing, so that Peter need not fear; but we know from Paul's ministry that what goes to heaven is more than cleansed, it is created anew, but the basis is laid there for it. Another thing that comes out is that Cornelius is told to send for Peter, who should tell him words whereby he and all his house should be saved; and Peter says, "as I began to speak the Holy Ghost fell on them"; (@Acts 11:15) meaning that he did not have time to finish his preaching. God embraced the Gentiles as he *began* to speak. In chapter 10 it says, "*While* Peter yet spake" the Holy Ghost fell upon them; but when Peter tells it he implies that he had just begun to speak, and it does not appear that he said anything more. God outran him, as
{390}
it were, and embraced the Gentiles, as He had embraced the prodigal. He did not wait for Peter's sermon. Peter was content when he saw that God had embraced the Gentiles; he then commanded baptism. He said, as it were, 'I see now that the time has come to open the door'. He says in his defence, "what was I, that I could withstand God?" (@Acts 11:17) It was what God was doing.
A.F.M. Why did he *command*?
J.T. Because he was commissioned. Paul was not commissioned to baptise, but Peter was. Therefore he commands it. I think it is very beautiful to see this. He saw what God was doing. Now he says, 'I must use my keys'. So the door is now open for Paul to go out. *Paul* is brought by Barnabas, who appreciated what God was doing, to the point where he would have most liberty, to Antioch; and from Antioch he is sent out by the Spirit with Barnabas "for the work whereunto I have called them". (@Acts 13:2)
A.F.M. The connection of these chapters you refer to is very beautiful. After Stephen's martyrdom the Lord appears to Saul in chapter 9 and opens the door to the Gentiles in chapter 10 and then Antioch coming into view, and the prophetic gift, and the voice of the Spirit saying, "separate me, Barnabas, and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them". (@Acts 13:2)
J.T. Antioch was a new basis of operations, the Spirit acting sovereignly. All, in a way, was in accord with these chapters we are considering in Luke, because they were ministering unto the Lord and fasting; the true priestly state was there.
G.A.T. Is this the same key as in @Acts 2, the keys given to Peter by the Lord in @Matthew 16?
J.T. Yes. As the assembly was introduced in @Matthew 16 there must be room made for it. The limits of Israel were too narrow for the development of what was so great, hence He gives keys to make room for it, for the development of the assembly.
{391}
R.S.S. What is the connection with what we are looking at now and the portion we read in Luke?
J.T. Our brother raised the question as to what was the difference between the Spirit coming as a dove on Jesus and as tongues of fire at Pentecost; that brings us back to our chapter. Heaven is opened on that Man who has gone to the lowest point and is praying; that is to say, He is an entirely dependent Man. That is the Man upon whom the heavens opened. So these chapters are the holiest in that sense.
E.G.McA. It is important to see that the heavens open *upon* this Man. In Stephen's case they opened *unto* him.
J.T. In this chapter it is for heaven to look down. In Acts it is opened for Stephen to look up. Christ is the Object in both cases.
J.L.J. In this chapter it is God looking down from heaven, taking account of Man on earth as suitable to Himself, so that He could now take up the human race and take it up from heaven.
J.T. In @Acts 7 we are entitled to look in. That is where the holiest is for us. It is Jesus in heaven.
W.B-t. Will you say a little more about the Lord praying? It is in that act the Holy Spirit descended.
J.T. It is very significant that He should be in that attitude when the heavens are opened upon Him.
W.B-s. Why do we find the Lord praying so often in Luke?
J.T. I think Luke emphasises that side because his point is to bring in the order of man that God accepts. It might all go without saying that a divine Person merits divine approval from heaven, but think of a Man who had been on earth thirty years, and in all the circumstances of man here, that He should have been to God's pleasure in every detail,
{392}
so that the heavens should open upon that Man; that is the point. It is what God found in that Person *here*, where all others broke down, that is the point. The opened heavens and the gift of the Spirit and the proclamation in this verse, turns the mind immediately back to all previous history from Adam onwards. Why is this? That is a question to ask ourselves. It is because every thought to which God had given expression is found in this Man, not one lacking; so that the anointing is that of a Man proving Himself to be the answer to God in every detail.
W.B-s. It was the approval of what He was personally. "Thou art my beloved Son". (@Luke 3:22)
A.F.M. There were two things, in connection with the Lord; this one and the one in Hebrews, "anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows". (@Hebrews 1:9) This was a personal thing, without blood, as in @Leviticus 8:12; then Aaron is anointed with his sons, verse 30.
J.T. I think the anointing above His companions, alludes to the distinctness of His own anointing. Aaron was anointed apart from his sons first in @Leviticus 8. Aaron and the tabernacle were anointed. That is Christ personally in relation to God's universe. God is able to anoint a Man without blood, and that is the greatest possible testimony to His Person; and then Aaron is anointed subsequently with his sons on the ground of death.
R.S.S. Here at His baptism it is said, "Thou art my beloved Son". (@Luke 3:22) At the transfiguration it is "This is my beloved Son". (@Luke 9:35) It was addressed to Him personally here. It was the delight the Father had in such a One on earth, without reference to anybody else, whereas in the other case it is calling the attention of others to Him.
J.T. If it were simply a question of His eternal Person, His deity, this might have been done at His
{393}
birth; that is a point of importance to notice. Although Mary is told at His birth "that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God", (@Luke 1:35) He is not formally owned from heaven by the Father at His birth, nor as a Boy; not till He has had opportunity to prove in every kind of circumstance what a man should be for God. So the anointing and the proclamation have allusion to what He was here. It goes without saying that He would be owned as a divine Person.
G.W.H. Why is there such a period of silence as to His life, eighteen years?
J.T. In one way the Scriptures do testify elsewhere, in type, and in the experiences of the Psalms, to what He was from infancy to manhood, but the evangelists do not record it. All that is necessary is the three points given: He is an Infant, a Boy, and a Man. As a Man at thirty years the heaven is opened upon Him and the proclamation is made "Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased". (@Luke 3:22) That embraces the whole three periods.
E.G.McA. Would the act of praying show forth a characteristic of His life in contrast with Adam's position?
J.T. I think so. @Philippians 2 contrasts Him with Adam. Consider Him praying! That is what heaven delights in. A man goes down to the lowest point, the depths of Jordan, and He comes out, and is praying. He is a dependent Man. Heaven owns such.
R.S.S. We have rather connected the thought of His anointing with His service which follows, and I suppose rightly, for it says in @Acts 10:38, we read, "How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power; who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with him". (@Acts 10:38) That would connect the anointing with His life subsequently.
{394}
J.T. Certainly. But who is anointed? A Man whom God can approve, and has approved, for thirty years. That is, the moral always precedes the official. He is not the Official till anointed. He had no official position at twelve years of age, but then the moral was there.
R.S.S. And so He could say in the synagogue at Nazareth, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me". (@Luke 4:18)
W.B-t. Was He anointed as a righteous Man that perfectly pleased God?
J.T. The Psalms show that He thought only of Jehovah. "I have set the Lord always before me". (@Psalm 16:8) You may say the eighteen years are passed over as to detail, but they are included in the "always".
G.B.M. "Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus". (@Philippians 2:5) That marked Him before the anointing as well as after.
J.T. The *mind* was there. So you find in the Scriptures that God does certain things, not only because of what Christ was personally, but because of what He was in His ways and works here. So in @Philippians 2, "*Wherefore* God also hath highly exalted him". (@Philippians 2:9) Why the "wherefore"? Because He took the descending course, not simply because He was a divine Person, but because that mind was in Him.
W.B-s. Is David a good type of this? He is anointed by the prophet, but he is found to have lived with God before.
J.T. He was morally equal to it. If a man is anointed in whom the moral element is lacking, the anointing would damage him, as in the case of king Saul. He was not morally equal to it. It often happens with a man who has gift. The gift, becomes a damage to him, if he is not equal to it.
J.I.J. Was He tempted forty days to prove what He was?
J.T. It is an allusion to Israel's position in the
{395}
wilderness. He comes out of it victoriously; He not only escapes the power of the "strong man", but binds him, and He does not go out of man's place to do it.
J.L.J. He "returned in the power of the Spirit" (@Luke 4:14) after being tempted of the devil.
J.T. You could not conceive of His going into the wilderness of His own will. It does not say He was led back; "He returned in the power of the Spirit". (@Luke 4:14) In Mark he is *driven* into the wilderness.
R.S.S. What you are speaking of now comes in between the two portions of Scripture we read. The Lord, being baptised, has now the approval of God, and is anointed in view of His ministry; but before He enters upon the ministry He meets God's enemy and ours and overcomes him in the wilderness, then He proceeds to spoil his goods. He goes into the world and delivers men from Satan's power.
J.T. He is entitled to the spoils after binding the strong man. He returns in the power of the Spirit into Galilee and He goes to Nazareth "where he had been brought up". (@Luke 4:16) There is a beautiful touch in that. He began at Nazareth where He had been known in all His humility and obscurity. It is a beautiful example of His perfect humanity. He said "no prophet is accepted in his own country". (@Luke 4:24)
I would like to dwell for a moment before we close on the wonderful manner of His ministry. Luke tells us, that "as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up for to read". "And when he had opened the book, he found the place where, it was written. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised. To preach the acceptable year of the Lord. And he closed the
{396}
book, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down. And the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him".
These verses are recorded so that our hearts should be drawn to the Vessel of grace before we have the unfolding of what He ministered. There is the testimony is His own town, the grace in which He stood up to read, and the gracious words that proceeded from His mouth. In that way He justifies the anointing.
R.S.S. And so Luke is the gospel of grace.
J.T. Yes. How the grace is enhanced in such a Vessel as this! Often you hear a man preach and he is not equal to his preaching. There is a great disparity between his manner, and preaching, not to speak of his walk and ways; his lips are not anointed. It was not so in Jesus. The ministry was enhanced by the Vessel.
{397}
THE TRANSFIGURATION OF CHRIST
@Luke 9:28 - 36
E.I.E. What is your thought in regard to these verses?
J.T. The passage in one sense is linked with Chapter 3. There He is at the lowest point and here He is ascended in principle. There He has descended; here He has ascended.
R.S.S. You refer to His baptism and identification with the remnant in chapter 3.
J.T. Yes; here He is ascended, and the remarkable connection is that He is praying. It is the same Person. The One who ascends is the One who descends. The Man, who has been down to the lowest point and touches man there, is the same above. That is what will make heaven what it will be for us; the Man being there who has been known here.
R.S.S. And He prepared the place for us by entering in as Man. He is not *preparing* it. He has gone to prepare it.
J.T. Yes; "He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things". (@Ephesians 4:10) Think of all things being filled by a praying Man!
G.A.T. What is your thought in connection with His praying in both places?
J.T. The Spirit records it to show us what sort of a Man He was, a dependent Man.
R.S.S. And in every instance whether in exaltation or humiliation.
J.T. This has reference to His ministry. In a sense He had accomplished His ministry, and He had title to ascend. The heavens opening upon Him in chapter 3 referred to the thirty years previous. This voice from heaven and the cloud in chapter 9
{398}
have allusion, to *His testimony*. The cloud is significant, it refers to the wilderness, to Israel's position there. There was no cloud in chapter 3.
A.A.T. It was the cloud of glory in chapter 9.
J.T. Yes, it is that. When Peter spoke about the tabernacles, the cloud overshadowed them.
A.B. In @Luke 3 it says the voice came out of heaven, and in @Luke 9 the voice came from or out of the cloud. What is the significance of that?
J.T. The cloud as I said is an allusion to Israel's position in the wilderness. It rested upon the tabernacle after it was constructed and set up, and the appearance of the cloud here implies that all that the tabernacle stood for, now finds its answer in this Man. So that the voice is "This is my beloved Son! hear him". It alludes to Peter's three tabernacles. There was only One really and that was Christ Himself. He was the true tabernacle of witness. That is, the testimony was maintained in Him.
J.B. Would you say the cloud set forth the Father's presence?
J.T. Yes, but as taking account of the testimony. There was no cloud in chapter 3. It was simply heaven owning that Man there. Before the tabernacle was set up, there was the pillar of cloud, in fact they were baptised to Moses in it. It was the symbol of the divine presence; but afterwards the divine presence was in connection with the testimony.
W.J.N. I was thinking of the cloud resting.
J.T. When the tabernacle was set up, then the cloud had a resting-place; so in the wilderness the cloud did not rest till the tabernacle was reared up.
J.B. There is the thought of *glory* here that you do not get in chapter 3.
W.B-t. Peter's remark showed a lack of intelligence.
J.T. He did not know what he said. His thought
{399}
was to put Christ on the same level as the other two, and the cloud appearing intimates that there was only one tabernacle, not three, and that One was really Christ Himself, because in Him, every divine thought was expressed. As the Lord was on the mount, "there talked with him two men, which were Moses and Elias, who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem". He is transfigured and these Old Testament worthies appear, but to be withdrawn, and their converse indicated among other things, that they could only be there on the ground of His dying. They were not speaking of the things in heaven, but of His decease. It was becoming that they should speak of that.
L.T.F. Would it intimate that they had testified of that in their testimony here?
J.T. I think so. They had intelligence in regard to it. It says, "who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he should accomplish". It seem that they introduced the thought.
G.A.T. It was a great comfort to me on Lord's day evening when our brother referred to this, and said that Moses got into the land.
J.T. He did here. The thing to get hold of is the kind of man that is seen here: the praying Man. Luke brings forward that side constantly. You get it in this chapter previous to this. He was praying when He put the question to His disciples as to who He was.
W.B-s. Why does it say eight days here, but in Matthew it is six days?
J.T. "About eight days". I think Matthew gives simply the actual days that intervened. Luke gives us the day on which the Lord spoke, and that on which He was transfigured, but I have no doubt there is more than that in it. It carries us on to the resurrection side, a new day.
{400}
J.L.J. What is it to see the kingdom of God at the present time?
J.T. As it is now, "the kingdom of God is ... righteousness, and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost". (@Romans 14:17) In order to see it you need to be born again.
J.L.J. Is not this the heavenly side?
J.T. The thing to see is that the kingdom is established in a praying Man. That is the point you would like to get hold of. All administration is established in One who prays.
J.B. Speaking of the Lord praying, when He chose the twelve apostles it says that He continued all night in prayer and then chose them. Are they not chosen in that sense in connection with the kingdom, and now on the mountain top He goes up *to pray*; it does not say to be transfigured.
J.T. That shows what the Man was. That is what we want to get hold of in these readings. In verse 18 it says, "as he was alone praying". (@Luke 9:18) We are not told what He is praying about, but that He is in that attitude.
R.S.S. The Lord is spoken of seven times in Luke as in prayer.
L.T.F. It says "as he prayed the fashion of his countenance was altered". What are we to learn from that?
J.T. The emphasis is on the thought that He was praying. It is that kind of a man that is transfigured. It is as such that He is owned in chapter 3, but now He is owned above and is transfigured as praying.
E.G.McA. Is not the disappearance of Moses and Elias another indication of God's mind that Jesus should be the centre of attraction?
J.T. Here He is the One to be *heard*. Moses and Elijah were the two great speakers of Old Testament times. They were introduced to be withdrawn, so that all might understand there is only *one* Speaker now but then the Speaker is the praying Man. The
{401}
kingdom would be established in Him and the testimony also.
J.L.J. Does He not rightly inherit all things through His redemption work?
J.T. Yes, but He takes up everything in dependence upon God.
A.F.M. Will you give us a word about the transfiguration itself, the thought that He was transfigured and why?
J.T. It is an allusion to His *present* condition. It happened here as a testimony to confirm the disciples, but now He has actually entered into another condition. His Person remains, but in another condition. In Him in heaven, the risen glorified Man, we have Man according to God's counsels; He is not there in flesh and blood. "As is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly". (@1 Corinthians 15:48)
W.B-s. He told the disciples not to speak of this till He was risen from the dead. Peter makes mention of it in his epistle. Is it because He was in humiliation, but when He was risen and glorified, then they could speak of it?
J.T. It was an immense means of strength to the apostles in their ministry. Peter says "for we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty". (@2 Peter 1:16) It was *the majesty* of a praying Man.
R.S.S. And the quotation goes on "For he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount". (@2 Peter 1:17,18)
W.B-t. There is no change in the Lord's spirit. He is the same as the One who went to the lowest place. I was thinking of @Ezekiel 28 which speaks
{402}
of the king of Tyrus. "Thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; ... Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness". (@Ezekiel 28:14,17) My thought is that the great exaltation of the angelic being under the name of the king of Tyrus lifted him up with pride, whereas, here we have a Man exalted to "the holy mount" and He is praying.
J.T. Not lifted up because of His beauty. He is the same kind of Man up there as He was below. What will make heaven all that it will be to us is, that that Man is there.
L.T.F. A praying man would involve a dependent, submissive man.
J.T. That is it. Instead of coming in His own name and strength and in order to establish Himself, He comes in the Father's name and is dependent. If we want to be in the tabernacle, that is the Pattern Every true believer desires to have a part in the divine system; now this is the Pattern and everything is to be made according to it.
W.B-s. In @Psalm 22 we get the lowest point, where He says, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me". (@Psalm 22:1) Then towards the end He fills three circles of blessing, having been heard from the horns of the unicorns.
J.T. And according to Hebrews He was heard because of His piety. That is a wonderful statement. Although a divine Person, the Son, yet His being heard is put on that ground. It is a question of what He was here.
G.A.T. In @John 17 you find Him on the earth praying to the Father.
J.T. John says what He prayed for, but Luke just says that He *prayed*, for the point in Luke is, that there is a Man here answering to God's mind.
G.A.T. What is in your mind in regard to us in connection with His praying?
{403}
J.T. Praying men are the men that are required. That was the Lord's commendation of Paul, the great master-builder. The Lord's introduction of him to Ananias was: "behold, he prayeth". That is the kind of man that is needed.
W.B-s. Elijah is referred to in James as "a man subject to like passions as we, are", yet "he prayed earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six months. And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit". (@James 5:17,18)
J.T. That shows what prayer secures for us, the value of it. The service requires praying men.
G.B.M. If Ananias had had the Pattern before him he would have understood that, Paul was of the same order.
J.T. That is the man that is needed. Barnabas had the pattern before him. He brought Paul to Antioch as much as to say, 'This is the man for the Gentiles'. He knew what was needed. A man who prays has power with God, and if with God he will have power with men so that to preach with power you must pray. We should be much humbled if we do not influence men. If you have not power with the saints, the secret is that you do not pray, because if you have power with God you will have power with men. Jacob wrestled with God, and had his name changed to Israel, which signifies *prince*; and the testimony was that he had power with God and with men. I believe the Lord in becoming Man, took that ground.
W.B-t. The Lord said to Job's three friends,. "my servant Job shall pray for you; for him I will accept". (@Job 42:8) And it adds "the Lord also accepted Job. And the Lord turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his friends". (@Job 42:9,10) What Job passed through seemed to make him effective in this way, and his captivity was turned, not when he said I "repent
{404}
in dust and ashes", (@Job 42:6) but when he prayed for his three friends.
A.B. The disciples said "Lord, teach us to pray". (@Luke 11:1)
J.T. Yes, they saw what was required. As you become acquainted with the Lord, it leads you to pray.
R.S.S. It was when they saw Him praying in chapter 11. I do not think He prayed *with them*, because there could not be common ground. He prayed *for* them, and taught them to pray. What do you think was the difference between the attitude in prayer in Luke and in John? It is rather dependence in Luke, but hardly that in John.
J.T. The word used for *pray* in John implies more familiarity. He is a divine Person and has title to ask the Father for things on that ground.
A.F.M. In 1 Timothy, those in the house of God are exhorted to pray in connection with the glad tidings. The apostle also says: "I will therefore that men pray everywhere". (@1 Timothy 2:8)
J.T. If we have power with God we shall have power with men, and the kingdom is largely that; a question of moral sway. It is not breaking things down arbitrarily, but as the Lord dealt with Saul, there is moral power. If you have no power with men, you should be humbled. One may have light without power.
R.S.S. Prayer is better than argument.
W.B-s. We see the two kinds of men in Abraham and Lot. Abraham prayed for Sodom. There is no evidence that Lot prayed, and he was mocked at when he gave testimony.
J.T. Abraham had power, too. He and Isaac both commanded the respect of the Canaanites.
E.G.McA. Even when he failed and Abimelech took his wife the Lord said: "Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, *and he shall pray for thee".* (@Genesis 20:7)
{405}
R.S.S. When you are thinking of the Lord Jesus in prayer, it is as a dependent Man, not in connection with His deity. He is to fill every office that God intended for man, but He fills each office as the praying Man, so that even in the end He delivers up the kingdom to God, having received it on the ground of dependence.
A.B. Was it not prayer that characterised the early disciples?
J.T. "They continued steadfastly in the apostles¬ doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in *prayers".* (@Acts 2:42) Then we have a side light as to it in @Acts 12, where they were convened for prayer in Mary's house at night.
R.S.S. We see the disciples in prayer in @Acts 4, "and when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were assembled together; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spake the word of God with boldness". (@Acts 4:31)
J.T. Prayer gives God His place. God and man are seen in their relative positions. It recognises that power belongs to God, and that we have none. Man's position is that of dependence.
E.G.McA. Was the display of the glory on the mount consequent on His praying?
J.T. It is so presented.
G.B.M. We are now getting an important answer to the Jews¬ question; "who is this Son of man?" (@John 12:34) We often use the title Son of man as an official title and lose the meaning of it.
J.T. The Son of man is the Inheritor of all that attaches to man in the counsels of God, and He recovers all like David; so that every thought God has given expression to as regards man is recovered in Christ; there is the reinstatement of man according to God, in His Person.
R.S.S. It is only in Luke that He is spoken of as praying on the mount.
{406}
J.T. It is because of what we are saying. Luke is presenting the Man to us, "the man Christ Jesus".
R.S.S. When Scripture speaks of Christ "upholding all things by the word of his power", (@Hebrews 1:3) is it not looking at His deity?
J.T. Quite so. That was true of Him while on earth, as much as before, only He had taken manhood, and He maintained a suited attitude. Balaam said: "according to this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought!" (@Numbers 23:23) If God is to work, there must be prayer, man must be dependent; he is to be taught dependence. How? He learns it in Jesus. Jesus comes in and sets forth the idea that power is in God, not in man inherently, and hence man should pray, and if man prays God works.
W.J.N. The Lord was ever divine, but having come into manhood, when anointed for His service, power is manifested.
J.T. Peter says, He was "anointed ... with the Holy Ghost and with power; who went about doing good ... for God was with him". (@Acts 10:38) The works were God's works.
R.S.S. Do you not think more than anything else, it is in prayer that you get adjusted in regard to God and in regard to your fellow-men? As an illustration; "when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any". (@Mark 11:25) That is the time your conscience will be in exercise before God, and when you will think of your relations to your fellow-men.
J.T. Then you get another thought in the Pattern, that you are admitted into great privileges, not only power. Jesus is transfigured and the heavenly saints come into view, appearing in glory, and they speak to Him.
R.S.S. Our brother, Mr. Raven, made a simple but remarkable statement, that if he had to live his life over again he would read less and pray more.
J.T. If you pray you get power. Then you are
{407}
liable to be admitted into wonderful things. One should keep on, not simply ask for the things you need.
E.G.McA. Why was His raiment white and glistering? Where did that light come from?
J.T. I would not undertake to say. It is something we cannot say much about. It took place for a testimony. It was evidently a miraculous occurrence and the Lord was altered both in regard to His Person and to His raiment. He was conformed to the heavenly surroundings. I think that prayer leads to change. If you go in to speak to God there is an impression left upon you and you feel yourself in wonderful company, as you wait before God.
A.F.M. Like Moses, whose face shone.
R.S.S. Is it something like @2 Corinthians 3:18: "beholding ... the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory". (@2 Corinthians 3:18)
J.T. If you take these things in the order in which they are presented here, they may be applied to any of us in prayer. There is *change*; then admission into heavenly privilege, and the consciousness of the Father's delight in us. All that appears in its own order. It is morally suited that it should be so. We begin here on earth in the place of need and we go on to the fulness of privilege.
W.B-t. Why did the disciples go to sleep?
J.T. Why do many of us go to sleep? It is the case with most of the Lord's people at the present time, they are in a state of insensibility to the glory, to the vista that is opened up for us in the ministry of the apostle Paul. Paul says, "Awake thou that sleepest", (@Ephesians 5:14) in writing to the Ephesians. Eutychus went to sleep, in the presence of that wonderful ministry.
R.S.S. J.N.D. says he *paid the penalty of his inattention*, but when Paul speaks of sleep it is not literal sleep.
{408}
J.T. You may have the most refreshing ministry, but unless your spirit is sustained by the Lord you do not appreciate it. The thing is to be on the alert, and the Lord helps us. But I am perfectly certain that the great mass of the Lord's people are asleep as to Paul's doctrine.
R.S.S. It is very remarkable that in Luke from this point the Lord goes up to Jerusalem. From this onward, all is in view of His rejection. He comes down from the mount of transfiguration to go to the cross.
J.T. Exactly. They were speaking of that on the mount. It is His exodus they were speaking about, and it should be accomplished at Jerusalem.
G.W.H. Is the service here that of Melchisedec?
J.T. Intercession is not Melchisedec's service. Melchisedec is priest of the Most High God, the Possessor of heaven and earth. He refers to Christ in His millennial service, as Priest. I think you have nothing as to ability to sympathise at all in regard to Melchisedec.
E.I.E. It says, "And they kept it close, and told no man in those days any of those things which they had seen". Why was that?
J.T. They were told to. It was to remain a secret till the Lord was risen from the dead. Everything was reserved till redemption was accomplished and it would be then that these things should become of value.
R.S.S. And was it not in view of the Lord's rejection they should tell no man that He was the Christ?
J.T. It was judicial in regard to the Jews. They were not to get any more light.
{409}
CHRIST'S LOVE FOR HIS OWN
@Luke 22:1 - 30
J.T. Here we see the Lord as having a man's affection for His own. Nothing can come home to us more touchingly than the thought of the place we have in His heart. That is the point of the Lord's supper in this gospel; it makes prominent the place the disciples had in the Lord's affections. It gives us another side of the Lord's humanity, that He had the genuine affections of a man for men. The other side of the truth is that He represented the love of *God* to men. In the end of @Romans 8, you first get the love of Christ, and then "the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord". (@Romans 8:39) There are two distinct thoughts.
W.B-s. Is one expressed in the loaf, and the other in the cup; the love of Christ in the former, and the love of God in the latter?
J.T. Yes. He said, "This is my body, which is for you". But the cup is the blood of the new covenant, which has reference to God. The foundation of the truth of the assembly in our hearts lies in the apprehension of the fact that Christ has affections as a Man for men.
J.L.J. Is there a greater expression of His love in this book than in Matthew or Mark?
J.T. I think it comes out more prominently here as to the place they had with Him; He said to them, "With desire I have desired to eat this passover *with you* before I suffer".
J.L.J. It also says, "This is my body which is given *for you".* "This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed *for you",* which you do not get in Matthew or Mark.
J.B. You refer to the love of the Lord Himself personally.
{410}
J.T. We must distinguish between that and the love of God which is in Christ Jesus.
G.A.T. In the last reading you dwelt a good deal on prayer. Does love follow on that?
J.T. I think so. When He is seen praying earlier in the gospel the horizon is wider. Here in verse 32, He is seen as praying for one of the saints, that is, Peter.
G.B.M. Is it this affection of a man for men that is in view when He said, "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends". (@John 15:13) "This is *my* commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you". (@John 15:12)
J.T. That is it exactly.
A.F.M. We have extremes brought together here in the hatred of the priests and the love of the Lord. They would kill Him, but He would lay down His life for us. The hatred of the priests and the people combined would form a dark background for the bringing into relief of all this blessed love.
J.T. And the treachery of Judas, one of, those upon whom the love had been lavished, for he sat down with the twelve. It is an immense thing to get the true idea of the Lord's personal love for us. It is that which enables us to understand the idea of brethren. "Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the children of God". (@1 John 3:1) The *Father's* love brings in the idea of children, but the love of Christ brings in brethren.
W.H.G. That is the assembly. "Christ also loved the assembly". (@Ephesians 5:25)
J.T. Exactly. It leads on to that.
J.L.J. *Brethren* puts us in association with the Person.
J.T. Yes. You learn what it is to be a brother from Christ. Judas did not learn that. He had the opportunity, but he did not learn it.
{411}
A.A.T. What is the difference between companion and brother?
J.T. One might be a companion who is not a brother. I think we are brethren in a practical sense by apprehending His love as a Man. Of course all believers are viewed in this light.
G.W.H. When He said, "This is *my* body, which is for you", is association in view there?
J.T. He is pointing out the great place they had in His heart. Becoming Man, He says to God, "Lo, I come ... to do thy will, O my God". (@Hebrews 10:7) "A body hast thou prepared me". (@Hebrews 10:5) He holds His body for God's will. Now He has devoted that body to the saints. "This is my body, which is *for you".*
G.W.H. I had thought that we could only be brethren on the ground of His death, resurrection and ascension.
J.T. That is true, but it is not the point here. It is rather that He is impressing upon them the great place they had in His heart. He had devoted His body to God's will and it was ever for that, as the next section of the chapter shows us, at Gethsemane. But He now devotes it to *them*.
R.S.S. It is something like, "there is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother". (@Proverbs 18:24)
J.T. Yes. Think of the Lord devoting His body for their good! "For you". Our dire necessity required that He should go into death, that His holy life should be separated from His body.
R.S.S. In connection with what has been already raised, does the Lord's supper and His death that is suggested through it, express the love of God or the love of Christ?
J.T. I think His body represents His own love, as our brother just remarked, but there is "the new covenant in my blood" that He speaks of here; the cup. That I think has allusion to God. It represents what is in the heart of God.
{412}
R.S.S. It declares God's disposition towards men, and so it is His love.
J.T. Yes, God surrendered that precious life. It was really for God. All life was for God. The Old Testament abounds in that testimony. Life belongs to God. There never really had been a life that God accepted, that He found pleasure in, before. This life was ever verdant. He grew up before Him as a "tender plant". What God found in that holy life of Jesus is a wonderful object for contemplation. God gave up that life.
A.F.M. That would enhance the love, that such a life was devoted to His brethren.
J.T. Yes; but it was for God's pleasure while the Lord remained in flesh and blood. He says, "I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father". (@John 10:18) The Father commanded Him to do it. The Father had pleasure in the life, that precious life of Jesus, and He commanded Him to lay it down; but that was necessitated by our state. The Father's commandment always alludes to what is absolutely necessary. His counsels originated with Himself. They do not refer to necessities on earth; commandments do. Hence, He commanded everlasting life; and another thing, promises have allusions to things on earth. If God makes a promise, it is with reference to some case of need, and so the promise to Abraham was in answer to a need, and the promise of life, even before the world was, was a necessity.
R.S.S. But what is connected with God's counsel and purpose is not a necessity, but it finds its source in Himself, an expression of His own pleasure and will; "according to the good pleasure of his will". (@Ephesians 1:5) I was thinking of a scripture in connection with what you mentioned as to God's great delight in His Son. "Behold my Servant, whom I have chosen; my
{413}
beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased:" (@Matthew 12:18) it is beautiful.
W.B-t. On the day of Pentecost Peter said: "Ye men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you". (@Acts 2:22)
J.T. His whole life, as the meat-offering indicates, was a sweet savour to God. Think of God giving that up! He commanded Him to lay down that life; in that way it is an expression of God's love to us.
J.B. Do you get that thought in the passover here; the Lord being the Lamb?
J.T. Of course the passover presents a different idea. It is a question of the judgment of sin. That was a necessity, the Lord enduring divine wrath on account of sin. There are two cups mentioned here; first the passover-cup which the Lord declares He would not drink again till the kingdom of God should come.
J.B. The passover cleared the way for the other.
A.F.M. Do you learn the love of Christ and the love of God prior to the partaking of the Supper or as partaking of it?
J.T. In this respect, the first great thing brought to us in the gospel is the love of God. The Spirit in the believer touches his heart and reminds him that God loves him. According to @Romans 5, "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us". (@Romans 5:5) At the cross it was there in its entirety, presented objectively. The love of God shone there according to @John 3:16, but it has to be made good in detail, so the expression "shed abroad" is significant; "*shed abroad* in our hearts". Each heart comes under the influence of it subjectively; not only as a matter of light, but it is shed there in our hearts by the Spirit which is given to us. But then your heart is not great enough to contain it all, hence it is presented in @Romans 8 in its completeness, "the love of God, which is
{414}
*in Christ Jesus* our Lord". (@Romans 8:39) It is all there. Then you have in @Romans 8 the thought of "brethren" and I think that is brought to pass in the soul by the knowledge of the Deliverer. In the end of chapter 7 the believer comes into contact with the Deliverer. Now it is not God there, it is Christ personally; the Deliverer becomes endeared to you, and in the next chapter you have "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus". (@Romans 8:2) Christ becomes endeared to you, and you have the law of the Spirit of life in Him. Now I think that lays the ground for what is developed later in the chapter, namely, the thought of brethren, "that he might be the firstborn among many brethren"; (@Romans 8:29) so that I think the Lord's personal love for us is what teaches us to be brethren.
A.F.M. And then that is your moral qualification for the Supper.
J.T. I think so; we come to the thought of brethren there.
W.B-s. The Supper is wonderful as seen here. He first comes to our side in the loaf, and then in the cup you see God's side, and thus you are led to the assembly.
J.T. It is of all moment to see that the Supper presents to us Christ as dead; that is the blood is separate from the body.
G.A.T. Before you go on to the Supper, I would like to ask a question in connection with the directions they got as to where to go to prepare the passover. I think you will find it a question in a good many persons¬ hearts today, as to where they should go in connection with the Supper.
J.T. You have the thought of guidance in the man with the pitcher of water. It is a great education to learn how to follow a guide, that is, a divinely-appointed one. There are divinely appointed guides at the present time, and God graciously meets us
{415}
where we are, and a man with a pitcher of water is a very simple occurrence.
R.S.S. How are you to recognise him? Is it a man who brings you refreshment?
J.T. A thirsty soul would have no difficulty in recognising *water*, and the next thing is you connect the water with a man who has it. The thing is very simple. The means of guidance is simple if one is in the state for it. Water is a very interesting thing if you are thirsty. Is there thirst? Wherever the Spirit of God is working with persons what marks them is thirst, and a thirsty person is very interested by water.
W.H.G. How continually the Spirit is connected with water.
J.T. It is a very remarkable figure in Scripture.
L.T.F. How do you connect the pitcher with the man?
J.T. The scripture says, "follow him into the house where he entereth in". The man with the water is going the right way. If he were not going the right way, he would not have the water. You cannot connect the ministry of the Spirit with unrighteousness, nor with a wayward walk.
W.G.R. Would @John 7 be similar to what you are thinking of? "If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water". (@John 7:37,38)
J.T. That is the point. It alludes, I have no doubt, to the time when Christ should be glorified and the Spirit be here in the believer.
R.S.S. And therefore this water is living water.
J.T. Out of the believer's belly it should flow, so that it is easy to fix it in that way; it is seen in the one who believes in Christ glorified.
G.A.T. What these people did would be wise for people to do now. They ask the Lord where they
{416}
should go, and you would direct people to the Lord today, would you not?
J.T. The Lord indicates how the place should be found. He says "when ye are entered into the city, there shall a man meet you, bearing a pitcher of water". That supposes you have been with the Lord. I am sure I would not like to weaken that side. If you want guidance you go to the Lord, but then there is what is here and the Lord would point you to it.
G.A.T. I ought to remain where I am getting the most and the best food.
J.T. You ought to be where there is spiritual food and refreshment. You cannot divorce the Spirit from righteousness and holiness. Where there is genuine spiritual ministry it must be founded on righteousness.
R.S.S. It is a moral necessity. "If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me". (@Psalm 66:18) You do not even get the good of prayer if connected with unrighteousness. The trouble is today that there is no thirst. People settle down and are satisfied where they are. It is a great thing to be like David's men in the cave of Adullam. It was those who were discontented and in debt and distress. God has a place here where He has pleasure, and that is where His people are found in conformity to Him. I remember very well, as an illustration, when I was deeply exercised about my ecclesiastical connections I had a friend, and we had entered into spiritual things together, and when I felt I could not go on any longer he said to me: 'Are you not saved, what more do you want?' Now I think people are there. They have something and they have settled down; they have salvation, as they call it, and they rest on that, but my exercise was that I was responsible to God for my pathway. I had not any question about the forgiveness of sins, but I had a great exercise to be where God would have me, and what made
{417}
me take *the* place I am in now more than anything else was that where I *was* there was no worship in the genuine sense. Outside was the announcement that the worship of God would be in this building at a certain hour, but I did not find it there, and really what led me out of the associations more than anything else was that God was entitled to worship; for the Father seeketh worshippers to worship Him in spirit and in truth. I did find a place where the Spirit of God was untrammeled, and where there was liberty for the people of God to worship God, without any hindrance which exists to so large an extent amongst our fellow Christians.
J.T. You found, as it were, "a large upper room furnished".
R.S.S. Exactly. Things were untrammeled and free, not for the flesh, but for the Spirit. There is such satisfaction with present conditions and with what is conventional; where there is, on the other hand, soul-thirst, God delights in it, and has great pleasure in answering it.
A.F.M. The man with the pitcher of water was not some one in prominence in the city; the point was, he was bearing this earthen pitcher. He had refreshment. So much around us today is connected with officialism where man is in importance. The Lord directs to the man's house; not only "a large upper room furnished", but there is some one in authority there. We need to come under the lordship of Christ, being subject to Him.
J.T. And all these things being found in the soul, you come under the influence of the Lord's personal love to you. The Supper, in a sense, involves the breastplate of the high priest. The Lord sits down with the twelve, each one had a place in His heart, and He shows them to what extent His love is prepared to go for them.
{418}
J.L.J. Does He not show it here that they might take the Supper and answer to that love?
J.T. That it might be continued.
A.A.T. Do you think Judas was there?
J.T. It says so here. "But behold the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table". That is what gives his treachery its sting. That it was a man, His own familiar friend, one with whom He had taken sweet counsel, @Psalm 55. That was the one that betrayed Him.
W.H.G. And had eaten bread with Him.
J.T. Quite so. What He says of Judas helps one to see the place all the disciples had in the Lord's heart: so that the scene is calculated to promote brotherly affection.
A.F.M. How do you connect what occurs in this scripture with @John 13, where the Lord gave him the sop? Is this historically after that?
J.T. That is historically after this, but in it, as you have intimated, the Lord designated him by an act of affection. It ought to have broken his heart if he had a heart to break; but he received it and went immediately out; and instead of his heart being broken, he went out and betrayed the Lord.
L.T.F. Why does it say, "A man mine equal?" (@Psalm 55:13)
J.T. It shows how Judas was regarded. Incidentally, it shows the place all the disciples had with the Lord. He took "sweet counsel" with them as His friends and companions.
W.B-s. The sop was a special mark of favour, was it not?
J.T. It should have broken his heart if he had one to break. It was not that he had any doubts as to who the Lord was, as far as he could apprehend.
W.H.C. He thought He would deliver Himself.
J.T. Quite so. But what a heart he had! It was as hard as adamant. Now, when you come to this
{419}
scene in @Luke 22, the Lord has drawn near to us in tenderest affection. He opens up to the disciples the length to which He is prepared to go in His love for them. He takes the loaf, It is what He *does* as much as what He says. There is something for the eye. When the apostle at Corinth records what he received from the Lord, he enlarges on what the Lord did. He took the loaf and broke it before them, saying, "This is my body, which is for you". (@1 Corinthians 11:24) There was something not only for their ears, but for their eyes.
W.J.N. When He broke the bread at Emmaus, "their eyes were opened, and they knew him". (@Luke 24:31)
J.T. They saw what He did. And at Jerusalem it was reported that "he was known of them in breaking of bread". (@Luke 24:35) I think the Supper suggests to us the breastplate of the high priest. It presents to us the place each one holds in the Lord's affections, and the place we hold collectively, the whole assembly, for the twelve names represent the whole of God's people.
A.F.M. You mean that comes out in the expression "for you".
J.T. I think so. Paul received the light as to the Supper from the Lord in heaven, so that the Gentile believers have also this same place in the Lord's heart. The thought is that if He has that affection for us we should have affection for Him. It is a wonderful thing in the history of a believer when he sees he has personally a place in Christ's heart; then you instinctively seek that He should have a place in your heart. The Supper is intended to that end.
R.S.S. We come together to break bread, and what is so blessed is the character of that meeting; it is different from any other. We come to read the scriptures together, or to hear the gospel preached, or to pray; but when we come together on the first
{420}
day of the week to break bread, it is all in special reference to the Lord Himself personally.
J.T. So it comes to this, that the *assembly is for Christ*. Hence, the first day of the week should be a free day. We have nothing before us but Christ. It is the day on which we are for Christ. The assembly is for Christ, and at the Supper that is what comes into evidence. He has a place in our hearts, and if so, He has a means by which He leads us in.
R.S.S. "When the hour was come, he sat down, and the twelve apostles with him". I think if we realised to whom it has reference when we come together, we would seek to avoid being late.
J.T. We are for Christ and to be at His disposal.
G.W.H. So that we should be prepared to "follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth". (@Revelation 14:4)
R.S.S. It is the Lord's grace that carries us through the week in view of coming together in answer to His love.
M. No one has authority to close the meeting.
J.T. A man might bring a meeting in his own house to a close, but not in the assembly. No one should attempt to do that. The assembly is the Lord's. He is supreme there. You do not undertake to close that. You are at liberty to go home, but we do not want to assume to close the meeting.
E.G.McA. Is there supposed to be spiritual insight as to when it is time to go home?
J.T. You have to go home because of the necessities there.
G.A.T. What would you call closing the meeting?
J.T. You often get a brother thanking the Lord for what we have had and commending us to Him and asking for blessing on the gospel.
{421}
CHRIST IN GETHSEMANE
@Luke 22:39 - 46; @Luke 24:50 - 53
R.S.S. I am thankful you suggested that we should read something from chapter 22, because I suppose there is no scripture that illustrates our subject, the humanity of Christ, more than it does. He is seen there distinctly as Man.
J.T. And wholly for the Father's will.
W.H.G. Would you say His agony was solely on account of the cup which the Father gave Him? You do not get man or Satan here, but the Father. He goes through it all in communion with the Father. Satan comes again at the cross, but here it is the cup which the Father has given Him which caused Him such terrible agony.
W.B-s. Is not that seen at the cross too? The Father's name comes in at the beginning and at the end. There is no thought of being victim here. It is rather a perfect Man for the pleasure of God. So the Father's name occurs twice at the cross.
W.H.G. He is entirely alone here with the Father.
R.S.S. "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me" (@Matthew 27:46) does not occur in this gospel. That is Matthew and Mark. The victim side is not seen so much in Luke.
A.F.M. What do you think is the significant thought in this gospel in connection with Gethsemane?
J.T. It is the mount of Olives here. I think the connection is to show that He is in touch with the Father. Mount Olivet was His retreat, apparently the place of heavenly associations. That was where He dwelt, so to say.
R.S.S. "And every man went unto his own house. Jesus went unto the mount of Olives". (@John 7:53, @John 8:1)
J.T. Yes. From the way things are mentioned, it seems it was the place of His associations and
{422}
communion with the Father when released from the demands of active service. He spent His nights there.
A.F.M. That is beautifully in keeping with the character of Luke. Does it not say Gethsemane in another gospel? Will you distinguish between Gethsemane and Olivet?
J.T. There is no distinction as to the position, because Gethsemane was on the slope of mount Olivet so far as we know, but the fact that mount Olivet is mentioned has its own meaning.
W.G.B. Would Gethsemane be connected more with His sufferings?
J.T. I think so -- the word signifies wine-press. Gethsemane was the spot He always resorted to, but here it is called the mount of Olives, and there can be no doubt that it was the place of His communion with the Father, retreating from His ordinary labours in Jerusalem, so that He receives the cup from the Father's hand here, in all the consciousness of His relationship with the Father. His perfection as Man is seen in His entire submission.
G.B.M. You get here not only the place where He dwelt, but that He lived by the Father.
A.F.M. Do you connect this with @Hebrews 5, His prayers with strong crying and tears?
J.T. It is an allusion to this, bringing out the reality of His manhood. He "was heard in that he feared". (@Hebrews 5:7)
R.S.S. In Matthew and Mark it speaks of the mount of Olives, and Gethsemane, in Luke it speaks of the mount of Olives, and in John it says, "he went forth with his disciples over the brook Cedron where was a garden". (@John 18:1) These are the four. What you say about the mount of Olives is exceedingly instructive.
J.T. The fact that it is only a garden in John has not the same interest attached to it. Places
{423}
and circumstances seen in connection with the Lord in John have not the same importance as in the other gospels, His Person being so prominent. Interest is always centred in the Person in John, not where He was.
A.A.T. It does say He often resorted there.
R.S.S. The emphasis would be on the word *He*. Is there not some contrast between the mount of Olives, in the way you have been speaking of it, and Bethany? The mount of Olives was the place where He retreated into the father's presence.
J.T. I think Bethany is earthly associations; His associations with the remnant.
R.S.S. But when He went to heaven it was from Bethany. Those most precious links were severed there.
J.T. It is the scene of His earthly associations; that is to say, what He found in the remnant of Israel, but then He lived by the Father. Although finding much in the disciples here, His springs were in the Father. Each of us has to live of Christ, although finding great support in the saints. "So he that eateth me, even he shall live by me". (@John 6:57) You find great support in the circle of the saints here, but it will not suffice; it helps you, but the source of supply is in Christ.
G.A.T. I suppose Mary proved that when she came to the grave. She had the saints, the disciples and the angels, but that would not satisfy her heart. She wanted Christ.
J.T. You must go to the source. It is important to emphasise the point of living by Christ. The Lord, in the exercise of His service, clearly lived by the Father.
W.H.C. You were saying the Christian circle alone is not sufficient for us, but in the Christian circle we get the grace by which we are helped, and
{424}
we help one another into Christ's sphere, where our blessings lie.
J.T. I was thinking that believers may rely too much on what is found in the meetings; although we can scarcely attach too much importance to Christian association, yet each one has to cultivate living by Christ in his individual history. I think that the mount of Olives indicates that side. Christ lived by the Father. Sweet were the associations at Bethany which He enjoyed, we know from other passages. He found a retreat there, and so do we; we find a congenial retreat among the saints, and refreshment and ministry, but with all that we have to live by Christ.
R.S.S. I think this is exceedingly helpful in connection with the mount of Olives and Bethany, and I am sure we shall all be glad to profit by it.
J.T. @John 6 is a very great study for our souls in that way. The Son of man coming down in order to be food for us, so that we might live; thus we are independent of the world. A Christian ought to cultivate a certain independency of soul through the resources that he has in Christ. The more you are independent in this way, the more you support and contribute to others. Each one has to learn what it is to live by Christ. "As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father; so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me". (@John 6:57)
W.H.C. We must feed on Christ as having died, and thus His characteristics and traits appear in us. The manna was for the wilderness, in contrast to the old corn of the land, and that feeds us for the continuance in service down here. In @John 6 it is different.
A.F.M. You made a suggestion that we should be independent in a certain way, through our living by Christ.
J.T. I was endeavouring to point out that in Luke we have indicated that the Lord retreated to
{425}
the mount of Olives, meaning that as a Man He lived by the Father, and so He takes the cup there.
A.F.M. Would it not greatly help us in connection with our fellowship in the Christian company?
J.T. I think it is a great thing to cultivate the habit of living by Christ.
G.A.T. Is that liable to encourage the thought that one can live anywhere without the saints, and be just as well off?
J.T. Well, the Lord surely corrects that in Himself. He looked for comforters. Even *He* sought fellowship and sympathy. The allusion in @Psalm 55 to Judas shows what the Lord had in the disciples. They "took sweet counsel together and walked unto the house of God in company". (@Psalm 55:14) All that is to be found in the circle of the saints.
G.B.M. Towards the close of our Lord's life, the love and sympathy He found at Bethany stand in strong contrast to the hatred in Jerusalem.
J.T. It is well to keep the balance. The Lord in His own life showed us how He valued friendship and associations; the reality of His humanity is seen in this. In the faith of our souls we live by Christ, but then we have divinely given affections which flow out toward our brethren. We want these affections to have their play, and to have them reciprocated, and in that you have support. But then, *we, must live by Christ*.
R.S.S. Fellowship with the saints does not hinder our retiring to the mount of Olives, where it is a question between the soul and God.
J.T. When each goes to his own home he has the Lord. You can always turn to the Lord.
G.A.T. Would you say it is possible for a person to be in Christian company and not know much about the Lord's company?
J.T. I think it is possible, and he may even get gain from it. You would encourage souls to come
{426}
under Christian influence, but all that is short of living by Christ. *One has to cultivate the habit of living by Christ*.
A.A.T. Is there a parallel thought in Naomi?
J.T. Yes. We know that Ruth was influenced by Naomi and gained by the company of Naomi, but she ultimately lived by Boaz.
L.T.F. Otherwise you would have to be carried all the way.
J.T. Yes. As coming to Christ, you do not depend on what you find among the brethren for sustenance, but you are greatly helped by what you find amongst them.
A.B. Paul says to Philemon, "let me have joy of thee in the Lord; refresh my bowels in the Lord". (@Philemon 20)
G.B.M. Is your thought illustrated in what the Lord said to the disciples, "Pray that ye enter not into temptation"?
J.T. He had asked them to watch with Him, that He might have their sympathy; and it is thus that Gethsemane serves to bring out the humanity of our Lord in a very special way. Here He was taking the cup from the Father's hand, recognising what it was, and yet recoiling from it. All was perfection in Man.
R.S.S. The very expression He used is wonderful: "Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me". It is so befitting in a Man perfectly subject to the will of the One whom He was addressing, and His intense feeling coming out in that expression; and He adds; "not my will, but thine, be done". The words are beautiful. The exact words are given us.
J.T. And how *really* He prayed, being in an agony! It is the human side; perfect, but human. "Being in an agony he prayed more earnestly".
G.A.T. Is not this period of the Lord's life overlooked a good bit when we speak of the sufferings
{427}
of Christ? We often speak of the cross. Are not His sufferings here?
J.T. They are anticipated here. They are not atoning sufferings as yet, but He is here as Man meeting indignation and wrath. It is all before Him. He measured it. He knew what the cup involved, and He was taking it in all that intelligence.
J.B. "He was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast". He was alone and yet they were near enough to witness it:
W.B-s. Does this scene have application to ourselves in principle? We often fail in times of sorrow because we are not going on with God and drawing from Him as our spring. In @Psalm 27 the one desire of the psalmist is to dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of his life, to behold the beauty of the Lord and to inquire in His temple. Then it goes on to say that in the time of trouble the Lord would hide him in His pavilion. Is that a similar thought to what we get here; first you are in His presence and then when sorrow comes, you are hidden and are proof against the enemy; so He could say; "weep not for me, but weep for yourselves"? (@Luke 23:28)
R.S.S. I think we would be immense gainers if we learned the lesson of Gethsemane, and saw that the Lord passed through His great sorrow in anticipation; I think we are privileged to do the same thing. I remember two sisters who were intensely devoted to their mother whose life was about to close. I knew their circumstances well, and said to them, 'I feel deeply for you in view of her being taken away'. One of them said, 'We have gone through all that'. I think that was a beautiful illustration of this. They had lost their mother in spirit and so when the time came that she was actually taken away, they were prepared for it.
W.J.N. The Lord here is the calmest of all when the moment came.
{428}
R.S.S. Because of having already gone through it in anticipation.
W.B-t. Did you say we should cultivate independence of spirit as Christians?
J.T. I mean in the sense that you are not dependent on the world, or even on the saints for your support. You live by Christ.
W.H.G. You are pleased to contribute to one another. "Happy are ye if ye do them", (@John 13:17) the Lord said.
R.S.S. You were speaking of @John 6. "As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me". (@John 6:57) It was in connection with "live by me" that you spoke of independence, that you are not dependent on others.
J.T. How is one to stand alone unless one knows this? Otherwise if the brethren fail, you are done for.
R.S.S. And that may come to pass.
G.A.T. Paul was in the good of this when he said, "all they which are in Asia be turned away from me". (@2 Timothy 1:15) The Lord stood by him.
J.T. I think that is a very important consideration for us, because that may happen, and you have to be prepared for possible emergencies; so that if the saints do not stand by you, you can stand as supported by the Lord. He stood alone. Clearly He had no support, although He looked for it from the disciples. They went to sleep and did not supply what He looked for.
J.B. "Ye believe in God, believe also in me". (@John 14:1)
R.M.L. Even at best if we are leaning on the brethren we are always in danger, for there is always a weak spot.
J.T. Quite so. Christians are not like the government of this country, which will not admit anyone who is likely to be a charge. That is not the Christian spirit. We are prepared for a public charge if we
{429}
are in the spirit of Christ. But then each saint ought to be ashamed to be a public charge. There ought to be exercise why it is so. I do not deprecate temporal need. I am not speaking of that, because in the government of God one may be deprived of the means of temporal support and the Scriptures exhort that we should support certain persons; but then no one should be a public charge spiritually, because spiritual means are always available. In the government of God temporal means may be withdrawn from us for discipline, but spiritual support is never withdrawn. Therefore, if any Christian has to be carried by the saints it is clear there is some defect in the soul.
R.S.S. Where there are aged saints, it is blessed that there is a place for them in the house of God. In the world, when we are in our prime, people have plenty of use for us, but when we get old and feeble it is quite otherwise. Then on the other hand, it is very beautiful that even little children have a place in connection with the house of God and we are glad to see them in the meeting.
J.T. I go fully with that. If we are in the spirit of Christianity we are prepared to support others.
R.S.S. Your contrast between this country and the house of God is very suggestive.
J.T. Why should I be a public charge *spiritually*; why not have something oneself, because the means of spiritual support are always available. The Lord is great enough to be food for the *world*, we are told in @John 6.
W.B-s. An old person sometimes is brighter and stronger in spiritual things than one younger.
J.T. That is because they live by Christ. One has had opportunity to see old Christians bright and happy, having no complaints and no murmurings, but bright in the Lord, although largely withdrawn from what we speak of as the Christian circle. The secret is they have learned to live by Christ. @Psalm 84
{430}
supports your remarks as to the house of God. "Yea, the sparrow hath found an house, and the swallow a nest for herself, where she may lay her young, even thine altars, O Lord of hosts, my King, and my God". (@Psalm 84:3) There is a place there for them. But then each individual ought to be exercised that he should not be a public charge.
R.S.S. The sparrow indicating the worthless one, "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing?" (@Matthew 10:29) and the swallow, the restless one -- "as the swallow by flying". (@Proverbs 26:2)
J.T. Yes, they find a place on God's *altars*. That is where sacrifice is made. It requires sacrifice from the saints to provide for such.
G.A.T. What are the marks of a person who has become a public charge?
J.T. His whole spiritual life is made up of what he finds amongst the saints. He does not cultivate the soul exercise that feeds on Christ.
G.A.T. I was thinking that you get an example in Peter's wife's mother. She had a fever, and fever marks one that is always complaining and not satisfied.
W.B-s. Lot went on with Abraham, but when he left him he went to pieces.
R.S.S. I think in these few verses in chapter 22 we have the most remarkable expression of the Lord's perfect humanity; at this moment an angel came and strengthened Him. He not only, when here upon earth as in chapter 8, was ministered to by women and supported in His temporal needs, but here an angel strengthens Him. He gives them that blessed place. They never had such a service as that before.
J.T. Instead of using His own inherent power, He accepts angelic ministration.
W.B-t. Is that the proof that He was human?
{431}
J.T. I think so; instead of the cup being removed, He is supported.
R.S.S. The Lord being God did not alter His being truly Man.
J.T. It is apparent here. Elsewhere He said, "Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?" (@Matthew 26:53) John says of those that came to take Him that "they went backward and fell to the ground", (@John 18:6) but here He is in man's position,
and accepts angelic ministration.
R.S.S. The Lord as Man was absolutely perfect as such; His feelings and thoughts were exactly that of a perfect Man in those circumstances.
J.T. He would fail of being food for our souls otherwise.
R.S.S. And we should get no benefit from Him as an example. Most Christians lose because they do not distinguish between the deity and the humanity of Christ. Mr. Raven greatly helped us years ago when he made the remark, that we cannot contemplate the Lord Jesus as Man and as God at the same moment.
J.T. He is the same Person, unchanged and unchangeable, only that He is viewed in these two distinct lights. We are entitled to consider Him as a divine Person and also to consider that Person in Man's condition.
R.S.S. This scripture is contemplating Him as Man. Of course, we ever retain in our souls the sense of who He is. And that is what makes it so blessed, but at the same time, we have an immense advantage over those we are reading about. I have thought that perhaps none of the disciples fully knew who He was; it dawned upon them very slowly.
J.T. As a matter of fact, to have the light of it requires that you should have the Spirit.
R.S.S. Our brother asks, What about Peter's
{432}
confession, of the Lord in @Matthew 16? He confessed, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God". (@Matthew 16:16) He got a glimpse of what we are speaking about, but it did not characterise him, for the next moment the Lord had to rebuke him.
A.F.M. Thinking of the scene before us as to the Lord's conflict here, even to sweat as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground, was that in view of the cup itself?
J.T. Satan was here really to bring to bear on His spirit the awful pressure of what was about to happen. The Lord is on the banks of the Jordan, as it were. Satan had left Him for a season, @Luke 4:13, but now he has returned to Him in another form; not now to offer Him the kingdoms of this world, but to bring to bear upon His spirit the awfulness of that which was about to happen; the awfulness of death as implying divine judgment.
R.S.S. Do you think Satan suggested the thought of judgment and death? I am distinguishing between the Lord passing through the judgment during the three hours of darkness and then death afterwards.
J.T. They are all coupled together. Death is penalty. How it came into Satan's hand is another matter, but primarily it is penalty and Satan brought it to bear here on the Lord; but the Lord viewed it in the light of what it was in God's mind. It was a cup of wrath. The Lord viewed it in that light, and Satan pressed it upon Him, and pressing it upon Him brings out the infiniteness of His perfection as Man. He recoiled from it and that was perfection; knowing what was in it, He could not but recoil from it; it meant the forsaking of God. But then the other principle that governed Him was obedience, and having come to obey, having taken man's place, His obedience is perfect, so He says, "not my will, but thine, be done". That is the glory of it. What the Psalmist saw in the heavens is now perfectly
{433}
expressed on earth. "The heavens declare the glory of God". (@Psalm 19:1) Now it is at the lowest point that the glory shines. That is what Man is for God. Man is God's glory, and that is seen here -- "not my will, but thine be done".
W.G.R. What is the power of darkness?
J.T. Satan is that. I would say all that Satan had under his control was used to darken. The world-system is darkening, and the Lord said, "this is your hour and the power of darkness". (@Luke 22:53) The world-system was all brought to bear against Him.
A.F.M. How do you connect these scriptures with the word in Hebrews, "having been heard because of his piety". (@Hebrews 5:7) I was thinking of @Psalm 16 where He says, "Thou wilt show me the path of life: in thy presence is fulness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore". (@Psalm 16:11) Would that be the right connection?
J.T. Yes. It was due to God morally, in the Son becoming Man, that man's place should be maintained, and that in that place He should honour God in every possible connection. On that account He was entitled to live, but instead of living, He dies to carry out God's will. He could not rightly deprive God of that life in which God had so much pleasure; the Lord would not have died of Himself. He says, "I have received this commandment of my Father;" (@John 10:18) and here He proves that in doing it, it is the Father's will.
R.S.S. That is one side of it, the other is, that He gave up His life for us.
J.T. That is what we had in the earlier part of the chapter; He laid down His life for us.
R.S.S. What you say is very beautiful. He would not lay down His life without a commandment from the Father, as taking man's place. We are encouraged to lay down our lives for the brethren.
J.T. That is the new commandment really.
{434}
The new commandment is the filling out of the commandment that He had received from the Father. He had received from the Father the commandment to die, but His love delighted in the liberty. He had delight in the liberty to die so that He could carry out the divine pleasure, and remove the man that was so intolerable to God here.
R.S.S. Paul could say that he was not only willing to be bound, but also to die.
J.T. That was in the strength of the new commandment. The proof of love is that ye love one another "as I have loved you". The proof is in laying down your life. You can see how full it was in the case of the Lord. There was the world-system and man in it to God's utmost displeasure. It gave Him liberty to remove vicariously the man that was such a cause of grief to God; and then, on the other hand, He was free to express His love for His own.
R.S.S. What do you mean by vicariously?
J.T. That the consequence of the Lord's dying, is that the man that dishonoured God is removed. He is not literally removed. That is why I used the word "vicariously". What we are is removed vicariously in the One who took our place.
A.A.T. Is that the same thought as propitiation?
J.T. Yes; and on the ground of it He can give the Spirit, so as to bring in an order of man for His pleasure.
A.A.T. But the Lord had in His mind the saints individually when He was on the cross.
J.T. He thought of us, but of God first. We little understand what a grief it has been to God to have rebellious man here. Every father who has had a rebellious son, knows something of what God has had to endure from man. Deuteronomy refers to it in chapter 21. Now the Lord took account of all that, and the Father's commandment enabled Him to set it all aside vicariously.
{435}
R.S.S. These scriptures would present the two sides of it; "who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God"; (@Hebrews 9:14) that is one side. The other is what Paul says: "who loved me and gave himself for me". (@Galatians 2:20)
J.B. You were saying yesterday the body is to carry out the will of God, and also it is given for us. The two thoughts are there.
J.T. Yes. On the one hand He says "a body hast thou prepared me ... I come ... to do thy will, O God". (@Hebrews 10:5,7) That is seen here. On the other hand. He says to the disciples, "This is my body which is for you". (@1 Corinthians 11:24) There it is devoted to them.
J.B. And in that way the wonderful fact of the incarnation comes into view.
J.T. Yes, you get both sides there, Godward and what it is to us.
G.A.T. Would you say a word about the Lord being alone on the cross? I have heard it said the Father never forsook Him; that the Father was with Him.
J.T. You cannot say that. You must allow the thought of abandonment, or you would not have atonement.
W.B-s. The Father's name is never connected with separation. It is not My Father, but "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (@Matthew 27:46)
J.T. No, but then we cannot separate God from the Father: "to us there is one God, the Father". (@1 Corinthians 8:6) It is the same Person, only on the cross you can understand that the thought of relationship ceases when He was abandoned. When the abandonment is over He prayed to the Father and said, "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit". (@Luke 23:46) But during the forsaking there could be no link. You could not have atonement if there were.
W.B-s. Only it is not given in that connection.
J.T. Because it is a question of dealing with sin.
{436}
The majesty of God was insulted by sin, and the Lord was the Sin-Bearer; He had to do with God.
W.H.G. That would be in the three hours.
W.B-t. What is the force of, "thou hast heard me from the horns of the unicorns". (@Psalm 22:21)
J.T. These represent the world's power. Pilate was the instrument of the world power, but God heard Him from that point, and the next thing is, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren" (@Psalm 22:22) and the answer to God hearing Him from the horns of the unicorns is resurrection.
R.S.S. When was that cry?
J.T. It would be after the three hours of darkness. God would not leave Him in the meshes of the power of evil here. He was heard from that point.
R.S.S. What our brother drew our attention to at the beginning is very good. He addresses the Father before the three hours of darkness, and after the three hours of darkness, but during the three hours of darkness He cries: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (@Matthew 27:46) You could not say there was any conscious link with God there.
J.T. He was completely forsaken, and this cannot be emphasised too much. He, as bearing sin, was under God's displeasure at that time; there was total abandonment, otherwise there could not be a true dealing with sin. At our best, none of us judges sin rightly. The idea in atonement is that sin was measured not only by God, but by Man. On the cross the Lord fully measured sin according to what it is in God's account; we never could do that.
R.S.S. What you say is true. You feel you can estimate your own sin very poorly, but there is One who has felt it aright, and He was a Man.
J.T. If God had utterly removed man out of the universe, which He could have done, you would not have secured what the cross presents to us. You
{437}
would have an evidence that God hated sin and must judge it, but at the cross you have a Man estimating it infinitely. He estimated it according to God's estimate of it, and removed it accordingly; so that it is only on the cross you have a true estimate and judgment of sin. The great white throne does not give it fully. Those consigned to eternal punishment do not estimate sin as Jesus estimated it. They doubtless recognise the justice of God in their doom, for they are judged according to their works, but they do not rightly estimate sin.
W.H.C. So the Lord said in connection with the Father's appreciation of that, "Therefore doth my Father love me because I lay down my life, that I might take it again". (@John 10:17) He was never more an object of the Father's complacent love than in His death.
J.T. He said, "thou art holy" from the depths of His agony.
G.A.T. Is that the answer to His cry "why hast thou forsaken me?" (@Matthew 27:46)
J.T. That is His own answer giving the reason of it.
W.J.N. He justifies God.
W.B-t. Would you connect these thoughts with the Lord's supper?
J.T. The Lord's supper is the other side. It is what His body is to us. You cannot but delight in His body, that in which He carried out God's will, but the immediate thought in the Supper is, "This is my body, which is *for you".* (@1 Corinthians 11:24)
R.S.S. It is rather striking that in the gospel that suggests the thought of the continuance of the Lord's supper (Luke), the only gospel that does, there is no reference to sin. In Matthew it says, "this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins", (@Matthew 26:28) but in Luke where the continuance of the Lord's supper is suggested, there is no reference to sin. What is before
{438}
us therefore is, that He loved the assembly and gave Himself for it. We must distinguish between that and the Lord on the cross bearing sin. He was alive then, but having borne it, He dies.
J.T. And that was necessary for atonement; the life had to be given up, the life to which sin had been attached on the cross. During the three hours of abandonment, sin was attached to Him. I mean our sins, and in order for atonement to be accomplished that life had to be given up. Hence He died and that order of man is ended.
W.J.N. I think what you have been saying as to the necessity for His dying is important. One might have thought if He had passed through the three hours of darkness and the judgment of God, there was no necessity for dying.
J.T. But "without shedding of blood is no remission"; (@Hebrews 9:22) that is, the life to which sin attached had to be given up, and He gives it up and never takes it up again. He takes life in a new condition.
W.H.G. Otherwise He would have been for ever alone.
{439}
CHRIST AS BLESSER AND PRIEST
@Luke 24:36 - 53
A.F.M. In passing through the terrible ordeal in Gethsemane, did the Lord qualify as Priest, so that now He is able to conduct the saints right up to, and through the Jordan and support them in the hour and article of death?
J.T. Yes. You often, find with believers that the hour of their departing to be with Christ is their brightest hour. The Lord seems to take special, occasion to support His own in their extreme weakness.
A.F.M. We can count upon the service of Christ right through, in that respect.
J.T. He would protect the spirit from satanic pressure at that hour. The power of darkness would ever be ready to influence the believer through weakness. The Lord protects the spirit of the believer and then supports it. He knows all we have to go through.
W.B-s. Is that the sense of the "swelling of Jordan"?
J.T. I think it is. "How wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan?" (@Jeremiah 12:5) But then the Ark of the covenant has gone over; thus, the sympathy of the Lord is there in the hour of death, and it is usually triumph as far as one knows. Have you not found it so?
R.S.S. Certainly, and very remarkably so in many cases.
W.H.C. Do you not think where that is so, the Christian has passed through death as the Lord did in communion with the Father, and then he is calm when the actual end comes?
A.F.M. We are apt to be timid when we think of the approach of death, but we shall not need grace
{440}
to pass through death till we come to it. The Lord ministers grace according to our present needs.
W.B-s. The last words of my father before he passed away were, Precious peace.
J.T. He saves to the *uttermost* those that come to God by Him. I have no doubt that the expression, "those who have fallen asleep *through* Jesus" (@1 Thessalonians 4:14) shows His instrumentality in it.
A.F.M. Would Stephen be an example of that?
J.T. Yes, he was wonderfully sustained. He was like a man following the ark. The Lord descended from the mount of transfiguration to die. That was the idea. He went down in all His strength to grapple with death. Now He has passed through it. "Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters". (@Psalm 77:19) The Lord took that way, and Stephen followed His footsteps.
R.S.S. And he followed very closely, because when the Lord Himself died, He said: "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit", (@Luke 23:46) and when Stephen died, he said: "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit". (@Acts 7:59) While the Father received the Lord's spirit, the Lord receives the spirits of believers.
J.T. And what a supply of the spirit of Jesus Christ Stephen had! He trod in the Lord's footsteps. Ordinarily, you could not find a path in great waters. It shows how different divine things are from human. Stephen found the Lord's footsteps and he was abundantly supplied with the spirit of Jesus Christ; so that there was a complete reflection of Him. Think of the power that was required in a man such as we are, with all that fearful pressure, so that he, as Stephen was, might be free from the spirit of vindictiveness, to which we are so liable! In the hour of the most terrible persecution, he could kneel down and pray. It is a remarkable illustration of what Christianity is. It has brought in an order of
{441}
priests. Luke gives us, not only the Great Priest, but an order of priests. We see it at the end of this chapter, they are in the temple praising and blessing God; that is priestly, and in Stephen you see it in the hour of the deepest persecution; there is the spirit of Jesus Christ, the spirit of the Priest, He could do what the Lord did.
R.S.S. From the fact that the only death of a Christian of which we have any detailed account in Scripture, is that of Stephen, would you not think it was a pattern death?
J.T. Undoubtedly. He is presented to us as an example, a man of like passions to us, so that it is not beyond any of us in that way. When persecution comes, even in the most superficial way, of the smallest kind, even among ourselves, how near at hand is the spirit of vindictiveness. Now, the idea in Christianity is to displace that, so that "if thine enemy hunger, feed him"; that is priestly. "If he thirst, give him drink for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his head". (@Romans 12:20) If you do that, he will come down. It is priestly acting. You are able to pray for him, if he has caused you grief. It may be a sarcastic word or an ungrateful act. Vindictiveness is always at hand in us naturally, and Christianity is to displace that. You see it perfectly presented in Stephen when the most fearful persecution was there. So the early Christians, as James puts it, were marked by that spirit: "Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you". (@James 5:6)
W.B-t. I notice you make a great deal of prayer in connection with the priesthood. I have a little difficulty because Aaron never is read of as praying.
J.T. I connect prayer with the priests, because they alone had access to the golden altar, and in the allusion to the golden altar in the New Testament, it is prayer that is in view. The Angel at the golden altar in @Revelation 8 presents the prayers of all
{442}
saints before God with incense, so that having compassion on the ignorant and erring, you would instinctively turn to God for them. In fact, there is no state in the brethren so low that you should not pray for them. Although Samuel was not the official priest of the order of Aaron, yet he was a priest in spirit and said, "God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you". (@1 Samuel 12;23) And that was when they were rejecting him.
Now, in regard to this chapter, it seems to me the Spirit would emphasise that the humanity of our Lord is carried on and re-appears in resurrection. I think Luke emphasises that. None of the others do. He calls attention to the Lord's words: "handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have". "It is I myself". Not a spirit, but a real Man in resurrection.
R.S.S. What you say is very important, because in Christendom many have the thought that He laid manhood aside when He died.
J.T. What you see in this chapter as in chapter 22 is the breastplate of the priest; that is, the place the saints had in His heart. Now I have no doubt that the shoulder-pieces also appear in chapter 24, and He acts with a perfect knowledge of human circumstances just as really as if it had been before His death. He is capable of walking with two believers who are on the wrong path, not giving them to understand that it is really He, but their hearts are burning, and entering into their house in the most simple way, He takes His place at their table and gives thanks for the bread. He is capable of all that in resurrection. In that way we can see how He could adapt Himself to us both in resurrection and in heaven, and all to the end that we might be free for the assembly. His strength is seen in the shoulder-pieces. The saints are on His heart and He supports them on His shoulders; that appeared
{443}
before His dying. In resurrection they are on His shoulders.
R.S.S. In connection with the Lord's resurrection as recorded in the various gospels, would you not think that in this gospel the Lord appears for their relief? They are in sorrow and distress, whereas in Matthew and perhaps in Mark it is rather for their support. In the end of Matthew, He says: "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations ... : and lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world". (@Matthew 28:19,20) Then in Mark they are sent out and it is there that the Lord is working with them, whereas in John when He appears in their midst it is rather for their affections.
J.T. I think that is right, only that as to Matthew and Mark, the first is the administration committed to the twelve, and the second is service; in John it is the assembly and the affections.
R.S.S. But the Lord comes in for their relief in Luke, and then He appears in their midst. When they were terrified and affrighted, He said: "Behold my hands and my feet that it is I myself".
J.T. No doubt these two who went to Emmaus are samples; they represent the state of the others, and doubtless His service extended to these in some other way; but we just have an example of how He gathered them. As you said, they were sad, downcast, and so needed relief.
R.S.S. Quite so. It is all preparatory for John.
A.F.M. What is on your mind is that we have two sides of His priesthood. Firstly, the side that comes to our aid to bring us into His circumstances where there is joy and pleasure.
J.T. Then you come into the good of His service *within*, where you know it is He Himself.
R.S.S. And all the Lord's activities in His resurrection were to that end, as recounted here. It says: "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared
{444}
to Simon". (@Luke 24:34) Now Peter was the last one we would have thought He would have appeared to. The Lord appears first to him. As a brother said, we are not told what transpired between the Lord and Peter on this occasion, but we may be sure there was so much grace on the Lord's part and so much brokenness on Peter's part, and things were so thoroughly out that when they met together in the evening, there was no sense of distance between the Lord and Peter.
J.B. Would you say something as to the Lord showing the disciples His hands and His feet and also eating before them?
J.T. I think it is mentioned to establish the realty of His humanity; that it is as real in resurrection as before. What is so comforting as regards priesthood is that, although risen and ascended, He is capable of entering into our circumstances as they are, just as He would have done had He been here in flesh and blood. It brings the Lord very near to you.
J.B. The priesthood broke down before by reason of failure in that, but here there was no breakdown.
J.T. The gain is to understand that the Lord is unchanged. He is Man as really now as He was before His death, and just as capable of entering into our circumstances here, our domestic, or business circumstances. He is not a stranger to any of them, and I think this chapter is to show that. He takes account also of the state of our souls.
R.M.L. Sometimes it has been said in regard to prayer as to your circumstances, that you should address God the Father, and as to the assembly, you should address the Lord. I would think the Lord would be interested in our circumstances from what you say.
J.T. So He is: He is interested *to support you in them*. See how simply He walks with those people on the road and how He enters into their thoughts!
{445}
He could adapt Himself to them; and how simply He could take a piece of fish and eat it!
A.F.M. Peter says in @Acts 10, "him God raised up the third day, and showed Him openly; not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God, even to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead". (@Acts 10:40,41) Peter doubtless refers to this occurrence, and there may have been subsequent ones.
J.T. It all endears the Lord to you. It is all to the end of relieving your spirit.
R.M.L. You would not have any difficulty in that case in addressing the Lord in regard to your circumstances.
J.T. I would ask Him to support me in them.
R.S.S. Would you not think these circumstances really connected themselves with the Lord's interests; but in the case of business, and having some secular matter in hand, it is rather *God* you would address?
J.T. Surely, but you need the Lord's support in them. He is with you as going through things here. You would look to God, but we need the sympathy of a Man with us. In having to do with men in the world, you get very little sympathy, hence the value of having the sympathy of One who knows you perfectly and loves you perfectly. You can do it much better that way, because the Lord is with you as well. He is so in sympathy that He is with us in the doing of the thing, so that we are not overwhelmed. You can now act much better, and with more grace.
R.S.S. "Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God"; (@1 Corinthians 10:31) and another scripture says: "do all in the name of the Lord Jesus". (@Colossians 3:17) As I understand it, you do it as representing Him in those circumstances; even the most ordinary things, as eating and drinking.
J.T. He is with you in them to support you.
{446}
G.A.T. How great to have a Man out of death come into our circumstances!
J.T. The word in Ephesians is: "He that descended is the same also that ascended". (@Ephesians 4:10) He is the same at the top as He was at the bottom.
G.A.T. Did He go into their circumstances at Emmaus to bring them back to His?
J.T. Yes; they were dejected and they went home. Now He undertakes to reverse all that, and in order to do it He follows them. He seeks them out. I have no doubt He dealt similarly with the others as their cases required, and as a result they were all recovered. Looking at the chapter in this way is very encouraging at the present time. The Lord casts His eye over Christendom; the saints are all in His heart, and His shoulders are strong enough to support them all. This kind of service is going on to the end that straying ones might be brought back; hence, if we are to serve, the great thing is to be on the line of priesthood. James tells us: "he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins". (@James 5:20) That gives employment to us. It is a very great thing to be on the look out for the salvation of an erring one.
J.L.J. You get the same thought in Jude's epistle: "and of some have compassion, making a difference; and others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh". (@Jude 22,23)
W.B-s. The disciples thought they had lost Him, but they get Him for ever now. He will never leave them any more. He is the same One whom they knew prior to His death.
A.E.M. Besides the joy of His presence, the Lord opened their understandings that they might understand the scriptures.
J.T. I think He is seen there in the capacity of a Priest, too. "The priest's lips should keep knowledge,
{447}
and they should seek the law at his mouth". (@Malachi 2:7) They heard it here. They never had such an unfolding of the law as this, besides His ability to open their understandings, what an unfolding it was, what priestly intelligence and ability shine in it!
R.S.S. It would seem they had profited by it, for while they had not the Spirit till Pentecost, they act with remarkable intelligence in appointing a successor to Judas. Peter was the speaker, and he seems to have taken up the Psalms in a remarkable way.
J.B. Here it would hardly be apostolic as in Matthew; this is the eleven "and *them that were with them*" (@Luke 24:33)
J.T. It is more the *saints*; although the apostles are in special evidence. The priestly side is apparent here all through in the way of relief, so that they are filled with joy; then in the way of instruction, and then in the way of blessing; that is, He relieves the spirit, instructs your mind, and blesses you. In the end the priestly company is seen in the temple. They are "praising and blessing God".
R.S.S. The Lord is seen in the chapter as having "compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way". (@Hebrews 5:2)
J.T. And then having collected them, He instructs them. As on the wrong path it is not the time for learning. The heart has to be put right and the spirit has to be relieved. All this is effected here. Then finally He leads them out as far as to Bethany and lifts up His hands and blesses them. According to @Numbers 6 this was the function of the priest. He was to bless the people. As the Lord blesses the disciples He is carried up into heaven. That Man is carried into heaven. It is not now that He goes up or that He ascends, but that He is "*carried up".* The point is the delight of heaven in a Man like that. It is not here that He had title or power
{448}
to go, as in John, but He is carried up. It is a matter of honour I think.
R.S.S. I think that is beautiful. @Numbers 6:22 - 27 is the blessing wherewith Aaron was to bless the people.
J.T. Showing that although God had it in His heart to bless the people, it would be through the priest; it indicates the place Christ had in the mind of God. He will bless men, but in that way.
G.A.T. Before He leads them out for blessing, you get the thought of separation.
J.T. Yes; they were to tarry in the city of Jerusalem as a matter of testimony, but they are led out to Bethany, which suggests separation.
W.J.N. Do you get priestly grace in the disciples in their return to Jerusalem afterwards?
J.T. Yes. They go back in testimony. There is the priestly company now. There never had been such before. I am, sure even Zacharias was not equal to that company of priests.
R.S.S. They knew not only the Lord's death, but His resurrection and still more, His ascension. When He was taken from them through death they mourned and wept. When He was taken from them by ascension they returned to Jerusalem with great joy.
A.F.M. Why is the temple introduced? Does it connect with the earlier part where we find Simeon?
J.T. The gospel of Luke, as to the facts related, does not take us beyond the Jewish position. It is a people blessed on earth and the temple is still owned of God; so that it is linked with the first of Acts. Now, when you come to Christianity, it is a people blessed *in heaven*.
R.S.S. "Blessed ... with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ". (@Ephesians 1:3)
W.B-s. The gospel begins with prayer and ends with praise.
{449}
G.B.M. Have you any thought why Luke omits from his gospel that a cloud received Him out of their sight, while he makes that statement in the Acts?
J.T. I think a cloud is mentioned in the Acts to show that the cloud period still remained. Your mind travels back to the wilderness when a cloud is introduced. It is that which hides. There may be a partial shining, but it hides, and that period remained till Stephen. There was no cloud to hide Him from Stephen.
G.A.T. In @1 Thessalonians 4, the saints are caught up "in the clouds.", Is there any connection?
J.T. I think that while God is recognising any special people on earth it is the cloud period. It is not the clear full shining of the sun; Christianity is this. Christianity is a cloudless dispensation, really the only cloudless one.
J.B. Is it not indicated here how we are to read the Old Testament Scriptures?
J.T. I think we are to read them in the light of this chapter, Christ risen; so that if one sets out in the study of Scripture to look for Christ he will be amply rewarded. Very often if you do not look for something, you do not get anything. You read carelessly. The Lord says: "*Search* the scriptures".
G.B.M. You look for the Man of the four gospels.
J.T. You would look for Him in every phase in which He is presented; so "Every scripture is divinely inspired and profitable". (@2 Timothy 3:16)
J.B. Will you say a word on Ephesians, "He that descended is the same also that ascended", (@Ephesians 4:10) as to the present place of Christ glorified?
J.T. He has ascended that He might fill all things. Think of a Man having gone up there with His hands uplifted in blessing! He fills all things in blessing and the first great evidence of it is the gift of the Spirit, so that He might fill the saints
{450}
down here. The effect of the gifts in the Spirit is to bring Christ in in His varied glories so that He might fill our hearts. In the future it will come to light how He will fill everything. He fills all from the top.
A.F.M. How does He fill all things?
J.T. By His greatness. It is in the sense of Colossians; "Christ in you". He fills every intelligent being with His own greatness and blessedness, so that it is Christ *only*. He fills every heart. "Christ is everything, and in all". (@Colossians 3:11)
R.M.L. "He led them out as far as to Bethany". That was the place of dear associations. Is there any connection with His ascending from that point?
J.T. I think it is the Jewish connection here. In Acts He goes up from the mount of Olives. I think Luke does not take us beyond the Jewish connection and this scene will be resumed in the future. In @Acts 1, "then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet". (@Acts 1:12)
W.B-s. Do we gather then from this that we have to be in the good of priesthood before we can take our place as worshippers?
J.T. I think that is so. The chapter shows how the Lord brings in the priestly company. They go to the temple, so that God's service is set up here in the true priests.
{451}
THE TWO PRAYERS IN EPHESIANS
@Ephesians 1:15 - 23; @Ephesians 2:18 - 22; @Ephesians 3:13 - 21
W.B-s. Do not these two prayers at the end of the first and third chapters flow out of what has gone before in the early part of the respective chapters, and is it not in view of the instruction, that has preceded, being made good in the saints?
J.T. Yes. They assume all the light of Paul's ministry. The apostle desired that the saints might, in the first instance, be able to take in the light; "being enlightened in the eyes of your heart, so that ye should know".
In the first chapter what is presented is from God's side, that we may know these three things; then in chapter 3 that we might be able "to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height". It is presented from our side; what we are called into; whereas it is God's side in the first chapter.
R.S.S. "The hope of *his* calling" and "the riches of the glory of *his* inheritance".
J.T. The third chapter is the domain into which we are introduced, and Christ in the midst of it.
R.S.S. Mr. Raven in speaking of this said that Paul had now declared unto them the whole counsel of God at Ephesus; he could not, however, effect anything in their souls; he could present the light to them, that is all. Now having presented it, he kneels down and prays for them.
J.T. Yes, and the prayer should be answered in us. The word that will have application to Israel in the future has application to us now: "Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee". (@Isaiah 60:1) *That* refers to Israel's light. *This* is our light. Our light is Paul's ministry. We are to shine in that.
{452}
R.S.S. I was thinking of chapter 5:8. "For ye were once darkness, but now light in the Lord; walk as children of light, for the fruit of the light is in all goodness and righteousness and truth ... Wherefore he says, Wake up, thou that sleepest, and arise up from among the dead, and the Christ shall shine upon thee". (@Ephesians 5:8,9,14)
J.T. I am glad you alluded to that. The light there is the light in which the assembly is formed and in which it is to shine. Its light is said to be "like unto a stone most precious", when it shines in the future, (@Revelation 21:11). I would like that we should get hold of that, that there is a distinct light in which we are to shine. In chapter 3 it is said that every family in heaven and earth is named of the Father. The Father names every family, and there is distinct light for every family. Now what we have to understand is *our* light.
A.F.M. You mean that we have to learn our proper distinction, and that is why you suggested this scripture to us, with a view to our answering to it here.
J.T. That is what the apostle had in his mind. In @Acts 20 he says he had declared to them the whole counsel of God. Now it was for them to answer to that. This epistle was written subsequently, and shows it was still the burden of the apostle's heart for them, that they should answer to what they had received. If you take the development of the truth as the Spirit of God gives it to us in the Acts, the subject of Paul's ministry really dates from Stephen. There was a man looking into heaven who was in accord with what was there. It must be remembered that the saints on earth as Christ's body are a suffering company; and the more you examine the truth the more you see that this is inevitable. To be here in the light of Christ, we must suffer. It is a suffering, or persecuted company that the Lord owns as Himself.
{453}
R.S.S. We have to own that we suffer so little, and the reason of it is that no doubt we fail to be true to what we really know and I suppose we all like to steer the easiest course; but when such a statement is made, I do not think it can fail to affect us all.
J.B. I suppose at that time the suffering was on account of persecution, but have not the conditions changed today?
J.T. I do not think the conditions have ever changed in the principle of them. The heavenly light here; that is, the light of Christ in heaven shining in us, is sure to draw out opposition in some form.
J.B. What is the force of @Philippians 3:10, "the fellowship of his sufferings"? Is not that continual?
J.T. We are called to be partakers of the afflictions of the gospel. It does not say while there are afflictions, for it assumes there will be afflictions *always*.
I think there has been a relinquishing of obligation. While not criticising the twelve, @Acts 6 shows they relinquished obligation, and delegated it to others; and those to whom they delegated the obligations became the sufferers; at least this is seen in Stephen.
A.F.M. What about John in Patmos: "your brother, and companion in tribulation"? (@Revelation 1:9)
J.T. That shows the tribulation is there.
A.F.M. But evidently John regards the saints as if he was connected with them and they with him.
J.T. All the apostles *did*, suffer; perhaps all suffered martyrdom, but they were not all honoured like Stephen. In fact the twelve remained in Jerusalem while others were scattered on account of the persecution.
R.S.S. And not only was Stephen one of the seven, but Philip also.
{454}
J.T. It is remarkable that both Stephen, and Philip are taken up by the Lord and signalised specially just immediately afterwards, and they were the ones deputed by the apostles to take up the obligations they had relinquished. Paul never despised the work of a deacon, the serving of the saints.
R.S.S. So I think they were hardly right in saying "It is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables". (@Acts 6:2)
J.T. It was like Moses in @Numbers 11, wishing to be relieved of his great burden, and so seventy others were used. It diminished his power. The power was not increased. The twelve would have had the power that Stephen and Philip had.
W.B-s. The seventy simply received of Moses¬ spirit.
J.T. The power was taken from him and given to them.
W.B-s. Does the suffering come out in maintaining the heavenly position?
J.T. I think so. Stephen's face shone as the face of an angel. What strikes you about Stephen is that he corresponded with Christ. He was a priest as persecuted. The end of Luke shows that Christ was a Priest; He was carried up into heaven as a Priest. He was that on the cross, praying for His enemies, and Stephen was in accord with that. I think the priest is a heavenly man. That is the testimony presented to us in the type of priesthood.
E.I.E. Stephen saw the glory of God and Jesus. Does that imply two thoughts?
J.T. Yes. The glory of God is that every thought that God had given expression to had found its answer in that Man; but Jesus is *the Man* for our hearts.
E.G.McA. The ability to stand in this suffering is in the apprehension of what is contained in these two prayers.
{455}
J.T. It is a very touching thing that the saints are owned as a suffering company. Saul of Tarsus knew that well, for he had been accustomed to go into their houses. Stephen was one, at least, whose sufferings he witnessed and he came in contact with the Lord in the martyr. Then in @Acts 8 he entered into *houses*. So he understood what the Lord alluded to and what James testified; "Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you". (@James 5:6) There was no vindictiveness in the saints. They suffered as the Lord had suffered.
W.B-s. The Lord showed Paul how great things he must *suffer* for His name's sake.
A.B. In @2 Timothy 3, Paul speaks of his sufferings at Antioch, Iconium and Lystra and adds, "Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution". (@2 Timothy 3:12)
W.J.N. The way in which the Lord Jesus was revealed to Saul and the way in which He spoke of the saints being Himself, a suffering company, left a lasting impression on Saul, fitting him to suffer.
J.T. I think so.
J.L.J. If we had the light of sonship in our souls we would be prepared to suffer.
J.T. It all goes with the formative principle of the light of Christ in heaven. He was the Sufferer. The gospel really presents it to us. It is *that kind of man*. Take the Psalms and examine the kind of persons whose experiences they give. It is a different order. The Psalms record experiences, not of a heavenly people strictly, but of an earthly people; truly God's people, but an earthly people. They do not express the same kind of sentiments that you get in Stephen. There is no demand for vengeance in Stephen, nor in any true Christian, whereas the Psalms present the exercises of those who do demand vengeance, and they answer to those desires. It is important, therefore, we should understand the light
{456}
in which we are formed and in which we are to shine.. "Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you". (@James 5:6) That was the testimony presented to them.
R.S.S. "Who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously". (@1 Peter 2:23) What you speak of is the Spirit's work in our souls, and do you not think the great thing above all else that we need is to be formed in the spirit of Christ? Stephen was formed in the spirit of Christ. He did as Christ did in the most testing circumstances. He prayed for his enemies. I think we can constantly pull ourselves up in connection with this question: are we acting in the spirit of Christ?
J.T. You have it in @Romans 8, "if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together". (@Romans 8:17)
A.F.M. Our epistle comes from a prison-cell.
J.T. That is significant, and Paul speaks of himself as a prisoner, a chained man.
W.G.B. It says, "If we suffer, we shall also reign with him". (@2 Timothy 2:12) Does that look at the assembly as a suffering vessel here?
J.T. It is the normal state of the assembly in a world that rejected Christ. The answer to the suffering is the reigning.
A.A.T. Is that where discipline is learned?
J.T. It is a higher thought than discipline. It was not discipline with Christ, but it was suffering. "For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake". (@Philippians 1:29) Of course, it often becomes discipline in our case..
W.G.B. It is evident from @Hebrews 11 that those who had faith, suffered for the light they had, even in Old Testament days.
J.T. You have the principle in Isaac. "He that
{457}
was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit". (@Galatians 4:29) As was pointed out, the spirit of Christ brings out the opposition.
R.S.S. So if we act in the spirit of Christ we are very apt to have to meet the spirit of the flesh; that will be against us but we will be greatly helped if not diverted.
J.T. The persecution may take a different form, but if the flesh is allowed and active, it is sure to persecute him that is born after the Spirit. Ishmael represents man after the flesh, and Isaac the man after the Spirit, and he is the heavenly man.
W.G.B. And you find Saul persecuting David.
A.A.T. Is this the warring in your own breast?
J.T. It is from another person, not your own flesh. You must have two individuals for this.
G.A.T. And it is Christ that is persecuted, not you.
J.T. But *you* are persecuted, if born after the Spirit.
A.F.M. I wonder if we are prepared to go the full length of being here for Christ. I was thinking of Stephen. He went to a martyr's death, and in @2 Corinthians 4 the apostle had accepted martyrdom, and so he says "I believed, and therefore have I spoken". (@2 Corinthians 4:13) He had counted the cost and was not afraid to declare himself. Is there not a principle in that? We shrink from speaking, because we have not counted the full cost of the journey.
J.T. I have no doubt that Paul's letters from prison, containing as they do the assembly's place and privileges, carry with them the conditions and circumstances of the writer, and these, in principle, should be reproduced in us. He spoke of Onesiphorus, who went to Rome, and sought him out diligently and found him, and was not ashamed of his chain. He accepted the apostle's position fully. So, "Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our
{458}
Lord, nor of me his prisoner; but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel". (@2 Timothy 1:8) It is in reproach.
W.J.N. I would like a thought as to suffering *with* Him.
J.T. "With" in Scripture involves association, and what lies at the bottom of that is our place in the future. Companionship with Christ as now in reproach, is companionship with Him in the future. "Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations". (@Luke 22:28) It is here we are suited so as to be with Him in the sphere where there are no tribulations.
W.J.N. Is there the thought of being formed after the spirit of the heavenly Man in suffering with Him?
J.T. You imbibe His spirit in the sufferings.
W.J.N. Hence you feel in that way the state of things around you. I am thinking of @Romans 8. It speaks first of suffering with Him, and then mention is made of the condition of things in creation.
W.H.C. Do you think that what would draw forth the persecution and enmity would be the spirit of envy in the natural man against those that belong to the heavenly family?
J.T. You see that clearly in Ishmael.
W.H.C. So the opposition would be because one belongs to a privileged family, and that draws forth the enmity of the man after the flesh.
J.T. Even though that man may be himself in favour. Take Isaac. From the time of his birth here heaven comes into view, and Ishmael is recognised from heaven, actually cared for from heaven. The angel calls out of heaven in regard to Ishmael. When you come to the application now, the family born after the flesh was really favoured from heaven on account of Christ. I mean the Jews. In spite of that, you have the ceaseless opposition to the heavenly man. Ishmael's opposition continued in spite of the fact that really Christ in heaven, as Man, drew down
{459}
favour for them; Christ going into heaven, and the Holy Spirit given, and all with them in view: "The promise is unto you, and to your children"; (@Acts 2:39) and yet that did not alter their opposition to Christ.
W.H.G. That principle is seen in @Luke 15, in connection with the elder brother; the father said, "thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine", (@Luke 15:31) and yet there was the enmity and opposition to the one in the place of favour.
S.T. Did not Saul of Tarsus take that place in persecuting Christ in His body here?
J.T. Yes. He, of all men, knew the persons to whom the Lord alluded.
S.T. And then he becomes the contrast to that in Colossians, where he suffers "for his body's sake" and rejoices in it.
W.B-s. In what way do you think of Abraham, as you were saying this morning, as a pattern of the suffering saint? He was a very wealthy here.
J.T. I think the suffering side is seen more in Isaac, because God would emphasise that it is the heavenly man that suffers. So the New Testament comment helps us: "he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit". (@Galatians 4:29)
E.G.McA. How would you describe the sufferings now? There is no violence or death.
J.T. Because the persecutors have no power to do that, but the opposition is there, and it comes in in some form. No doubt the opposition is narrowed down now, but it exists and it is the same opposition.
E.G.McA. Can you give us an illustration of what would come to us?
J.T. Paul alludes to suffering from false brethren. That is very largely what it is.
G.A.T. "Of your own selves shall men arise". (@Acts 20:30)
J.T. Wherever the flesh is allowed to work it is sure to persecute him that is born after the Spirit. It will come out in some way.
{460}
R.S.S. Then again Paul, recounts the things he passed through in @2 Corinthians 11, including as he says: "that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the churches". (@2 Corinthians 11:28) Truth remains the same, though outward conditions have changed. Our manner of life is different; the life which we have to go through here is not so much marked by persecution, but more by pressure. In those days they had not the heavy business pressure, for they lived in the simplest way possible, and they were free from the pressure that we are all in more or less. I got the thought from a letter in which it was said: I often comfort myself with the thought that probably *pressure* in our day answers to *persecution* in early days; I mean as discipline. Both would *seem* a hindrance to the conditions necessary for spiritual growth, and yet if taken up with God would prove not only not a hindrance, but a help.
J.T. When the Man that is in heaven is shown to be the only Man owned of God and owned of faith, all others have to be displaced. That is where the persecution arises.
W.H.G. That awakens enmity.
J.T. Now the first *record* although of course it existed from Cain onwards, we have of persecution is in Isaac, and not when he was born, but when he was *weaned*. It was then that Abraham made a great feast for Isaac, and necessarily Isaac was the supreme figure, and that displaced Ishmael, who was the elder of the two. That alludes, in the fulness of it, to the place Christ has obtained in heaven. The man born after the flesh was put into the shade. That is what drew out the opposition. If carefully analysed it will be found, the more you look into it, that the opposition is centred against Stephen.
J.M. Our keenest suffering would be from the religious element.
J.T. From those who once had a status from God;
{461}
wherever there has been an acknowledgement of such by God, and where that has been set aside. If you make a great feast you say: "not I, but Christ". You do not allow any other spirit but that of Christ and that will bring out opposition. There is no obvious reason why people should dislike you; you do not do them any harm, and yet they do dislike you.
G.B.M. It came out in Michal's anger at David dancing before the ark.
J.T. Most markedly; and the comfort is, that that kind of generation becomes extinct. She had no children after that. First of all that generation is limited. Under Saul it was not limited. It prevailed while Saul reigned, but it became limited in Michal, it lasted only as long as she lived. When David made much of Christ, she despised him in her heart, but when she died, that spirit died with her. She had no child.
R.S.S. Why do you think Abraham pleaded with God, "O, that Ishmael might live before thee!" (@Genesis 17:18) God said, "I will make him a great nation". (@Genesis 17:20) Ishmael is the figure of the man after the flesh, and I cannot quite see why God maintains him, and apparently prospers him.
J.T. Because he was Abraham's seed. It shows the great place Abraham had with God. It was not because God had any pleasure in Ishmael because he was a "wild-ass of a man". That was his character. God could have no pleasure in a man like that. Being Abraham's seed is the ground on which God said He would bless him, @Genesis 21:13. God honours Abraham and blesses his seed, because he is his seed; and he is owned from heaven even after Isaac is born. When Hagar was first forced out of Abraham's house God took care of her and sent her back; but it is not said that He spoke to her out of heaven, but when she is cast out with Ishmael the angel
{462}
speaks from heaven to her, @Genesis 21:17. God honours Abraham. God blesses a man's family because of him.
R.S.S. I was wondering if the position of Ishmael and his history is given us in order that we might have a delineation of the man after the flesh.
J.T. Yes, as blessed of God; He refers to Israel.
R.S.S. It all results in nothing.
J.T. Quite so, and God did all possible for Abraham. God says, as it were, 'If you love Ishmael, as you do, I will bless him', but nothing came out of it but persecution. It is applied to Israel in Galatians. "This Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children". (@Galatians 4:25) That was the issue of it all.
L.T.F. That shows the length God would go with the desires of His own.
J.T. That is the point. God said, as it were, 'I will bless Ishmael on your account, but let the issue show itself'. "In Isaac shall thy seed be called". (@Genesis 21:12)
R.S.S. It shows how reluctant we are to give up the flesh.
J.T. If we want to understand Paul's doctrine we have to examine the history of Isaac. Isaac is the great foreshadowing of it in the Old Testament. When Isaac is born heaven comes into view. When he is offered up, the angel calls out of heaven twice, @Genesis 22.
R.S.S. The beautiful circumstance in the plains of Mamre, when the three men come to Abraham as he was sitting in his tent-door, would seem to have as its object to foretell Isaac's birth.
E.I.E. You were speaking this morning regarding Abraham being called by the God of glory. Do you get that referred to in Ephesians? As appearing to him as the God of glory He had something to communicate to him.
{463}
J.T. "Unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world, without end". (@Ephesians 3:21) The glory is in the assembly. When Paul sets to work in regard to the assembly, it is "house to house" work. As it had been house to house work in the persecution, so in the ministry. When we come to the Ephesians, those that had been formed by this house to house work of the apostles are qualified for the heavenly position. @Acts 20 says, "from house to house".
This is how you get to know the members of Christ. Of course we get to know each other in the assembly, but we should get to know each other at home. You help a brother by going to his house. Paul did not go in a social way, but to carry the light he had. He took account of each saint as a member of Christ. He had in his mind the great scheme. He was a master builder. If he went into a believer's house, he took account of that man as a member of Christ and ministered to him accordingly. "That we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus", (@Colossians 1:28) was Paul's objective.
S.T. Is that shepherding the flock?
J.T. It amounts to that. He had the great end in view; the position in which each one is to shine.
W.B-s. Will you give us a little more on these three scriptures?
J.T. I think that in Ephesians the apostle is writing down his thoughts by the Spirit as to the assembly's place, and he shows that Christ has been made "head over all things to the church, which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all". But in the meantime she is a sufferer here.
A.F.M. That is what is in your mind when you speak of suffering. I want to know the connection between the suffering and these scriptures.
J.T. The suffering is that which shows that they were the members of Christ. We are owned in that
{464}
way. It is useless to talk about it unless there is suffering, because it is a suffering people that He owns.
A.A.T. Is it a suffering people who, in any special way, receive His service as Priest?
J.T. They suffered more because of what they were. Saul went into their houses and sought out men and women. It was not simply what they were doing that provoked this, but sheer opposition to the spirit that was in them. Saul was mad against them, but it was on account of what they were, and their relation to Christ. He did many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth.
A.A.T. Yet, on the other hand, Christ as Priest was surely supporting them.
R.S.S. Your thought is that the assembly in connection with Paul's ministry and Paul's history, begins where Stephen's ends, and is connected with it.
J.T. Quite so. He had to do with the spirit of Christ in these persons. The Lord identifies Himself with the very thing that Paul had been dealing with. The man who was speaking in heaven was the One whom Saul had been dealing with in these persons; they were of the same spirit. That is how the assembly as the body comes to light on earth.
E.G.McA. I do not quite see why you have dwelt so much on persecution in these scriptures.
J.T. I did not intend to dwell so much on it at first, but I think it is of the Lord that we should see the position, and that the assembly is connected with persecution. It is thus in correspondence with Christ here, as it will be in glory.
G.B.M. Would you connect these words in @Ephesians 1 with the expression in Philippians: "That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings". (@Philippians 3:10)
J.T. "Him" in @Ephesians 1, is God. It is really a question of the knowledge of God. I apprehend
{465}
it is God revealed in His counsels. The first chapter treats of Christ, according to God's counsels, sitting down in heaven. You will notice that; the fact of resurrection stands by itself, and it is said to be the exceeding greatness of God's power; the words *"and* (he) set him down" introduce another matter. After being raised, God set Him down above all principality and power and gave Him to be Head over all things to the assembly. That is the full position of Christ and the assembly in God's counsels, is emphasised.
W.H.G. That would be the abstract truth apart from all experience here, and would not the result of being identified with Christ as Head, down here in our mixed condition, be persecution?
J.T. I think so. Ephesians presents the full thought of God, namely that Christ is set in heaven as Head over all things to the assembly. What a place the assembly has! The first chapter, taking it from the middle of verse 20, sets forth the divine counsels as to Christ and the assembly.
W.H.C. There is no persecution *there*, but as identified with Christ, we suffer persecution here.
A.F.M. Why did the apostle pray these two prayers? What is the difference between them?
J.T. I think the first prayer is that we might see things from God's side, that we might have the knowledge of Him, so as to see what He is doing in the accomplishment of His counsels. The third chapter is what we are brought into, it is the other side of truth. It is one thing to look at God's counsels and see what He accomplishes for Himself; to do that you must have "the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him". The book of Proverbs helps to show that God does everything in wisdom. Chapter 8 contemplates the divine counsels, and that wisdom was there with Him. We need "the spirit of wisdom and revelation". It is not found in man's
{466}
brain. It is something God gives to us, so that we might follow Him in what He is doing. In chapter 3 the apostle thinks of *families*. "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named". He thinks of families, and then he treats only of *one* family, and that is the assembly. He desires that they might be "strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man; that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts". In other words, that we might see Christ, the centre of the whole scheme, the anointed Man. God has anointed Him for the accomplishment of His purposes, and He is in the centre of all, and He is to dwell in our hearts. "Being rooted and founded in love, in order that ye may be fully able (it is a matter *of power* ) to apprehend with all the saints". He is thinking of *all* the saints, and what they are to be brought into, "the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ". It is what we are brought into, and that we may know the whole extent of it.
S.T. We must be formed in the divine nature for that, "rooted and founded in love".
J.T. That is what it means. If we do not know love we are out of it.
G.W.H. In chapter 1 it is intelligence; in chapter 3 affection.
J.T. Yes, and in that sense, ability. You are great enough to take it in. It requires inward strength, not only that you have a mind great enough, but affection great enough.
J.B. Formed by the Spirit.
J.T. By the Spirit of the Father. When you come to this side of the truth, this world is not great enough for you. It is too limited, it is too narrow. You want, with this ability, a wider sphere than there is here, and the apostle's desire is that we, in conjunction with other saints, may take it in.
{467}
W.B-s. Is not that the greatest scope of divine things in Scripture?
J.T. It is like the "land that I will show thee". (@Genesis 12:1) God, from the top of Mount Nebo, showed Moses all the land of Canaan. That corresponds with the point of the apostle's prayer here. Moses was equal to that vision. It is the breadth, length, depth and height.
W.H.G. The height would be the counsels of God.
J.T. Right up to God Himself.
A.F.M. Canaan was the length and breadth, but here we have the depth and height.
J.T. The heavens and the earth are all in view. The whole domain of the counsels of God.
W.H.C. Would the depth be founded on the death of Christ?
J.T. I suppose the blessing extends from that point.
R.S.S. In the end of chapter 2 I think you said we get privilege.
J.T. *Present* privilege. The chapter is divided into two parts. The first part is a continuation of chapter 1. In fact if you look at the New Translation there is no break. It is one continuous statement. Christ is set in the heavens and then, "And you hath he quickened". (@Ephesians 2:1) You Gentiles and we Jews, "quickened us with the Christ ... and has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus". (@Ephesians 2:5,6) That is, chapter 2 shows how God brings us to that point. There are two very precious thoughts in it; the first is association with Christ, and the second is that the saints are *together* in that. "With" is association with Christ, and "together", is that *we* are united. Jew and Gentile are brought into one company.
{468}
R.S.S. The thought of quickening carrying with it the thought of association, being made to live in our affections.
J.T. That is it; as made to live, it is *with Christ*.
R.S.S. It is like @1 Thessalonians 4, "caught up together", that is, the sleeping saints and the living ones.
J.T. The word *together* is a very precious word in Scripture. If we love Christ, "with Christ" is precious; if we love the saints, "together" is precious, because you have them all with you.
W.C.R. "The rich and poor meet together; the Lord is the maker of them all". (@Proverbs 22:2)
G.A.T. Does the word *together* bring in the idea of separation from the world?
J.T. The idea underlying it is, that if you love the saints, you do not want one exempted.
A.B. The word occurs seven times in the epistle.
J.T. That is interesting. We are quickened together and raised up together and made to sit down together.
W.H.C. Raised up together will be association.
J.T. It is association with one another; "raised us up" is elevation, not from the grave, but from earth to heaven. Then we are seated, not together with Christ, but *in* Christ. That is our dignity.
A.F.M. I would like to ask if the expression "fully, able to apprehend with all the saints" is something like what you have been speaking of regarding "together"?
J.T. Yes, only it supposes the work of God to be effective in them all.
A.F.M. Are we hindered at the present time by the failure as to this in the saints at large?
J.T. Unquestionably. There is very little ability to take in the vastness of the divine scheme. We are not great enough. You may have light and that is
{469}
chapter 1, but to be "fully able", by virtue of the quickening power of the Father's Spirit is another matter.
J.L.J. Abraham was great enough for it when Lot had left him. There must be separation before you are morally great enough to take in the purposes of God.
J.B. I would like to ask a question as to the body in @Ephesians 1:23, "the assembly which is his body", We have been speaking of it as in the Acts in relation to the word "why persecutest thou me?" (@Acts 9:4) and of the body being a partaker of the sufferings of Christ. Does the body go on to the day of, display referred to here: "that in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace". (@Ephesians 2:7)
J.T. Chapter 2 is what may be called anticipative. The truth is presented anticipatively. It is not what has taken place historically. It is the whole work of God in the assembly viewed anticipatively, as though it had taken place; and it is "that in the ages to come he might show". (@Ephesians 2:7)
R.S.S. You say anticipatively because it includes every Christian from Pentecost to the coming of the Lord.
J.T. And every bit of work that God has wrought in the assembly.
A.A.T. Do we apprehend individually or collectively?
J.T. I think it is collectively. The saints aid you. You get a greater grasp of things in assembly than individually. You have more power, more of the Spirit. You can understand a thing better in the company of a spiritual man than alone, so if you increase that, you increase the capacity.
R.S.S. Is it not true that our greatest blessings are collective, not individual?
J.T. And love would have it that way.
{470}
G.A.T. Thomas missed it because he was not with the company.
J.T. Yes. There is another thought in regard to the second chapter, the second half of which you might call *provisional*. It is what we have in the interval as a means of support and supply, pending the full accomplishment of the divine thought. We have already access to the Father by the Spirit, and are already fellow-citizens, and of the household of God, and already built upon the foundation of the apostles, and already a temple *growing*; there it is not complete, but growing. All that is provisional, although real and abiding as far as the work of God in us goes.
R.S.S. That is very helpful, the distinction between the first and the last parts, the first anticipative, and the last provisional, for our present realisation.
J.T. They are wonderful things, but it is well to admit the truth that what we have now is not so great as what we shall have. What we have now is simply provisional, lying in the possession of the Spirit, pending the accomplishment of God's purposes when all is complete.
R.S.S. And it is largely in view of our access to the Father.
J.L.J. Does God have His inheritance now, in the assembly?
J.T. Yes, "in the saints". Only it includes *all* saints -- *every* family.
{471}
"IT IS NOT GOOD THAT THE MAN SHOULD BE ALONE"
@1 Corinthians 11:8 - 12
You will observe here that in treating of God s order in connection with creation, the Spirit of God presents the man and the woman, ending with this, that "all things are of God". So that in result, when the counsels of God are consummated, the man and the woman will appear accompanied by this, that "all things are of God". God is the sovereign Source of all things.
I have read these verses because they present to us the man and the woman. My thought is to speak of Christ and the assembly, and in approaching the subject I would say that the gospels give us the Man, whereas the epistles present the woman. The masculine side is seen in the gospels, the feminine side in the epistles; and I need not add that the assembly comes under the feminine idea in Scripture.
Now we have been dwelling on the Lord as Man, and one has the assurance that it has not been without profit. At any rate, if there has been in our souls the inquiry that the reading of @Isaiah 53 produced in the heart of the eunuch, we shall not be without profit. You will remember how interested he was; "of whom speaketh the prophet this? of himself, or of some other man?" (@Acts 8:34) The beauty of the Man delineated in the chapter excited his interest, and he inquired as to who the Man was who was so delineated, the prophet himself or another. Had he read chapter 6, he would have readily concluded it was not the prophet, for @Isaiah 6 tells us that the prophet was a man of unclean lips; he therefore, was not the Man depicted in chapter 53. But his interest was excited: "of whom speaketh the prophet this?" (@Acts 8:34) Beautiful speaking!
{472}
The Spirit of God tells us in commenting on it elsewhere, that "these things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spake of him". (@John 12:41) His *glory*; a humbled, despised, persecuted Man! Yet he saw His glory. "These things". What things? The fifty-third chapter of Isaiah. "He saw his glory". No one can speak rightly of Jesus who has not seen His glory. If it be a mere historical narrative of the Nazarene such as we often hear of, it is no *true* narrative. Only one who has seen His glory can speak of Him aright. Now Luke saw His glory. Luke was imbued with the idea of the glory of the Man. His gospel goes far beyond Isaiah. He saw His glory. I am not saying that the Scripture says Luke saw it. His gospel proves that he saw it. He saw Christ's glory and spake of Him. What a delineation of the Man! Hence the evangelist Philip begins at @Isaiah 53 and preached to him the Man.
What a moment for the Ethiopian eunuch! His heart was captivated by the Man whose "life is taken from the earth". (@Acts 8:33) Do you ever miss the life of Jesus here? His life is taken from the earth. What a life it had been! A life ever verdant. The prophet sees Him growing up. Growing up, how? We fathers know what it is to see children growing up. We sorrow sometimes, but here is One growing up -- how? As a tender sapling. "As a root out of a dry ground". (@Isaiah 53:2) He drew nothing from the soil about Him, but He grew in wisdom and stature; that was what Jesus was here. You know what green is to the eye. It is divinely intended in the creation for man's eye to rest upon. That is what Jesus was for God. God's eye rested on the green. The Lord Himself definitely calls it green. "Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children ... For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry?" (@Luke 23:28,31) Till
{473}
He died, there it was for the eye of God, but that life was taken from the earth.
Now in the eunuch we see the principle by which the assembly is being formed here; that is, by attraction to the Man. The Lord foresaw this in the gospels and in @Matthew 13 He said: "the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field;" (@Matthew 13:44) it was something that a man found. In the next parable we find a man seeking for goodly pearls. In the first instance, it is a treasure found; without evidently any effort to discover it, it is found. In the second instance, the merchantman is *seeking* something; goodly pearls. He finds what he seeks and he buys it, but the treasure he hides in the field. How precious the disciples were to Jesus! "Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations"; (@Luke 22:28) He said to them. They were His companions in sorrow. They were *with* Him, and the thought of it, the joy that He had in that favoured band, excited His supreme interest; He hid the treasure and bought the field. In other words, the Lord established incontestable right to all humanity in order to have the treasure. No one could question His right to the treasure for He bought the field, the treasure went with it. Only He could value it, and none could dispute His title to it. The Lord Jesus surrendered all that He had to secure the field; and who can recount what He had, for as Man here on earth, He was Heir to everything.
Now having secured the field, He sends Paul out into it in order that every bit of the treasure should be secured. What a faithful searcher Paul was! He went into houses to find it. The Spirit of the Lord searches us out at the present time; it is a question of searching after straying ones, of separating the precious from the vile. Believers have strayed, but the Spirit of God searches for them. Paul's thought was that the saints should be instructed and
{474}
formed, as members of Christ's body. He recognised the loneliness of Jesus. Bereft of Israel, as Isaac of old of His mother, Jesus was alone. He needed a companion and Paul was used to bring her to Him. The field was wide, and the sheet from heaven in @Acts 10 indicated the whole field. Think of Paul let out into that field with a commission from Christ in regard to the assembly. His mission was similar to that of Abraham's servant of old. What a zealous man he was! I have often likened Paul to the valiant men of David who heard him sigh: "Oh that one would give me, drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem!" (@2 Samuel 23:15) They heard that and they went and drew it; they secured it for David. Consider one so devoted to Christ let out into the field with the full knowledge of the redemption-rights of his Master. Paul did not tread on Roman ground timidly, but in the sense of the rights of Christ. He was the commissioner of Christ. The territory was Christ's. It was His incontestably and Paul searched it for the treasure, and he did it by presenting Christ in the gospel.
Now I want to show you that in the divine thought the Man would not be without the woman. In every position He occupies, whether official or otherwise, the woman is associated with Him. You remember how the subject is introduced in Scripture; "It is not good that the man should be alone". (@Genesis 2:18) Now that principle runs right through Scripture in regard to Christ and the assembly, and, I desire, by the Lord's help, to point out to you from the Old Testament types, how that in almost every position the assembly is associated with Christ. He had to go into death, of course, alone. There was no man in the tabernacle but Aaron, when the atonement was effected, but in every other position, we may say, whether official or personal, subsequent to His death, the assembly is seen. "It is not good that the man
{475}
should be alone", (@Genesis 2:18) is a word that refers to Christ. It does not *always* refer to us, for evidently it was good for Paul. It refers to Christ. That is the divine thought.
Now Adam is the first great type of Christ, and he was head of creation, a wonderful man he must have been. You will all remember the record given to us in @Genesis 2. "It is not good that the man should be alone". (@Genesis 2:18) One is to be made his like, to be a companion. I only touch on it to say that as Head of the creation the Lord Jesus associates the assembly with Himself. She is *of* Him. He was not created for her, but she was created for Him. She is of Him and she is for Him as Head of God's creation. The Lord Jesus associates us with Himself in that wonderful position that He has in God's counsels. He is the beginning, the Head of God's creation. Think of that. Is it not worth while belonging to that which is the companion of Christ as Head of God's creation?
When we come to the next great figure of the assembly, she is presented to us as the companion of the heavenly man. You all remember Isaac and Rebekah. Isaac appears in Scripture as the heavenly man. It is in connection with him, as far as I remember in Scripture, that you first have a communication "out of heaven", @Genesis 21:17. I quite admit that the immediate object of it was Ishmael, but it is after the birth of Isaac, typically the heavenly man, that we have communications out of heaven. That accords with the gospel of Luke, In @Genesis 22 the angel of the Lord twice calls out of heaven, and on each occasion it is in regard to Isaac. He is the object of heaven's interest, and directly he arises from the dead in figure, we have the genealogy of Rebekah; it is in the same chapter. @Genesis 22:20 - 23. Directly he is risen, the genealogy of his spouse is given to us. And what a genealogy, typically! She is not made from one of his ribs.
{476}
That is not the idea in Rebekah. That is Eve, who was *of* the man, created *for* him. Rebekah is *equal* to him. She is of the same family, the same stock; and it was of great moment in the mind of the Spirit that as Christ is risen from the dead, the assembly seen in figure in Rebekah should appear in her dignity. The point in the passage was to show that she sprang from the same stock. It says nothing of her person, but that she sprang from Nahor, Abraham's brother, so that now the heavenly man has a companion; he is not to be alone. Do you ever think of that?
It is not good for *you* to be alone without Him, depend upon that, but it is not good that He should be alone without us. Does it not appeal to your heart? To the disciples He said: "Ye are they which have continued with me". (@Luke 22:28) There is a wonderful meaning in that word *with*. Where are you in regard to the people of God who are in affliction? Where are you in regard to Christ to whom you owe everything? It is not good for Him to be alone. And so Abraham understood how Isaac needed a companion, and the servant is sent out and a companion is brought. You will remember the Spirit of God tells us that Isaac was alone in the field. He needed her. His mother had just died and she was buried and we are told that he was meditating, or it may be rendered praying. About what do you think he was meditating? What is the Lord thinking about at the present time? He is not engaged with the government of the world, He will be ere long. About whom is He concerned? His members here, who think nothing or little about themselves. The Lord Jesus is thinking about us. Isaac is meditating. It raised the exercises of his heart. The heavenly man must have a companion and he receives a companion.
Now I pass on to Joseph. Joseph was rejected by his brethren, but he was accepted and glorified amongst the Gentiles. That is another position of
{477}
Christ; rejected by the Jews, He pursues them in grace with the gospel, in the Acts. The Spirit of Christ in Paul pursued the Jews, his brethren after the flesh, to Rome, he sent for them and talked to them the whole day long. They left Paul disputing with one another. They did not accept the Messiah. From Jerusalem to Rome it was one continuous series of rejections in spite of the faithful presentation of the Man Christ Jesus; the true Messiah, to the Jews. So Paul, having quoted @Isaiah 6, says: "the salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and ... they will hear it", (@Acts 28:28) In other words, the testimony of Christ was accepted amongst the Gentiles, and He is glorified amongst them, and if so, He is to have a Gentile bride. That is Asenath. She represents the assembly associated with Christ at the present time, as rejected by Israel, but glorified amongst the Gentiles. You may ask me, Where is He glorified amongst the Gentiles? In your heart, if you are a Gentile, in the hearts of believers. He is held in regard there.
Now, the next great type of Christ in Scripture is Moses. He is ruler of the house of God; as such, he has a companion. He ends that series of types. I only say a word about Moses, which I think is important, and that is in regard to his selection of a bride. Miriam and Aaron spake against him on account of her, saying: "Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses?" (@Numbers 12:2) Moses really suffered for his weakness. He said he could not speak, and so the Lord took up Aaron. The Lord would have spoken everything through Moses, but he made room for Aaron and for Miriam, and they now put up the pretension that they were equal with him, but there was no equal to Moses. He was a man with whom Jehovah spoke mouth to mouth, not in a vision, and Moses had a perfect right to select a bride. The Lord Jesus has a perfect sovereign right to select His bride. Do not
{478}
we rejoice in it? It is in His sovereignty that He selected us, and who dares to question that right? He is going to associate us with Himself according to sovereign selection, and who can dare to question it? You may say she is an Ethiopian and her skin is black. It is Moses¬ selection. He is a better judge than Aaron or Miriam. He knows what he does. So does the Lord Jesus. He makes no mistakes. He presents the bride to himself a glorious assembly, no black spots, no Ethiopian skin there.
I have no doubt the eunuch in @Acts 8 was a coloured man, as we speak; he will not be coloured in heaven. The Ethiopian will change his colour there. You cannot bring it to pass down here. Christ will present the assembly to Himself a glorious assembly. Were we not black as the Ethiopian? Look at the bride in the Song of Songs. She says: "Look not upon me, because I am black". (@Song of Songs 1:6) She was equal to the Ethiopian, but she does not remain black. She comes out in glorious attire, perfect in beauty, so the assembly is to be presented as the handiwork of the Lord Himself, "not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing". (@Ephesians 5:27) Aaron and Miriam knew nothing of that, of the transforming power of Christ.
Now I pass on to another series of types comprising two; Ruth and Abigail go together. They are both connected with David. David is the king. In Ruth we have a type of the assembly, she is in many respects a very remarkable one. To be practical in regard to Ruth, she sacrifices what might be regarded as propriety, for him who is the type of Christ. Have you ever done that? How often it is that souls are despised because they go out of the way to reach Christ! They sacrifice what may be deemed in common etiquette, propriety. Now she went to the threshing-floor of Boaz at an unseemly hour to reach him. She learned his wealth and power, and more she learned his kinship. She was intelligent.
{479}
She had light as to redemption, and she sacrificed propriety to reach Christ. Do not be afraid of doing violence to etiquette. It is sure to stand in your way, especially if it be religious etiquette. Ruth did violence to natural propriety, but she gained the desire of her heart. She was redeemed and her inheritance was redeemed and she became the spouse of her redeemer.
Now the assembly recognises the redemption-rights of Christ. That dismisses for ever any rights that we might have. The Lord Jesus has all the rights that belong to you. He has purchased them and He is the best One to hold the title-deeds. They are secure in His hands. Do you recognise the Lord in that light? The assembly does. She recognises that the title-deeds as to every right are held by Christ on the ground of redemption. She is espoused to Him who bought her and all that belonged to her. In other words, Christ has redeemed the inheritance and has bought her with it. All this has a practical bearing. Your rights are all merged in Christ.
There is one other thought, and this Abigail represents. When you come to David, you come to the king, and there is no one to come after him, hence we get in Abigail the last type of the assembly, and I would like to look at it. I just want you to ponder over this remarkable personage. She appears at an epoch marked by the death of Samuel, recorded in @1 Samuel 25; that is to say, at a time when the link between God and the established order is severed. Samuel dies. I may say in passing, for the benefit of anyone here who may be hankering after an established religious order in the world, that there is no link whatsoever between that and God. The link is severed and till you acknowledge it you will never come into the benefits of assembly privilege. You must acknowledge that the link between God and the established religious order in
{480}
the earth, is broken. Samuel was that link in his day, and he died, and in the death of Samuel is evidence that the link is broken between God and the people, between God and the outwardly established order of things.
Now David is in rejection, and Abigail is presented to us. She is the wife of a man called Nabal. He was churlish, and the Spirit records other that she was "of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance". (@1 Samuel 25:3) The chapter is most interesting, and it ends with "David sent and communed with Abigail, to take her to him to wife". (@1 Samuel 25:39) He has thus secured a companion in his royalty, equal, not as a matter of lineage, but as a matter of intelligence and beauty. She has a good understanding. That is one of the greatest things. What is said in the prophet is that God's people were destroyed for lack of knowledge. They were not acquainted with things. Think of all that is opened up to us now that Christ is in heaven; all that is opened up to us in the ministry of Paul! Paul as in the light of it and the blessedness of it, bows his knees in prayer. What does he pray about? First of all, that the saints might have "the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him"; (@Ephesians 1:17) that is, of God. God wishes us to be intelligent. If we take up the truth of God and pray over it, the Lord will give us understanding.
Now the assembly will appear in the future in this capacity, as possessed of a good understanding. There is not anything with which she is not acquainted. She comes out of heaven with intelligence as to all that is required of her in the way of government, and then, she has a beautiful countenance. Where did she get the beauty? The beauty of the Lord is upon her. The Spirit has graced her with the beauty of Christ, so that in the assembly there is the reflection of Christ, both in regard to a good understanding and in regard to beauty. In this last great type of
{481}
the assembly we have her viewed as the companion of the King, Him whose right it is to rule. She is His companion and she is equal to the position, because she has good understanding. She is a queen in intelligence and beauty. That is how the assembly will appear in connection with Christ in the government of the world. He whose right it is to rule, has a companion whose understanding is good and whose beauty is perfect.
Now you will see in what I have been saying, that the divine thought is that the Man is not to be alone in any position, and therefore I connect all I have had to say with those verses in 1 Corinthians, "For the man is not of the woman; but the woman of the man. Neither was the man created for the woman; but the woman for the man. For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head, because of the angels. Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord. For as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the woman; but all things of God". So you see that in the mind of the Spirit, it is the man and the woman; and in the end, Christ and the assembly. The assembly appears as His companion, whose right it is to rule.
The principle being stated it is for us to recognise what is implied in the word "It is not good that the man should be alone". (@Genesis 2:18) Do we recognise that we are essential to Christ? If there is anything that I treasure in my heart, it is that I am essential to Christ. I am no more essential to Him than you are, every member is essential. The Lord knows each one and the question for our hearts is this: Where are we in regard to Him? He seeks companionship. I do not know any word in the Scriptures that carries more with it in this connection than the word *with*. "Quickened ... together *with* Christ". (@Ephesians 2:5) "Ye are they which have continued *with* me in my temptations". (@Luke 22:28)
{482}
"Father I will, that they also, whom thou has given me, be *with me* where I am". (@John 17:24) In these scriptures, and in many more, you will see the desire of the Lord's heart, and the question is as to whether we are answering to it at the close of this period, and when He is about to appear. Are we *with* Him so that we shall be ready to join Him in reality when the assembling shout is heard?
{483}
LOVE-FEASTS CONTINUED
@Jude 12 - 23
What I have before me is to speak about love-feasts as they are alluded to here, and also to show how these are to be maintained so that there should be a continuance of them until the end. The subject cannot be without interest. I desire to show you how the Lord introduced love, and I need not remind you that the Lord introduced it into this world. It took form in Christ, so that if we love, it is because He first loved us.
Now I assume that every genuine Christian loves, and the first movement of love in your heart is taken account of by God, and though that love may become obscured, covered up in your soul, it is known to God; He remembers it. He never forgets the first movement of love in your heart. That is seen in the history of God's people of old. What is said of them at the beginning of their history is that they loved God, and God said of them, "I remember for thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness", (@Jeremiah 2:2). What is said of God at the end of the wilderness journey is that He loved them: "Yea, he loved, the people", (@Deuteronomy 33:3). Wonderful thought; it spells the wilderness: the end of the wilderness is He loved the people. That love which has taken root in your heart God nourishes, and so I take it that the seventy palm trees and twelve wells of water at the beginning of the wilderness is that He would nourish their affections. The Lord had a place in the hearts of the people; they sing of Him as a "Man of war"; they recognised what God had done for them, and they attributed His power on their behalf to His love.
You will remember the statement in @Ecclesiastes 10:2:
{484}
"A wise man's heart is at his right hand", and so it is with God, speaking reverently; He loved His people, and His right hand was at the disposal of His love. "I remember for thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals". (@Jeremiah 2:2) God takes account of that and remembers it. Israel was thus holiness to the Lord; holiness depends on love; Israel was "the firstfruits of his increase". (@Jeremiah 2:3) What is the increase of God? The increase of God is love. There is nothing at all in the way of increase from God's point of view apart from divine love. Now God would cultivate that as a tender plant in this world. Consider the wilderness conditions! There was nothing in the wilderness as such to culture that plant; all was against it, but God brings in a means of preserving it, and I believe that the seventy palm trees, affording the shelter in which it is developed, and the twelve wells of water by which it is refreshed, represent this. God in that way provides for the continuance of love in your heart. It is a question of the continuance of the love, not simply of the beginning. God would see to it that love is continued. Now, when we come to the Antitype, that was all contingent on the Lord Jesus bringing it in; it was in Him that God's power and God's love were made known; He set it forth, so that it might be learnt. We have to acquire the ability to love. @John 13 teaches us how to love.
Now the Lord Jesus not only introduced the thought of love, but He introduced a love-feast. I do not say that the supper mentioned in @John 13 was the only love-feast, but that is specially recorded for us, as it was the last, because *in* it the Lord provided for its continuance. Whilst He was here amongst them He provided that there should be a continuance of love-feasts; He would see to that. With what pleasure He would surround Himself with his loved ones; He would never fail to take
{485}
advantage of every opportunity to afford His loved ones such privileges. But when we come to the last supper with Him we have added there the means by which it should be continued, even though the Lord were not present; He was to be absent, but the feasts were to continue. You remember that it was after the supper the Lord rose from the table. The supper was ended, and now He says, as it were: I want to show you how you can have this continued amongst you. He rises from supper and lays aside His garments. If the love-feasts are to be continued, we have to do that; we have to be prepared to divest ourselves of whatever dignity we may think we possess. I do not deny that we possess dignity, for God has dignified us; wonderfully He has dignified us in such manner as that we are suited companions for His beloved Son.
I think God loves dignity, but it is dignity according to Himself. What an undignified sort of person Jacob was, how undignified his behaviour when he displaced his brother! How undignified, indeed, was his whole course, until he returned from Laban and Syria and God met him; he was going to God's house, he was on his way to Bethel, and God says, as it were: If you are going to Bethel, you are to go in a dignified way. I am going to put dignity upon you. So God meets Jacob, and He cripples him! It is a wonderful moment when the touch of God cripples you; you are rendered weak; you are now undignified in the eyes of men; you are limping about. But that is all well. God takes away all natural dignity from you, and now He ennobles you. God changes Jacob's name. "Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a *prince* hast thou power with God and with men and hast prevailed". (@Genesis 32:28) God loves to dignify us.
Now the possession of the Spirit is dignity. What can exceed the dignity of such a gift as the Holy
{486}
Spirit? It renders you a prince, and God intends to surround Himself with such. Hence Jacob is constituted a prince before he reaches Bethel, so that there is no lack of dignity in him now! Think of what the disciples were; they were the companions of Christ; think of the dignity of that!
Now the supper table was clearly the circle of privilege, they were His companions there, and think of His dignity! Well, the Lord rose up from supper and deliberately divested Himself of His garments. He laid aside His garments. Now why does He do that? He does that to show how the feast is to be continued. He lays aside His garments, that is one thing; and He girds Himself with a towel, that is another thing; He becomes a servant. Now the continuance of the feast depended on that. He provided the water; you must have that too; you cannot wash without water; you cannot dry without a towel; the Lord provided both, and He proceeds to perform the most menial service. Well, why is all that? It is to continue the feast. Now, He says, You see what I have done; there is the supper table; we have enjoyed mutual affection there; I want that to be continued. You call me Master and Lord; you say well, for so I am; He maintains His dignity in the action. "If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash *one another's* feet". (@John 13:14) It is not that you are to wash the feet of the brother or sister whom you *prefer*; it is wash *one another's* feet.
I am speaking of very simple things, but the Lord says, "If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye *do* them". (@John 13:17) He does not say, Happy are ye if ye *know* them. I doubt if knowledge makes you happy; at any rate, the Lord's remark shows that it is not the knowledge, it is the *doing* that makes you happy. It is remarkable what happiness you acquire in serving the saints; there is a wonderful satisfaction
{487}
from it, a certain, happiness which arises in the soul in the service of the saints; so the Lord says, "If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them". (@John 13:17) I want to appeal to you as to whether you take account of things in that light, as to whether you see that the continuance of what is of God is made to be contingent upon ourselves. You will understand that I am not in the least detracting from the Lord's service; He carries it on; but the service is dependent upon us; the service has to be carried on by each one of us. You say the meeting is very dull, there is very little love amongst us. Well, what about that? If there is not love, then *you* see that there is; you see to the continuance of the thing. The Lord has introduced it; it is for us to see that it is continued, and He shows us how.
Well, now, that service is light. Love is light. The divine nature in its activity is light. Think of the brilliancy of the light that shone at that supper table, what brilliancy there was in it! The brilliancy was so great that the spots were driven out. Judas was a spot. "These are spots in your love-feasts", says Jude. We know of spots in the sun. There are no spots in Christ; the reflection of the light that shines in the face of Christ suggests no spots. But there was a spot at the supper table when the Lord introduced this feast, but the light was there; the light that shone in that wonderful service of Christ, the brilliancy of that light forced, we may say, Judas out, and the company was free. Light is a most practical thing; light is the shining out of the, divine nature; it shone out in Christ on that memorable occasion, but it was to shine in the company. See what a shining! Now, how does the divine nature show itself? It shows itself in descending. It descends. You cannot fail to observe that the Lord's action was a descending action.
I refer for a moment to @Luke 14 for the reverse of
{488}
this. A man is bidden to a wedding: well, what does he do; what does the natural man always do if he is bidden to a feast? He takes the highest room, but he becomes degraded. Climbing is dangerous work; the world is marked by climbing; there is the ladder of fame. The ladder of fame in Christianity is reversed; it is the going down. Sometimes the Lord graciously bids us to come down from our climbing; then all is well; He helps us down in His grace; but as sure as possible if you climb, you climb for a fall. See that man climbing for the highest room; he has to come down. That is what marks Christendom. But then the man who takes the lowest room is elevated.
The Lord descended here. You understand what I mean; He was in a position of dignity. He was the head of the family, so to speak, at the supper, but He rises from that; He lays aside His garments; He takes a servant's form. Think of Him moving about in that company and washing their feet. But see the end of it; what a result! He has set before us a lesson that was to continue during all the centuries of His absence, and it should result in the perpetuation of love-feasts among the saints. It is not only that one Man loves, as it was in Christ, but that a circle of men should love one another as He had loved them. What a result! That circle is like the moon. It is the reflection of what is in Christ, and there is no spot.
Now Jude contemplates spots as not merely failing Christians; spots are men like Judas, who have not the Spirit. If love is not amongst us the door is open for anything; but if there is love, it is the great preservative, you cannot have the spots. Love drives out the spots. "These are spots", he says, "in your love-feasts". What a terrible thing a spot is in that sense; these men that are described here as spots are awful men; the worst beings, perhaps,
{489}
that could be spoken of. Jude outlines them, and he says, "Enoch prophesied about them".
Now one cannot but think with pleasure of Enoch; it does not appear that he had anyone to walk with on earth; he was alone; God loved him, and he loved God and he walked with God. He pleased God. That which God had been denied in Adam He found in Enoch. God came down to have holy converse with Adam. How He set His heart upon man! He would come into the garden at the cool of the day when all things would be advantageous to Adam; but, alas! Adam was hiding, and God's love was left unreciprocated. But what He was denied in Adam He found in Enoch; He found one who would walk with Him. In that way God found companionship in man on earth. He translated that man to heaven. But before the eternity in heaven God looks for the walk with Him on earth. Enoch did not have human companionship, but he had it in faith. He saw the Lord coming with the holy myriads; these are the kind of people he would delight in. Do you not delight in holy people, the holy myriads? These are they with whom the Lord comes to execute judgment on the spots. You know the whole of Christendom is dotted with these apostates; but the Lord is coming to remove them; the scene is to be cleared of them; but in the meanwhile the circle of love is to be free of them, and I urge upon you to accept the obligation to see to it that so far as you are concerned there should be no spots. How does it take place? It is by what I may call a descending service; you go down.
I was speaking a moment ago of how the Lord often helps us in His grace to come down when we have climbed up. It is a wonderful thing to be helped by the Lord to come down from a position that He has not put you in, yet He would help you down. You remember how Zacchaeus went up; he
{490}
was little of stature; that is the kind of man that goes up. But why should you be little of stature? There is the means of growth; if you are rooted and grounded in love, you are sure to grow. God shelters you, and He refreshes you: with water, that you may grow. Zacchaeus climbed up, and the Lord encouraged him down, and he came down. It is happy to come down; if you come down, the Lord will come into your house. He encouraged Zacchaeus with that; He would abide in his house. In whose house? In the house of a man who comes down. It is a wonderful thing to me to see the grace of the Lord, so that we might be helped; He would have us here in lowliness, for it is in lowliness that the feast is continued.
Jude here points out the character of the spots, and then he goes on to show how things are to be preserved. I do not go over what I have already spoken of in John; what he says here is: "But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit". Now you see the principle: "building up yourselves". How is that accomplished? It is accomplished by love. Love descends. "Building up *yourselves".* The Lord has introduced the thought of love; it is here; He did not take the love back with Him, He left it here. The Holy Spirit came down and made it all real among the saints; there could not have been anything more real than that circle, and the Spirit came down. But now look: "Building up yourselves"; you all know how Scripture speaks of building. "Knowledge (we are told) puffs up"; (@1 Corinthians 8:1) knowledge by itself is sure to lead you on to a pinnacle from which you will fall, for it puffs up. I am not excluding myself, you know, for one knows the danger. What does love do? Love *builds* up. What is built remains, and so Jude says, "Building up yourselves on your most holy faith". There is the foundation; the
{491}
foundation is laid in the death of Christ; that is holy faith; that is where the faith rests. You are to build on it. You take heed to yourself first and to the doctrine. Why? You want to save yourself *and* those that hear you; that is a word from the apostle for all those who minister.
There is the greatest need to take heed to ourselves and to our circumstances. We must remember that we have not only our own safety at stake; there is the safety of the saints. If a minister has any ability to serve, it is for the saints; but I must not speak of ministers: it is, "Ye, *beloved*, building up *yourselves".* Think of the mutuality of Christianity -- "yourselves". In order to build you have to *go down*, and love enables you to go down. Love never fails. It *is* the greatest thing in the world; it is the one thing that never fails It is the most untiring and the most skilful of all things; it sets itself for the promotion and prosperity of its object. The apostle speaks of "self-building up in love", (@Ephesians 4:16). That is the collective sense; we see to the building up of each other, in love. "Praying in the Holy Spirit". There is the recognition of the blessed Holy Spirit in us and we pray in Him; thus we keep ourselves in the love of God.
I would just say a word about the love of God. In @Romans 5 it is said to be shed abroad in the hearts of the saints. In chapter 8 it is said to be in Christ, "the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord". (@Romans 8:39) Now, as I understand it, you taste it in your heart; it is shed abroad there; but then you do not see its entirety in your heart. Where do we see the entirety of the love of God? In Christ. Think of the vastness of it, the far-reachingness of it, it extends to the whole universe. It shone in the death of Christ, and what shone in the death of Christ in its entirety is in the Person of Christ now; He can make it effective in us. The apostle says. Who shall
{492}
separate us from that? We need to keep ourselves in that, "the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord". (@Romans 8:39)
May the Lord help us, beloved brethren, as we draw near to the end, that things may be bright, as they were at the beginning; not so *great*, we do not look for that, but we may look for the *same kind* of thing. Let us be "awaiting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life".
THE KING AND THE MAN
*"Behold, a King shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment. And a man shall be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land". --*  (@Isaiah 32:1,2)
My thought is to present to you the King and the Man. I apprehend these two thoughts are bound up in the gospel. We have to take account of the King, and we have to take account of the Man. The King is to supersede all that is political in the world; that is, the King as seen in Christ; and the Man as seen in Christ is to supersede all that attaches to man as we know him down here in the world. So that a right apprehension in the soul of the two ideas effects deliverance, first from the political world, and, secondly, from all that attaches to man as he is, fallen man. It is well to bear that in mind. We have to be delivered from all that is fallen and a right apprehension of these two aspects of Christ effects such a deliverance as that.
Now the idea of the King opens up a very wide subject in the Scriptures and in the history of the world. There is nothing said about a king before the flood; and indeed the idea arose in connection
{493}
with a rebellious man; an idea which God will meet, I may add, but it came to light in Nimrod. That is where the idea took form. Now you will find that following upon that the great idea of kingly power came to light in the posterity of Esau. He was Edom, and Edom represents man's pride; he was a man descended from Isaac and Rebekah, but a man who despised what was of God; he had a wonderful ancestry, but he despised what is of God, and bartered it for a mess of pottage. That is Esau. When you come to the genealogy of Esau in @Genesis 36, you find a chapter full of dukes. The point in Esau is not that he is violent, that is Nimrod; what attaches to kingly power in this world is violence and pride; violence as seen in Nimrod, and pride as seen in Edom.
I dwell for a moment on these early chapters. It is well to consider the book of Genesis; you get the initial ideas of things there. Kingly power arose in these two connections. There was violence in Nimrod, and the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, which means confusion. Nimrod disregarded the judgment of God. The judgment of God was seen in the word Babel, and Nimrod, disregarding it, began his kingdom there. He would centralise power in disregard of God's judgment on centralisation. That is Nimrod, and that is what marks the present moment. The great effort of the moment is centralisation. God will break up every combination in the world. What is in the heart of man at the present moment is combination. If there is one feature of apostasy manifest at the present time more than another, it is the effort at combination. After the flood they were conscious of the absence of divine support. But what we should notice is that kingly authority began with the entire disregard of the judgment of God.
Now what followed upon that, was the royal line
{494}
of Esau, and there the man after the flesh attained the zenith of human pride. Kings reigned in Edom before any king reigned in Israel. Man after the flesh is always first; he *will* always be first if he can, but what I want you to see is that God meets every possible condition that arises here in this world. He meets it in His own way, and so He brings in a king of His own.
@Genesis 36 gives the history of Edom. It is a chapter full of dukes. Dukes after the flesh are of little account, but God is pleased to give us the whole line of Esau, and in the next chapter we have the genealogy of Jacob, and all we get there is a lone lad of seventeen years of age. There was nothing pompous about Joseph! Hated of his brethren, reproved by his father, a lone lad, but he had the light of God in his soul, beloved friends, and in that lone lad God indicates to us how royalty is reached according to Him. Think of that lad seventeen years of age! He was loved of his father, but misunderstood by his father.
Now Joseph says, "Hear, I pray you, this dream which I have dreamed: for, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright". (@Genesis 37:6,7) What light there was in that! That is the initial idea of royalty according to God. But that was not all. It was a great deal for him to dream that his brethren should submit, but he dreams again, and he says; "I have dreamed ... and, behold, the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me". (@Genesis 37:9) What light that was! The sun, the symbol of universal dominion; the moon, subordinate authority; and the eleven stars, everything that points to dominion in the universe. That is royalty according to God. That royalty, beloved friends, is reached by another road than that taken by Nimrod, and than that taken by the dukes of Edom.
{495}
Think of Joseph! The Spirit of God refers to him later; he was sold as a servant. What a road to reach royalty! @Psalm 105 says, "sold for a servant: whose feet they hurt with fetters". (@Psalm 105:17,18) Where was the evidence of power? His brethren were too strong for him; the Egyptians were too strong for him outwardly, but "his word came: the word of the Lord tried him. The king sent and loosed him ... and let him go free". (@Psalm 105:19,20) What a history had been his until the king sent and loosed him! A man with all the light of God that was then in the world in his soul, none his equal. "He made him ... ruler of all his substance". How qualified he was! "To bind his princes at his pleasure; and teach his senators wisdom". (@Psalm 105:21,22) *That is God's king*. I am not saying for a moment that Joseph was of the royal line, for he was not. Judah was the royal tribe, but we see in Joseph the contrary to the line of Edom. He comes out into publicity, and he binds the princes of Pharaoh at his pleasure. That is God's king; that is God's idea. Now a king of that type will "rule in righteousness", and none other.
Now there is more than that. When we come to the prophecy of Balaam, we find everything given from the divine point of view. It is well for us to see these things from the divine point of view, in order to apprehend them in their fulness. Balaam says Israel's king "shall be higher than Agag". (@Numbers 24:7) Amalek was the first of the nations. God's King is higher. God sees to it that Christ is exalted. Agag is Antichrist really; not only a king as those of the line of Edom were, but Agag is king of a nation directly supported by the devil. That is what is coming into this world. We may say that the kings of this world are supported in a sense by God, so long as they exercise government. But there is a moment coming when Satan will directly support a king. What kind of king will he be? He will do
{496}
his own will absolutely. He comes in his own name and does his own will, and Satan lends all his support to him. Such will be Antichrist. What a man he will be! We are living in a day in which men are admired. Agag is the type of man who will be highly approved of upon earth and supported by satanic power.
Now, the majesty of Christ comes to light when that man appears. He comes into evidence when man reaches the zenith of human power in opposition to God. We are told of the Antichrist, that "he sits in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God", (@2 Thessalonians 2:4). It is the acme of assumption and defiance of God. The Lord Jesus then appears, and "the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming". (@2 Thessalonians 2:8) Think of that! Think of the "spirit" that is in "the mouth" of Christ now! That leads me to the thought of what He is as Man. Luke presents Him as Man to us, and says, "they marvelled at the words of grace that proceeded out of his mouth". (@Luke 4:22) The spirit of His mouth affects our hearts. There is no destruction in it now. It will be destruction when Antichrist appears, the king who does his own will, but the Lord's mouth at the present time speaks of all that the gospel involves; you remember Him in the synagogue at Nazareth.
I would now speak of *the Man*; and what I would say is this, that the Man is really in a sense a greater thought than the King. There are two thoughts of Him in Scripture: there is Christ Jesus, the anointed Man, and Jesus Christ, the Man anointed. I would speak now of the Man that is anointed. What you find here is that that Man becomes certain things to you. The King rules in righteousness. What I understand by a righteous rule is a rule of love. You cannot have righteousness without love; it is impossible. Nothing can be right without love.
{497}
A rule of righteousness is a rule of love, but it is also a rule of wisdom. Think of a Man on the throne who *loves you*! I need not remind you that the Lord is not ruling the world now. His rule has no reference to the world at the present time, but it has reference to *your soul*.
You remember Saul of Tarsus as we learn of him in @Acts 9; what had the Lord's rule reference to in Saul? It had reference to his *soul*. That is what the royalty of Christ has reference to now. Look at the words of grace that come out of His mouth. He speaks as *Man* and Saul owns Him as *King*. He says to him, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" (@Acts 9:4) That was a Man speaking. What words of grace in His mouth! What a Man He was, and Saul owns Him as Lord. That was right. In owning Him as Lord, Saul owned he needed His protection. So do you, so do I, and, thank God, we can have it. The righteous rule of the Lord has reference to your soul. Depend upon it, if you do not know Him as Lord, your soul will suffer loss. His protection at the present time is for *souls*. Think of all the power that will be used in the consumption and the destruction of the Antichrist; all that power is for the protection of your soul now. It involves our deliverance from all that is adverse to us, all that is adverse that is *outside* of you. It involves that, but, remember, it involves the disallowance of all that is adverse that is *inside* of you. If the Lord will not tolerate evil that is *without* you, He will not tolerate it *in* you.
Is there one here who does not own Christ as Lord? He can do more for you than the king and the parliament. If you could enlist them all on your side, they could not do for you what Jesus can do for you. He rules in righteousness, but He rules in love. If you own the *Lord*, you find the *Man*. That was the history of Saul. How he loved to speak of the Man Christ Jesus; and so does the prophet:
{498}
"A man shall be as an hiding place from the wind"; a remarkable expression. Adverse winds blow from various quarters. In @Luke 7 an adverse wind blew upon a poor sinner from the Pharisee Simon, a hypocritical man. The Lord was a hiding-place for her. There was *the Man*. In @Luke 10 you have a wind of a different type; it blows from a sister. Martha found fault, and Mary found a hiding-place in Jesus. Do you understand that a Man becomes that to you? Do you know Jesus? How *much* He can do for you! It is not the question here of the assertion of His power, but what that Man is. He appeals to the heart of Simon in @Luke 7. He appeals to Martha in @Luke 10. In each case He was a hiding-place. Have *you* found refuge in Jesus from all the storms? Many here know what it is to have found a hiding-place from the wind, a covert from the storm. How blessed for the heart to find it all in a Man! He answers your accusers; you have no need to answer them. Mary did not. The woman in Simon's house did not. They let the Lord answer, and He did perfectly; and in doing it He was a hiding-place for them and a refuge, also.
He is also "as rivers of water in a dry place". The woman of Sychar in @John 4 found that. She was thirsty. It was not that the world was any less sensual than it had been; it did not afford any less pleasure to her than before, but her soul was thirsty. Are you thirsting after the world? Well, Jesus is as rivers of water in a thirsty land. Now note! When the work of God begins in your soul, the pleasures of the world lose their power. I know what that is, they lose their sweetness, they lose their attractiveness, and your heart is desolate. That woman went to Sychar with an *empty* water-pot, a type of herself, empty. She went out alone, she was desolate, and she met a Man, Jesus.
You remember how Philip spoke to the eunuch
{499}
in. @Acts 8; he "evangelised Jesus", the Man to him. When he went to Samaria, he preached the Messiah, but when he went to the eunuch he evangelised the *Man*. The poor outcast woman of Samaria went out to Sychar and she met a Man, and He became to her "as rivers of water in a thirsty land". There He was, and He proposes to her to produce in her a fountain. What a Man He was! He says to her, "If thou knewest ... thou wouldest have asked of him". (@John 4:10) Who is He? A few verses previously, in chapter 3:35, we are told, "The Father loveth the Son". The Son was the *Man*. "The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand". (@John 3:35) If the woman had known that, she would have asked of Him. He assumes no position. He is a Man weary with His journey. How does He appear at the well? In royal dignity? No, as a weary Man. He "sat thus on the well", "wearied with his journey", (@John 4:6) and yet He proposes the very greatest thing to that desolate heart. He was to her "as rivers of water in a thirsty land". What a moment it was for her! That is what the Lord proposes to do for *you* .
Then He said, "Go, call thy husband". (@John 4:16) The point in that was to reach her conscience. The inner springs of her being had to be exposed to *her*. That is a wonderful service on the part of the Lord. He takes no *pleasure* in that work, but it is a necessity. He *has* to do it before your soul can enjoy the sweetness of the living water. The corrupt springs have to be exposed. The light shines in, and what does it discover? It discovers hidden corrupt springs; these have to be judged. "Go, call thy husband". (@John 4:16) What was that to her? It was the exposure of her whole life. That is the effect of the work of God - the exposure of your inner being. Your whole history is brought up before you, and you judge it. She goes to the men in the city. What a change in her!
{500}
What a changed woman she is! She is engaged now with the *Man*, not with the men; not with five husbands, but with *one Man*. "Come, see a man". How completely He had gained her heart!
It is a remarkable moment that we are living in! We are drawing near to the end. God is waiting upon man patiently, presenting Christ. Have you found the Lord? Has your heart found an object? In the *Lord* you have protection, and in the *Man* you have an object. See how it affected the eunuch in @Acts 8. Jesus had become the controlling object before his soul; he accepted death with Jesus and went on his way rejoicing.
"As the shadow of a great rock in a weary land". It is one thing to be in a thirsty land, another thing to be in a weary land. The Lord becomes the shadow of a great rock to you. How completely He meets us in *every* circumstance!
I trust that what I have sought to present will be clear to you -- all that circles round these two thoughts of Christ as King or Lord, and as Man. May each one here find Him as both!
{501}
WHAT IS OF GOD BROUGHT TO LIGHT
@Revelation 7:1 - 17; @Revelation 8:1 - 6; @Revelation 11:1 - 3; @Revelation 14:1 - 5
My thought is not to engage you with what is merely prophetic, as much as I would wish to do that if I had ability, but to show how that which is of God comes to light; and as having come to light, what its character is.
That which is of God now is obscured; even in the ministry of the Lord here, which was all *pure gold*, things were not manifest publicly, only those whose eyes were anointed saw what was of God, "the poor of the flock that waited upon me, knew that it was the word of the Lord"; (@Zechariah 11:11). The mass failed to perceive that it was of God. Thank God, there were such as recognised it. They were a comfort to the Lord's heart; they waited upon Him, and it is thus that we discover what divine things are; they waited on the Lord and they understood. But they, the poor of the flock, were in obscurity.
The book of Revelation shows that what is of God, and what is obscure now, will yet be publicly brought to light. For the moment "our life is hid", and we do not want to be public now; but when "the Christ is manifested, who is our life, then shall ye also be manifested with him in glory". (@Colossians 3:4) It will be manifested in its due order; when *Christ* is manifested we shall be manifested, and we would have it so. The book of Revelation shows how the thing comes to pass. The assembly is seen coming down from God out of heaven. What a display! She comes down adorned as a bride for her husband. He is the Lamb, the rejected One.
The opening of the seals refers to the administration of the Lamb, who is seen in chapter 6 interfering in the course of things on earth. He did not do so
{502}
when here; He left things untouched. Pilate represented the existing authority, and Christ submitted to that power, and that was His glory. He left things untouched and suffered publicly, and He has remained out of sight ever since. He has not moved His finger to alter things here. He has withheld His hand from the present course of things and the assembly is called upon to share that place with Him now.
Now in this book we see God interfering directly. In chapter 5, the Lamb appears, and in speaking of the Lamb, I feel the name should draw out the affections of the saints. The One who is in the midst of the throne is the One who was slain; "A Lamb as it had been slain". Now the Lamb has *title* to interfere, and He has *power* to interfere. He is the "Lion of the tribe of Judah". The taking up of the title to interfere involves a course of administration, and that administration brings to light what is of God. The Lord would bring to light the saints; that is chapter 7. Those who were once regarded as the "poor of the flock" are brought to light and are owned of God. They are taken account of according to their tribes. God never surrenders a thought He has given expression to. One thought of God was that the administration of the world was to be by the twelve tribes of Israel. The blessed Son of God is to have companions on earth in the government of this world, and these are brought to light here and formally owned of God. A hundred and forty-four thousand refers to divine administration as to number.
Now I want to show, that if they are brought to light room must be made for them. In connection with the assembly the nations had not to be set aside, but when earthly administration is in view room has to be made for the twelve tribes. This is how room will be made for Israel on earth, and I turn aside
{503}
for a moment to suggest the importance of making room for the assembly. I mean by that, that room should be made for its principles. Where the principles of the flesh are admitted the principles of God and of the assembly are ignored. The assembly is a universal thought; it cannot be confined to any nation. Room is to be made for the assembly in the affections of the saints, and when there is enlargement in the affections, then the principles of the assembly will be worked out locally. Directly the saints are brought to light and owned, what we find is that *they pray*, and the great High Priest of Israel gives efficacy to their prayers, chapter 8:1 - 3. As a result of this, there comes down that which works desolation on the earth, and that makes room for the saints.
On the morning of the resurrection we read, according to Matthew, that an angel descended from heaven and rolled away the stone and sat upon it, the stone was the one that sealed the tomb, and the angel's countenance was like lightning. That signifies that the power of God was there to overthrow the world power. The power of God is now exercised in grace, but in the day to come it will be evidenced in judgment. The Lord Jesus says in @Matthew 28, "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, *even* unto the end of the world". (@Matthew 28:18 - 20) The Lord is with us in the exercise of that power, not now in judgment but in grace. When He acts in judgment He will turn the world upside down, "as a man wipeth a dish". (@2 Kings 21:13) It will take place in answer to the prayers of God's people on earth. God acts, and will act, but He acts in answer to our exercises. God has pleasure in our exercises. The
{504}
prayers go up and judgment comes down. The prayers are in order that room may be made for Israel and @Revelation 8 and 9 give the judgments which will effect this.
The trumpets are the answer to the prayers of the saints, and one trumpet after another is sounded until the earth is cleared. In chapter 10 the Lord claims His rights. He comes down and sets His right foot on the sea and His left foot upon the earth. No weakness there, beloved friends, He cried with a loud voice and the seven thunders uttered their voices.
In chapter 11:1-3 you get the saints *measured*; in chapter 7 they are *sealed*; here they are *measured*. What is measured is what God has for Himself, the temple of God, the altar and the worshippers. The temple of God is *light*. There is light and it is preserved in the saints, thus there is "the temple of God". The prophet is called upon to measure the temple. It was there to be taken account of and to be measured. The altar also is to be measured; the altar is sacrifice. God looks for the temple and the altar. He looks for a response to His gracious dealings. For the preserving of the light you must have sacrifice. If you do not sacrifice the light will leave you. The altar calls for surrender, and if we do not surrender, the light will leave us.
Now as to worshippers, you cannot have the worship without the worshippers. The Lord said to the woman in @John 4, "God is a Spirit: and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth". (@John 4:24) The Father seeks these worshippers. Show me a company of worshippers and I will show you the worship. Worshippers are persons formed by the revelation of God and who respond to it. God has revealed Himself upon earth to man as Father. In the light of that worshippers are formed. Now if there are such, God measures them, but all that lies
{505}
outside is omitted; "the court which is without the temple leave out; measure it not". There is much going on today in the Lord's name, but it is all outside the temple and the altar and the worshippers. All this is connected with the earthly people, but the principles apply to us.
I pass on now to chapter 14 in order to show the full effect of God's gracious dealings. If one thing exercises me more than another, it is, that we might be brought into the light of God's purpose and answer to it. Now God's purpose in regard to the earth is that mount Zion should be the centre of His dealings: Satan is not occupied with that yet. The great centre of conflict now is not Jerusalem (it will be later) but heaven. Heaven belongs to us. Satan is not moving a finger in regard to Jerusalem, but nevertheless war is on and the war is in heaven. Every good general in war has to see clearly where the seat of the opposition is. The position of the enemy now is located for us. The sphere of the conflict is the heavenly places. The devil would do all in his power to darken your soul as to the purpose of God in regard to the present moment. The great love of God has given us a place in heaven and He uses all His power for the accomplishment of His purpose that in the ages to come He might show forth the exceeding riches of His grace. @Revelation 12 contemplates the dislodgement of Satan from the heavenly places; chapter 14, the hundred and forty-four thousand are *on mount Zion with the Lamb*. What a testimony to the power of God! They know the Lamb and love Him, and they are identified with Him in the scene of conflict, mount Zion. One would covet to understand the thought of companionship. The idea necessitates being *with* a person. "Ye are they who have continued with me", (@Luke 22:28) said the Lord to His disciples. Are you *with* the Lord? Are you in sympathy with Him? The disciples
{506}
were companions in His rejection and they will be His companions in glory. The one hundred and forty-four thousand are with the Lamb on mount Zion, and then we get their character. They are virgins; they are not defiled. The Lord looks for separateness of heart. The secret of much trouble is that our affections are not girded by the truth. Samson had an alliance which was not governed by the truth. Our loins are to be girt about with truth. Take care of unequal alliances; they are contrary to the truth. The hundred and forty-four thousand were regulated and governed by the truth. Their affections were all reserved for Christ. The woman in @John 4 was a woman of great affection, but it was not regulated by the truth. Now God is gathering up our affections so that we may become worshippers. The point is to let our affections have a right object. If our affections *are* regulated by the truth Christ will have a place with us. The one hundred and forty-four thousand follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth; they had no guile. What a triumph of grace to bring this to pass. Think of what the Jew is now. If we were more frank and open with one another, a much better state of things would exist among us. "In their mouths was no lie found".
May the Lord grant that we may be found like these who follow the Lamb wheresoever He goeth.
