{1}
EXPERIENCE
@Ezekiel 47: 1 - 9
I rose to speak of experience. Our brother who has just prayed said to the Lord that He was always ready to be with us -- and He is. We can speak experimentally of this. One can say truthfully that he hardly recalls the time in which he has been with the brethren, as we are now, when he has not proved the Lord with us. This is a matter of experience, and experience is one of the elements of guidance. Only this very day, speaking with brethren at the house of our brother near by here, certain questions arose as to procedure in assembly service, and it occurred to me that experience helps us in regard to assembly service. There are certain methods and forms that are prescribed, others are left, but, according to the principles of Matthew, the Lord saying, "Behold, I am with you all the days, until the completion of the age" (@Matthew 28: 20) is honouring the assembly, as if He had confidence in her and assures her that He is with her. He is with us, even saying "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them"; (@Matthew 18: 20) then again, "If two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them …" (@Matthew 18: 19). And so, much is left to us, within certain latitudes or limits, for the Lord loves to think of us and to look on us as moving according to what He has made us, according to the instincts He has given us, and, of course, according to His teaching and the examples He has set. And all this involves experience, which affords guidance to a point as to methods amongst us, experience enabling us to prove what may be the best; and I have selected this chapter in Ezekiel, well known to us, but read now in view of what has been remarked. Ezekiel treats,
{2}
among other things, of life and he affords us an example of an experience of life. The thought of life is full in Ezekiel, which could be shown from the pages of the prophet, and it reminds is of what the Lord said, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it abundantly", (@John 10:10). Hence the great advantage of experiencing life and proving how abundantly it is.
So I have read this chapter because it affords an experience of life, what is said of the river indicates that wherever it moves it brings life, and another thing about it is that, as the prophet has experience in the river, indicating whence it comes and the way by which it flows and the point to which it flows, he shows that it affords life, and instead of one river it becomes a double one, as verse 9 tells us, showing that, as we move on in experience in what is afforded to us through the death and resurrection and ascension of Christ -- that is to say, what is in Christianity, we prove that, as the Lord says, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it abundantly" (@John 10: 10). So that we need not fear, dear brethren. Much has happened that might cause us to fear, but from the positive side there I nothing to fear. We shall always come out victorious, but increasingly so. Hence in these verses the prophet, as most of us here know, had experience first of the river covering his ankles. It is a question of experience, and experience implying certain parts of the body which are intended to be active, to afford activity, as in the book of Acts the man at the gate of the temple his has ankle bones affected, so that he walked and he leaped and he praised God. That involved, not only his ankles, but his knees -- indeed his whole body. The human body is made in that sense to be used. But the ankles are noted here in the experience in the river. It says, "And he brought me out by the way of the gate
{3}
northward" (@Ezekiel 47: 2). If we are conversant with the significance of the points of the compass, this would suggest to us what is severe; it becomes known, the north wind and the effect of it, and then it is said, "When the man went forth eastward, a line was in his hand; and he measured a thousand cubits, and he caused me to pass through the waters: the waters were to the ankles. And he measured a thousand cubits, and caused me to pass through the waters: the waters were to the knees" (@Ezekiel 47: 3 - 4).
One might speak much of these points, but one only desires to be concise and brief, as we should be at these meetings, affording something, even if it is but one point brought home to us. And so knees surely points to severe exercise, especially in regard of prayer, as we see with Elijah -- he put his face between his knees, and we know the result, how the cloud was seen rising like a man's hand. I am only just referring to this one point. "For this reason", says Paul, "I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" (@Ephesians 3: 14). That is a second experience -- the ankles first, and then the knees, the second. And then again afterwards "he measured a thousand and caused me to pass through: the waters were to the lions". We may, in speaking thus, refer to anatomy -- of which one knows but little, but there is such a thing as spiritual anatomy, and so the Lord Jesus, speaking reverently, says, "A body hast thou prepared me" (@Hebrews 10: 5), and again we read, "Many bodies of the saints fallen asleep arose, and going out of the tombs after his arising, entered into the holy city and appeared unto many" (@Matthew 27: 52). We can see the importance of our bodies, and the Lord is going to bring us up out of our graves in bodies, and not only bodies in an ordinary sense, but bodies like unto His glorious body, His body of glory. One feels affected in speaking thus, dear brethren, because it reminds us
{4}
of what is coming, and the portion of the saints in our high places and walking in our high places then and even now in a spiritual sense. And then too -- something that has now been before us already lately -- the Lord appearing to certain ones. It would be Himself, just Himself, but in His body. Then it is said further, "And he measured a thousand: it was a river that I could not pass through" (@Ezekiel 47: 5). Thus we learn what is beyond us by experience, and we do well to be governed by the sense of limitation that we cannot just speak of everything as if it were common; there is such a thing as mystery, which we should learn and be subject to and say we do not know at times, and not venture to explain everything. Here the waters were risen -- and they are apt to rise in the principle of which it is spoken of here. And I think they are rising -- to be very simple -- and it would be wholesome if we learnt that we are limited by the rise and that we cannot compass things, that we have to bow and regard everything reverently, and yet be in the sense of liberty, not overcome. But we find here the prophet says, "It was a river that I could not pass through" (@Ezekiel 47: 5) -- not "that could not be passed through", but that "I could not pass through". That would indicate the limitations of the creature. And so he goes on, "For the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed through". That spells limitation, not only for Ezekiel, but for all, for every creature -- it could not be passed over. Well, it is well to have an experience like that, finding out that you cannot pass over, that you are limited, that others are going through, and that we do well to learn our limitations. Hence the apostle in Ephesians speaks of the breadth and the length and the depth and the height. All that speaks of limitation, but what blessed limitation, and we have the addition "and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses
{5}
knowledge" (@Ephesians 3: 19) -- which cannot be passed through. I do not refer to it in this way as if it is presented just as I am saying, but it is really implied that the love of Christ is known -- "to know the love of the Christ" -- that is within the range of a Christian, of all of us, and how much it is needed -- to know the love of Christ. John says, "Hereby we have known love because he has laid down his life for us", (@1 John 3:16); but then it is the love of Christ which passeth knowledge. It is an experience and an experience that one would urge on all and on oneself, the idea of knowing the love of Christ. The brethren from the beginning of Christianity have known the love of Christ. Paul could say, "Who has loved me …" (@Galatians 2: 20). I do not know that anyone else says just that, but he says it -- He "loved me", not that He 'loves me', but He "loved me". Of course it implies that He loves me, but the point is what is historical, that experience had been in Christianity from the outset; Peter could say it no doubt, but Paul says it. "Waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed through".
Then I just wish to touch on another thing, which I think is important for us on this point of experience. Brothers and sisters may learn, or have it before them to learn, by experience. It is in the limits of guidance; you know so-and-so because you have experience. Of course you may say, 'I have proved it and I know scripture teaches it', but then there are things that are not formally taught, and so the need of experience as one said, "I have been young" -- he had that experience -- "and now am old!;" he did not speak of middle age, he spoke of old age; and he had not seen certain things, and that fact was a guide to him. That is what I am speaking about. So here in verse 6 someone is saying something to Ezekiel -- which is another point that is to be expected and looked for and found as we look for it -- that is someone who
{6}
says something. He says it of himself, and he is not asked; one who say things because it is important they should be said -- as we might say, a word from the Lord, but it is rather that this man was saying it. "He said unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen this?" (@Ezekiel 47: 6). Another thing is that "Son of man" is a remarkable expression. We have already together here spoken of man, what a place man has with God, and how Wisdom -- which is another suggestion -- says "My delights were with the sons of men" (@Proverbs 8: 31). There is something very beautiful in that suggestion -- the "sons of men"; sons, but sons of men. Angels are called sons of God, I suppose in a provisional sense -- "all the sons of God shouted for joy" (@Job 38:7). But Wisdom does not say her delights were with the sons of God, the angels, but with the sons of men, and it brings out a point of importance as to what is lovely, what is peculiarly attractive in a youthful sense; life as it were, at its prime, in its beauty. As the Lord says, "Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin. And yet I say unto you that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these", (@Matthew 6: 28 - 29). It is a question of what life is and the youthfulness of life, and, as applied to life in a spiritual sense, of which I am speaking, it is most attractive, and the sons of men would be a suggestion of what life is as Wisdom saw it. And so I touched on verse 6 -- "Son of man" -- not 'son of men'. It is a term found in Ezekiel many times; much used by the Lord as to Himself. But "sons of men" is a beautiful expression, and I have already touched on it. But here it is, "Son of man, hast thou seen this"? It is a question of experience -- had he seen it? He had seen much up to this point. And it says, "And he led me, and brought me back to the bank of the river". That is, you have had remarkable experience, but the man has more for
{7}
you and I believe that is one point in our meetings, dear brethren, how much there may be yet, how much is possible. And so here, "he led me and brought me back to the bank of the river". It is a great matter in scripture to be led: there is a great need for it too. It says, "And he led me and brought me back to the bank of the river. When I returned, behold on the bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other". Now this is the point, as many of us perhaps have noticed; he had not seen this when he saw the river first. He had gone through the river and he speaks of it being impassable, but he saw nothing of the trees; reminding us of the importance of waiting in the divine realm -- how much there is to be seen, even surprises! In fact you might say this was one of them. So it says, "When I returned, behold on the bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other". Why did he not see them before? He is not reproved; he reproves himself by implication, as if he were to enlarge on what is in mind. He could tell us about the depth of the water, to the ankles and the knees and the loins, and the impassableness of the river, but not a word about the trees. If the river is the Spirit, the trees are the brethren; that is simple -- I am not forcing the passage. We may talk much of the Spirit, and we should, but do not forget the brethren. If they come into view in this sense of surprise, how beautiful they are! We ought to learn the beauty of the brethren -- "Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us". The beauty of the Lord, but set upon us, in the sense of what can be on man -- put on man, put on the brethren. Well, he said he returned, meaning that the point is the returning, the coming back to a thing; not being sure that everything is exhausted or looked into or thoroughly known. It is hard to say much about anyone who knows much, except Paul as a
{8}
teacher he says, "Ye can understand my intelligence in the mystery" (@Ephesians 3: 4) as though the Lord put him forward as an ideal of acquiring knowledge, and if Paul, why not others? He says, "I returned", and "behold on the bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other" -- on both sides. No doubt John had this in mind in his book of the Revelation. I believe he had read it and that the Lord intended him to know something of the book of Ezekiel and of course we can get enlargement on the subject by reading the book of the Revelation. "And he said unto me, These waters issue out toward the east district, and go down into the plain, and go into the sea; when they are brought forth into the sea, the waters thereof shall be healed" (@Ezekiel 47: 8). That is what I am coming to, the power of the life in the sense of healing -- how much that is needed; how much laceration, dear brethren, has come about with us and what need for healing! -- "Rather it may be healed". And there is the power for that in life; the Spirit is life and the saints become living too. But it is a question of the river here and the trees are on both sides of the river, unseen at first but now seen. "And it shall come to pass that every living thing which moveth, whithersoever the double river shall come, shall live" -- the double river, that is, it is a plural idea now. It is a question of the things that live already that are in mind now, the increase of life, life more abundantly. So that there is abundance as we come on in the truth and get to know one another, finding our home in the assembly. The Lord will be with us, as our brother said in his prayer, according to Matthew. Matthew gives us no account of the ascension, he is an assembly man and he is stressing the fact that the Lord is here to support us in it; not to take charge of it exactly, but to support us in it. "There am I …" -- not because of what He does -- of course He does
{9}
things -- but He is there, and that is the thing to have before us. The Lord is greatly enlarging special meetings, as we call them, and it is a sign of the moment, it is a sign of life that the brethren like to be together. The thing is increasing. The devil is, of course, against it; but there it is, there is the increase, the word "double" implies that, the increase, what there is. Hence it says, "And it shall come to pass that every living thing which moveth, whithersoever the double river shall come, shall live. And there shall be a very great multitude of fish; for these waters shall come thither, and the waters of the sea shall be healed; and everything shall live whither the river cometh" (@Ezekiel 47: 9). There is the idea of living and moving, but now there is something additional -- there is life in abundance, a very great multitude of fish, that is, living things; John could speak of them one hundred and fifty-three great fishes. That is, the fish are there on account of this, for the waters shall be healed whithersoever the double river cometh.
So I thought I would call attention to this in view of experience that, dear brethren, we might be experimental in things and find guidance in experience and prove what comes about under certain conditions, and do not have to ask so many questions. Hence the point is to get the conditions, then we know what comes about, it is sure to happen. We are urged to come together, to assemble ourselves, but there are needed conditions; hence the point is to bring these conditions about. <br>J.T.
{10}
LEVITICAL SERVICE
@Numbers 3: 14 - 20; @Numbers 4: 1 - 33
J.T. The object in reading these scriptures is to call attention to the Levites, first viewed as a family -- all being included, and then to their work. There are actually fewer engaged in the work than are counted in chapter 3. It is thought that we should profit by dwelling first on the family side in chapter 3 in which the sons of Levi are reckoned according to their birth, and then the work or service side in chapter 4 in which they are regarded according to the sovereignty of God, Kohath being the first mentioned. The subject begins in the early part of chapter 3 -- "And these are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day that Jehovah spoke with Moses on Mount Sinai". The fact that Moses was Aaron's brother is especially in mind according to what was said by Jehovah earlier when He called the attention of Moses to Aaron for the first time saying, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother?" Then Aaron did certain things, which indicate that he was a real brother. God said "He goeth out to meet thee; and when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart". That refers to the brotherly side -- the family side, and ought to be remembered so that we might have a right view of the Levites. "And these are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day that Jehovah spoke with Moses on Mount Sinai. And these are the names of the sons of Aaron: Nadab the firstborn, and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar. These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the anointed priests, who were consecrated to exercise the priesthood. And Nadab and Abihu died before Jehovah when they offered strange fire before Jehovah in the wilderness of Sinai, and they had no sons; and Eleazar and Ithamar exercised the priesthood in the presence of Aaron their father". Two
{11}
sons of Aaron died because they offered strange fire. That is another matter to be before us in considering the subject of the Levites. So the subject proceeds down to verse 14 which says, "And Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai saying, Number the sons of Levi according to their fathers¬ houses, after their families; every male from a month old and upward shalt thou number them. And Moses numbered them according to the commandment of Jehovah". It would be well to refer to these earlier verses so that we may have before us the idea of the brother among the Levites; then the priest, that is Aaron. What happened to him? What happened to his sons? That is more the family side; the Levites are taken account of from that side in chapter 3 where they are regarded according to their birth. Then in chapter 4 we have the sovereignty of God, Kohath being mentioned first, and the verses from 1 down to the end of 20 are devoted to his services, the remaining verses read to the end of 33 being devoted to the other two sons of Levi. There are distinctions and variations which are important. It is hoped that the Lord will help us to look at the subject bearing these types in mind.
Rem. Is the brotherly side stressed in the assembly gospel? Matthew tells us that the Lord chose two pairs of brothers. Is that what is in your mind? He saw two brothers, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, and going on thence he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee and John his brother. Is the emphasis on the brotherly feature?
J.T. I think it is. Then to see that these four brothers had a leading place among the twelve. First Peter, then Peter and John, and then the other two in a lesser way, so that we are constantly reminded of variations in the service of God, all this calling attention to care for each other and to help us to bear
{12}
in mind the distinctions God may put upon us, even though these may be slight. We have to make up our minds not to be democratic which is the spirit of the age, it being said (especially in the western hemisphere) that God created all men alike. That is not so. The remark is intended to bring out the equality of man. 'He created all men equally' -- is a well known saying, but it is not true. Men are not created alike or equal. Distinctions are seen in the assembly too and the further down the line we come the more we shall see what variations there are and what distinctions, what nobility and so forth. God reserves these rights among His people.
Ques. Are you speaking of the family side first in order to emphasise the sovereignty of God with us? There were 22,000 Levites.
J.T. That is right. That is chapter 3 where we have the number stated, viz. 22,000, whereas in the actual work there were about eight thousand. Then the idea of sovereignty in Kohath the priest. We will do well to reserve a little time to speak of the special work of Kohath, and the danger that attended it. In ministry dealing with Divine Persons or divine things, the point arises of the danger of the natural mind working, and so the passage that we have read calls attention to the provision for the preservation of the Kohathites. Verse 18 says "Ye shall not cut off the families of the Kohathites from among the Levites, but this shall ye do unto them, that they might live, and not die, when they draw near unto the most holy things: Aaron and his sons shall go in, and appoint them every one to his service and to his burden; but they shall not go in and see for a moment the holy things, lest they die". I speak of this because of the tendency with us to say wrong things when the greatest care should be exercised, especially anything that relates to Divine Persons Themselves. The
{13}
greatest care should be exercised that we do not make mistakes and say wrong things lest we be cut off, for it is most serious.
Rem. You were speaking of the democratic spirit and the place given to it, and that all were not alike; would be that seen in Mark's gospel where the Lord surnames Peter, James and John?
J.T. Quite so. The idea that all men are created equal is not the truth. We have another case in @Acts 4 -- Barnabas was surnamed Son of consolation. We might say these men were distinguished above others.
J.W. The Lord says of Paul, "This man is an elect vessel to me", (@Acts 9: 15).
J.T. That is a distinction. I do not think there is another designated in that way -- "For this man is an elect vessel to me to bear my name before both nations and kings and the sons of Israel", (@Acts 9: 15) as if he were to be fitted for it.
P.J. You said, in referring to Aaron, that he was a real brother. What had you in mind?
J.T. Well, just what I quoted, what Jehovah said to Moses, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? …And also behold he goeth out to meet thee; and when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart". (@Exodus 4: 14) What an advantage to have a brother like that! What God said of Aaron was not said even of Moses himself.
Ques. Do we get the two sides you have been drawing attention to in 2 Corinthians? In chapter 2 verse 13 it says "I had no rest in my spirit at not finding Titus my brother". That is the brotherly side. And then later in chapter 12 verse 11, "I have been nothing behind those who were in surpassing degree apostles". Is the sovereign side seen in that?
J.T. Quite so. Then the two brothers who laboured with Paul at Corinth is another point. They preached the Son of God, as it says, "The Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among
{14}
you, by me and Silvanus and Timotheus". They were suited vessels for that purpose.
Rem. In regard to the bounty of the saints, Titus who has already been mentioned comes in, in that connection in @2 Corinthians 8; then we have "the brother whose praise is in the glad tidings through all the assemblies", and later on in the chapter, "our brother whom we have often proved to be of diligent zeal in many things". Does that all shew that the brotherly element should not interfere with the distinctiveness required in the service?
J.T. Quite so. These distinctions are convenient to use in the service and in the epistles where the brethren are saluted we have a convenient means of expressing our affection and respect in these titles. Saints are called upon to be obedient because there is a great tendency to disregard all these things in the ministry and service and I think, too, a tendency to disregard what brethren who are in the service are entitled to, not that they claim it of course. If they did they would disqualify themselves but it is how the saints should regard those in the ministry, seen especially in the salutations of Paul; others too, but particularly of Paul.
Jno. G. Would you say that if ministering servants are marked by the features of the brother it would greatly help the saints in paying them respect?
J.T. Well, that is true, but that is the other side of the matter. There is one thing perhaps resident in one, there is something else to balance that in another. We do not want to reduce things. We want to make the most of what is divinely given, and which carries with it divine authority.
A.B. In that connection Ananias in @Acts 9 was very quick to recognise the brotherly features in Paul although they had not been manifested previously.
{15}
He could say, "Saul, brother", it is not mentioned previously.
J.T. Yes. There is not much said about Ananias but evidently he knew how to use the word brother; "Saul, brother". I think it is good to use whatever adornment there is. The authorities afford us this light. We learn from them, we learn from nature too, and we learn from ordinary men. It is good to observe that and to make use of what God affords us for our instruction so that the democratic idea is not allowed to govern us; the idea of distinction runs almost from the start in humanity.
W.H.T. Does not the beloved apostle distinguish Timothy in that way as being like-minded and caring with genuine feeling how the saints get on?
J.T. Just so. There was no one else like him and that was a distinction -- "For I have no one like minded who will care with genuine feeling how ye get on". (@Philippians 2:20) It is helpful to note these allusions to Moses and Aaron and to their generations -- "These are the generations of Aaron and Moses". God brought these two men forward and the sister is brought forward later. He has a right to do that. Miriam has distinction but not such distinction as Moses and Aaron. The family side is seen in these twenty-two thousand numbered from a month old and upward. We are to recognise what is likeable in the brethren. It is rare to get any two alike in the human race, and when we come to the divine family we should look for these distinctions and what is likeable, so we take David, whose name means beloved. He was a likeable young man, being described as "ruddy, and besides of a lovely countenance and beautiful appearance". (@1 Samuel 16: 12) He is the Lord's anointed and surely in all this we are to be reminded of the Lord Jesus. Then, too, John; the Lord loved him, as it says "The disciple whom Jesus loved" (@John 21: 20).
Ques. Would that feature be specially seen in
{16}
David being loved by all Israel and Judah as going out and coming in before them?
J.T. That is the thought. He was signalised too in the song of the women after the slaughter of Goliath but he was loved by all Israel and Judah.
J.M. Is it the divine thought that every Levite is to be a loveable person?
J.T. Well, I would say so. At the time when the disciples were making much of their exploits the Lord brings in the balancing truth that their names are written in heaven, which would involve distinction. That is a point to notice, not to make too much mention of our exploits or our work, not too make too much of things that happen incidentally which in themselves mean nothing. So that at a critical time when things were turning against Him the disciples came to Him and said that the demons were subject to them, through His name, but the Lord says, "Yet in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you, but rejoice that your names are written in the heavens". (@Luke 10: 20) That is, there is something to distinguish each one for the name given would mean distinction. They are all firstborn ones as it says "the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven", (@Hebrews 12: 23). So here the Levites are taken to represent the firstborn in Israel.
G.F.G. In verse 27 there are four families mentioned in connection with the Kohathites, but there are only two in each of the other two cases. Have you something in mind as to that? "And of Kohath, the family of the Amramites, and the family of the Izharites, and the family of the Hebronites, and the family of the Uzzielites; these are the families of the Kohathites".
J.T. It is very much worth mentioning that as there must be something in the fact that there are more in the case of Kohath. We have called attention
{17}
already to the verses covering the Kohathites in chapter 4. How much more there was with Kohath as compared with the other two.
G.F.G. Is it a question then of spirituality that brings out these family features?
J.T. Well, it would seem so. Four is a universal number. There were four priests, sons of Aaron, but two of them died. That was a terrible loss -- a terrible calamity -- but what is in mind particularly is that we should regard the saints from the brotherly standpoint, that is as the family of God. In service we are apt to be tested by one another more than in the family. The gift that one has may tend to rivalry and I believe the thought is that the brotherly spirit should stand. If a brother who is serving in a special way comes under discipline I think the brotherly spirit should stand, because there is a danger in such circumstances that we may give way to rivalry.
S.R. When you said it should stand, do you mean that it should prevail?
J.T. Well, it should stand anyway. It should not be weakened.
Rem. The brotherly link that existed between Peter and Paul was seen in the 15th of Acts when Paul went to up Jerusalem. It stood the strain when a difficult matter arose later on as to ministry.
J.T. Peter showed how superior he was and he says, "Our beloved brother Paul". It would look as if he intended to stress the brotherly feature because brethren might have thought that Paul's rebuke of Peter would be unseemly, Peter being an older man, certainly older in the service.
S.B. Is the spirit of what you say seen in @1 Timothy 5: 1, particularly in regard to discipline. "Rebuke not an elder sharply, but exhort him as a father, younger men as brethren, elder women as mothers, younger women as sisters, with all purity".
{18}
J.T. I am glad you mention that. The servant who ministers well is deserving of special consideration. The whole history should be taken into account if we have to deal with any of our brethren who are in service.
Ques. Do you mean that we should not fasten our minds on one particular thing and press it beyond a man's general course?
J.T. That is right. We must begin with heaven really in these matters and heaven has a perfect standard, hence we have the word "measure" taken up by Paul. Heaven had its estimate of Paul at the outset. "He is an elect vessel". -- not that he was going to be that but he was that.
Rem. Does the viewing of the Levites from one month old and upwards help us to look at the saints in relation to the potentialities that are there, whereas in the case of the number actually in the work it is a question more of the qualities coming out specifically and room would be made for the distinction they carry?
J.T. Quite. I have thought in relation to Timothy, the mother and grandmother being mentioned would mean that they have accorded distinction to Timothy, for their names are given. His father was a Greek, which added no distinction to Timothy, but the mother and grandmother do. It says of Timothy "From a child thou hast known the holy scriptures". (@2 Timothy 3: 15) What we have to look for in brethren is, do they know how to use scripture in ministry and support everything they say by it. Timothy was well versed in the scriptures.
Rem. Would that bear on the difference between the service of the Kohathites and the others. The Kohathites seem to deal more with what belonged to Divine Persons Themselves, the vessels of the Sanctuary, whereas the others seem to be more in
{19}
connection with divine principles and the persons of the saints.
J.T. These features are not there for nothing. They are there for our notice and intended to help us in our day to make full use of scripture. Give full place to it, make it adorn what we say in the emphasis we give it so that we are not saying things just because they come to our minds but because they are authorised by scripture.
Ques. Do you think we are clearer as to divine principles than we are as to the truth in relation to Divine Persons?
J.T. Well, I am sure that is true. That is why I think Kohath is put first. So much is said about him, as if the servant should be clear as to the truth of Divine Persons and all that relates to Them. I think what Kohath means is that things that relate to Divine Persons ought to be well understood before we minister -- to have the truth of Divine Persons clearly in mind and especially what goes with Them, the sacred things.
S.G. Do you think that as stressing the scriptures in these last days we would be preserved as over against the character of governments that might come in?
J.T. Well, I think so and therefore we ought to search the scriptures daily whether these things are so.
Ques. You spoke about certain using scripture more freely. What had you exactly in mind? Do you mean taking liberties with it?
J.T. Yes. One has seen it and heard it in ministry, and in open air preachings. There is nothing has more weight than the scripture quoted rightly and intelligently.
F.I. Is the apostle in line with that when he speaks of "… my glad tidings and the preaching of
{20}
Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery …" (@Romans 16: 25).
J.T. I suppose that would mean that the mystery was in mind in relation to the glad tidings and its effect upon souls. In preaching the idea of the assembly should be there and therefore independency would disappear. There is so much independency -- persons said to be converted and in the preaching not a word said about the assembly. Paul's doctrine includes the ministry of the assembly. Paul would be concerned that the gospel should carry with it at least the principle of the assembly.
Ques. Were you going to draw any special attention to this service of the Kohathites?
J.T. Well it has already been alluded to in the sense that so much more has been said about him than about the other two Levites and so much brought in as to priesthood in the service of the Kohathites; hence it is said in verse 16, "And Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall have the oversight of the oil for the light, and the fragrant incense, and the continual oblation, and the anointing oil -- the oversight of the whole tabernacle, and of all that is therein, over the sanctuary, and over its furniture". That is brought in, in the midst of the instruction about Kohath and you can see that the priesthood is stressed right through it. The priests were to go in and take down the holy things and that preserves us from rashness for the priestly element ought to be with the preacher. The priestly element is that which helps us to be balanced in saying things.
Ques. Are you connecting that in your mind with what you said about being established in the truth concerning Divine Persons?
J.T. Well, I would say that. You will notice in that connection in verse 15 it is said, "And when Aaron and his sons have ended covering the sanctuary,
{21}
and all the utensils of the sanctuary, when the camp setteth forward, then afterwards the sons of Kohath shall come to carry it, but they shall not touch the holy things, lest they die". So that the minister ought to distinguish between his ordinary feelings as minister and his priestly feelings, and the priestly feelings should govern all he states. Whatever he may say he must ever think of what is priestly and think twice before he says things about Divine Persons.
Ques. Is the reference to Eleazar a reminder that we should cultivate closeness to Christ as the One who has personal oversight? Would that be the reference here?
J.T. I think so. I think the Eleazar is the prince of the princes of the Levites and whilst Ithamar is also a priest he is not spoken of in the same way. Eleazar, I think, would be the minister as he keeps himself in close touch with the Lord. He lives there.
Rem. So that if a matter comes up in relation to the truth of the Father or of the Son or of the Spirit it is not only a question of understanding and bowing to the authority of the scripture but of being under the control of Christ.
J.T. I would say that -- that you are really under his influence. I think that is what Eleazar means. Eleazar is near to Aaron and immediately Aaron dies he is the high priest.
S.B. A priest must be a man of understanding, and his lips keep knowledge.
J.T. His lips!
A.E.D. Would this thought as to the Levites being safeguarded be seen in Paul in Romans? "For God is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit in the glad tidings", (@Romans 1: 9).
J.T. Very good -- serving God in his spirit. These things are most enlightening and corrective that our
{22}
spirits should be right. Mary, the mothers of the Lord, seems as if she was fitted for a great service. She said, "My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour" (@Luke 1: 46). She distinguishes between her soul and her spirit.
J.M. Do the doxologies we have in the epistles indicate something of this priestly feature with the writers?
J.T. Just so. I think they are put down for that purpose to enrich the scriptures, beautify them. If you love the Lord they furnish rich means of holy prayer or meditation or worship even. You may use them in worship.
{23}
QUICK LEARNING
@John 1: 43 - 51; @John 20: 15 - 18
J.T. As has been remarked, it is not simply learning that is in mind, but quick learning. This gospel makes much of learning, and properly speaking, teaching precedes learning. The Lord Himself in the prophets says "He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed", (@Isaiah 50: 4). So that it is in the mind of God that we should all be learners, but particularly those of us who serve in a special way. The Lord, too, in this particular gospel, quoting from the prophet (@Isaiah 54: 13) says "They shall be all taught of God", (@John 6: 45), although that refers to the millennium when there will be widespread learning of God. In chapter 3 we have a special result of the work of God; Nicodemus is a slow learner, although a true believer, and it is thought that chapter 1 furnishes a quick learner -- that is Nathanael -- a learner by observation, not so much listening to teaching. Then in chapter 9 we have in the blind man who had his eyes opened, one who learned quickly, but who learned in order, the order in which the truth comes to us, until he arrives at the Lord Jesus and the Lord arrives at him. The Lord had met him earlier, but now he finds him and says "Dost thou believe on the Son of God", and the man replies "Who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him"? So that he has been learning and as the chapter shows is even able to teach others. Now he is still learning, and I suppose he may be regarded as representing us all, for while we are down here we are to be learners. So I thought this scripture in @John 1 would help us on this point. The chapter 20 would help us as extending the thought to sisters. Sisterhood usually includes more in number than with brothers, but I am afraid the
{24}
disposition with them is to leave the learning to the brothers, the wives being content that their husbands are taught, whereas this gospel has striking examples of sisters who learn. Mary Magdalene is perhaps the best example -- hence the passage in chapter 20 has been read.
Ques. What had you particularly in mind when you spoke of Nathanael learning by observation?
J.T. Well, the Lord, when He saw Nathanael coming to Him says "Behold one truly an Israelite, in whom there is no guile. Nathanael says to him, Whence Knowest thou me? Jesus answered and said to him, Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee. Nathanael answered and said to him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel". He said that because of what the Lord had said, and it is because he observed that the Lord was there that the Lord could say what he did to him. He acquired a knowledge of the son of God very quickly.
P.J. Would you say that he was marked by spiritual discernment?
J.T. Well he had been growing. In verse 45 it says "Philip finds Nathanael, and says to him, We have found him of whom Moses wrote in the law, and the prophets, Jesus, the son of Joseph, who is from Nazareth. And Nathanael said to him, Can anything good come out of Nazareth?" That would shew there was no discernment there at the start.
P.J. I mean there is discernment there as a quick learner.
J.T. Yes, quite so; but not at the start. It is just as well to examine occasions of this kind because they are put down for our examination and our instruction. He says first of all "Can anything good come out of Nazareth?" Why should he say that? A man who had just spoken to him had said "We have found him
{25}
of whom Moses wrote in the law, and the prophets, Jesus, the son of Joseph, who is from Nazareth". Why should he answer immediately "Can anything good come out of Nazareth"? The speaker, Philip, evidently spoke sincerely and truly and feelingly; where was Nathanael's discernment? Why should he say that immediately? Where was his discernment? Where was his history? Where was the experience which he learned from the facts?
J.W. Was it possible that he was coloured by what was current at the time? It is said on another occasion "Search and look, that no prophet arises out if Galilee", (@John 7: 52).
J.T. Well, quite so.
S.R. Would the thief on the cross be an example of one who learned by observation?
J.T. Very good; he is a good example of the aptness which now should occupy us in observation and learning.
Ques. Would the absence of guile in Nathanael account for his ability to learn quickly?
J.T. Well, the Lord's remarks would indicate it was constitutional, which is a thing to be counted on. If we see one who has some marks of the work of God, however small, God has effected that. The truth is that the whole man is born again -- not partially so. In (@John 3: 5 - 7) it says "Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except any one be born of water and of Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit". Nicodemus queries that because he is natural, and yet he had the distinct marks of the work of God, only the work in him was sluggish. You do not get anything very much of him until the nineteenth chapter, and even then he provides spices for the embalmment of the Lord's body.
{26}
Jno.G. Do you think that we see a contrast to Nathanael in Nicodemus, in the fact that he discloses the ability to learn quickly and the Lord recognises that in saying "Thou shalt see greater things than these"; whereas Nicodemus was not able to learn quickly, hence it says -- "If I have said the earthly things to you, and ye believe not, how if I say the heavenly things to you, will ye believe"?
J.T. Well, of course, you must remember that the teaching is progressive, and what you say is a bit beyond the beginning. The Lord is really meaning to encourage Nathanael and says, "Thou shalt see greater things than these". It is a progressive thought. He had already said, "Thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel". Think of a man being able to say that in such a short time from the truth being brought to him!
H.B. When you speak of quick learning being constitutional, do you mean normally to each person who is a believer -- one who is born again -- or is it to a selected person?
J.T. Well, anyone who is born again, or course, is selected, but some are sluggish. Others are quick. There are many examples in the scriptures, but I have picked out these two as the best that could be found -- especially Nathanael.
J.M. What do you suggest would help us to learn quickly?
J.T. The word "constitutional" is good, because it implies (speaking of it on natural lines) what one is by birth. The principle is in the person -- the principle of learning, the ability to learn; that must be there. Even in natural things you would get capacity for instruction in a man or woman, a boy or girl; you could not get ability to learn in a dog, no matter what means may be employed. It might appear in a small way in a detail, but in general it is
{27}
not there. The thing is not really there at all. Therefore the principle of learning lies in the new birth. That is where everything lies, because the person is born anew. The word in @John 3 is "That which is born of the flesh is flesh" and if the new birth dislodged or displaced the natural, there would be no sluggishness. The fact is that there is flesh to be dealt with, and it is that, if allowed, which causes sluggishness. Hence the need for exercise.
P.H.H. Is there a certain skill implied in the ministry or in the minister in Philip's action here? First of all he is found by the Lord and then he finds Nathanael, and when Nathanael raises a doubt he says "Come and see". Does that imply a certain method of approach which should be inherent in the ministry today?
J.T. Well, I think that is good. "Come and see". Meaning to be simple and practical, that if anyone is exercised at all, "come" is a word with spiritual instruction. Paul and Barnabas (especially Paul) had that in mind when at Antioch they taught in the assembly for a whole year. It is very remarkable indeed, the understanding and skill that is there; skill and experience too in teaching, which would be necessary to continue for a whole year, notwithstanding the fact that time must be regarded as valuable with these two brothers. However that is the way they did it and the result was very remarkable, for the disciples were called Christians at Antioch, but the teaching was in the assembly. It was a crowd they were teaching, and these persons would be rather mixed in ability and in constitutional qualities.
Ques. Have you any thought as to the distinction, Andrew leading his brother to Jesus, and the way that Philip invites Nathanael to come to Jesus?
J.T. You mean the difference between leading and coming?
{28}
Rem. I mean the invitation bringing him.
J.T. Just so. The power of the word "come". The words "come and see" are characteristic of John, and have a great place in that Gospel. It means that the Spirit is here on earth, and it is of great value for an exercised person to some and see; for instance, the two that followed the Lord in the early part of the chapter. It says "Again, on the morrow, there stood John and two of his disciples. And, looking at Jesus as he walked, he says, Behold the Lamb of God. And the two disciples heard him speaking, and followed Jesus. But Jesus having turned, and seeing them following, says to them, What see ye? And they said to him, Rabbi (which being interpreted, signifies Teacher), where abidest thou? He says to them, Come and see". That is, if you are exercised about learning, come and see where Jesus is, and what goes on where He is. They abode with Him that day. That would be an opportunity to see learners and how they learnt. Some say that class learning is the best way, that is persons all together, learning the same thing, and using all their powers to get all they can. That is what meetings like this should be -- not simply a coming together for a good time, and to hear the truth, but to carry the truth away with us.
Ques. Would an example be seen in Paul in @Acts 9: verses 19 and 20, where it says that he "having received food, got strength. And he was with the disciples who were in Damascus certain days. And straightway in the synagogues he preached Jesus that he is the Son of God".
J.T. That is good. Evidently he learned quickly. For about sixteen years now we have had up this question. Who is the Son of God? The brethren have had it before them all that time, and the question is what have we learned about it? That matter was brought up very pointedly and one might say
{29}
Suddenly. (That is another significant word which we get in scripture). We have had it before us all these years, and it is a challenge for each of us how much we have learned. Here the Lord says "Come and see", and I think that anyone who hears now will do well to observe how the brethren are listening, that the Lord is here with us, and how we are getting on in truth.
Ques. I would like a little more help as to this thought of "no guile". It was when Jesus saw Nathanael coming to Him that He says of him "Behold one truly an Israelite, in whom there is no guile". Would you say that guile is one of the most retarding things in relation to learning?
J.T. Well, I suppose that is right, and the Lord comments on Nathanael being free from it, because what it says is, I am sure, true. Nathanael is to be subject to the work of God and Nicodemus too. When we compare the two men as to learning, we see that in the case of Nathanael it is said, "Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him". The actual fact of seeing is another feature of John. For instance in verse 41 already alluded to Andrew "finds his own brother Simon and says to him, We have found the Messias (Which being interpreted is Christ)". The interpretation of words which would not be understood is usually given in John, especially in these early chapters, and so this word Messias is explained in verse 41, "(which being interpreted in Christ)". Then it says he led him to Jesus. We have already commented on the difference between leading, being led, and coming. Next we have "Jesus looking at him". He also looks at Nathanael as it says "Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and says of him, Behold one truly an Israelite, in whom there is no guile". We have already alluded to the constitutional side, and it was there. But the point is that it is not what Nathanael says, but what
{30}
The Lord sees in Nathanael coming to Him. That thought leads me back to the beginning of Genesis. There we have the idea of names of persons and things, names of persons and things, names of creatures. Jehovah caused the animals to come to Adam to see what he might call them, as if God had pleasure in the discernment, the intelligence that His great creature man had. So, in a more exalted way, we have here the last Adam, Christ. He looks on Simon and says "*Thou* art Simon, the son of Jonas; *thou* shalt be called Cephas". This is material for the assembly. Now the Lord looks at Nathanael and says "Behold one truly an Israelite, in whom there is no guile". Evidently He had Israel in mind, what should be looked for in them. And so, if it be a question of having the assembly in mind (and of course that is the question now) Cephas is the man for that. It is a question of what the Lord sees in us at the first.
Ques. Is Cephas constitutional?
J.T. I would think so, because it is a question of material. The Lord says in @Matthew 16 "*Thou* art Peter". Not 'Thou shalt be called …' That is what he was by constitution, by the work of God in him. And so in all these gatherings it is a question of what God sees, a question of persons, and whole persons as subjects of the work of God; not part of them, but the whole man. That is by the subsequent creative purpose of God.
S.G. The note in relation to verse 42 is interesting. It says "Looking carefully at him".
J.T. The note referred to reads "Looking carefully; so verse 36; @Matthew 19: 26; @Luke 22: 61". These notes are useful. But I think we can all see the use of these words, the importance of them in regard to our subject, that is, in regard to teaching. The teacher must look at the disciple or pupil. Someone was telling me last night that he was engaged in
{31}
connection with the service of demobilisation. I enquired as to whether he looked at the soldier he was dealing with, and was told No, he looked at the papers. It comes to my mind now that heaven is not looking at the saints from any documentary standpoint. That will be so at the great white throne; but now heaven is looking at the work of God in every one of us, and hence the importance of Christians, real Christians; the importance of the work of God.
Rem. The importance also of all learning to be true to what is true of us constitutionally as born again. The Lord looking at us carefully would remind us that we come under divine scrutiny, do you think, and we have to admit sometimes that what the Lord sees and what He would disclose to us is that the things we are going on with are such as would prevent us from being quick learners. Hence the need of being true in the power of the Spirit.
J.T. You mean you are holding yourself in the light of what you know you are by the work of God, and moving accordingly; paying attention to what is necessary to accelerate that -- to make it all it should be.
Rem. I feel very much and I would like more help as to the thought of guile. It is not exactly arrant wickedness, but it is something near the truth, but not quite the truth. Guile seems to be quite a striking word and I was wondering if there was something very particular in it being brought forward so early in John.
J.T. It is clearly with a view to the man. He is a good case. It is a very important thing with a workman in the field of God. What kind of persons are we dealing with? Sometimes they are slow and sluggish and sometimes they are quick and ready to talk too much. The true workman will know what to think of his subjects. It is a great matter in service to
{32}
deal with the person, as we have seen that the Merarites in their service had to do with the boards, that is the persons, persons who are subjects of the work of God, and would observe them.
Rem. So later on in John you have those who practise the truth and come into the light. I suppose they are persons in whom what is constitutional has become characteristic.
J.T. Quite so. You see that in the way things are thrown off, judged and abandoned, so that the work of God is allowed to go forward. "Laying aside every weight and sin which so easily entangles us …"
F.B. It requires a moral foundation for this quick learning.
J.T. Well, it does. It is not a mere academic matter, it is a moral matter, it begins with God. God is our great Teacher. The Lord Jesus is here specifically called that by the persons who follow him -- they call Him Teacher. John's disciples wanted to see the Teacher, but the Lord said to them "What seek ye", whereas He said to Mary Magdalene "Whom seekest thou"? It is a question in the first place of the thing. The Lord had in mind that they needed to be taught, but with Mary Magdalene it is the Person.
G.M. What is the difference between teaching and learning?
J.T. You knew what the teacher did at school? He taught. That is his business. Your business was to learn. Your parents would point out to you to study. That is what is left to *you* to do. We do not study enough. We do not meditate. John said "We have contemplated His glory".
P.J. Would quick learning be seen in @Romans 8, verse 5? -- "For they that are according to flesh mind the things of the flesh; and they that are according to Spirit, the things of the Spirit".
{33}
J.T. Well, that is good.
Ques. Just referring for a moment to the enquiry about guile: Do you get an illustration of guile in the woman in @John 4, where the Lord says "Go call they husband" and she replies "I have no husband"?
J.T. Do you not think that was a downright lie?
Rem. It seems to be a measure of the truth to cover up the whole truth.
J.T. "He whom thou now hast". There was deception -- guile, no doubt, but I would say it was far worse.
Rem. The Lord says "Thou hast well said, I have no husband". There seems to be some truth in what she says. I wondered if that was where the guile comes in. It borders on wickedness.
J.T. Well, it does. She denied the thing. Guile is bad enough, but this is worse.
P.H.H. Is there a certain glory which follows upon this learning? I was thinking of the disciples in the next chapter being in the presence of the sign of the water turned into wine and it says Jesus manifested His glory and His disciples believed on Him. Does that shew the advantage of moving along this line of learning, to come into some ray of the glory of the Person?
J.T. Just so. It is progressive I would say. The Lord remarks "One truly an Israelite, in whom there is no guile". That is a basis for further remarks by the Lord. Nathanael says to Him, "Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answered and said to him, before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee. Nathanael answered and said to him, Rabbi, *thou* are the Son of God, *thou* art the King of Israel". The manifestation of His glory is here too. The negative statement would indicate he was ready to let in light as it shone; let in glory as it shone. So that the Lord said, "Before that Philip called thee,
{34}
when thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee. Nathanael answered and said to Him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou are the King of Israel". What a marvellous thing -- the ability to take in things quickly! Two of the greatest things in the book of Psalms, he is able to say immediately that they applied to the Lord -- the only person to whom they could be applied. "Jesus answered and said to him, Because I said to thee, I saw thee under the fig-tree, believest thou?" The Lord is confirming His work in a progressive manner. He is carrying the subject along in what he has already confessed. So He says "Thou shalt see greater things than these". Not simply 'There shall be greater things', but he was to see them.
J.M. Would the Lord suggest in that way to Nathanael that he was still to be quick in his observation?
J.T. Quite so. That is what the Lord implied. The Lord would have in His mind that he was learning quickly, learning wonderfully.
Ques. Does it shew that in the way he uses the word "thou" twice emphatically?
J.T. Well, I would think that; it would fit in with the first chapter of Hebrews, where the things relative to the glory of Christ are taken from what the psalmist uttered. Heaven is pleased with those who learn, taking their very sayings and applying them.
P.H.H. The fact that he says "Rabbi" shows that he had taken the thing on.
J.T. Quite so. I think he is a reader, which is a great matter. What we are dealing with now is a question of the scriptures, and these bible readings are definitely appointed for these last days. It is a question as to whether the apostles had readings just as we have them. I am sure God has ordered these bible readings, and it is a question for persons who
{35}
come to them to read the scriptures. So Philip the evangelist (not the Philip mentioned here) when he first met the eunuch said "*understandest* thou what thou readest"? You can see how Nathanael understood. So the Lord in @Luke 24 finally adds the idea of the Psalms when teaching the disciples -- He opened their understanding and referred to the Psalms.
H.B. Nathanael would be actually an advance upon Philip. Philip refers to Moses and the prophets, but it would seem as though Nathanael had got something additional.
J.T. Yes, that would be seen if he compared notes with Philip later. I am sure Philip would be ready to give credit to Nathanael, the new convert, although he himself was not a very old convert. It is movement, constant movement in this chapter. One result of quick work. We have John the Baptist's part in it, and the Lord's own part in it, and then his remarks here; and so as remarked, if these two brothers compared notes afterwards I am sure Philip would be ready to admit that the younger brother, Nathanael, went beyond him. That is what the old brothers do all the time -- recognise the young. One of the greatest encouragements I know is the number of young brothers who are able to come out and serve, and as far as I can see, too, the older ones ready to recognise them. So I am sure that Philip would be ready to tell Nathanael that he had got on quicker than he; he would probably say, 'I did not say anything to you about the Son of God'. It was Nathanael who brought that subject up.
Rem. Philip told Nathanael that they had found Jesus, the son of Joseph; but Nathanael goes far beyond that. He says "Thou are the Son of God; Thou art the King of Israel". Then the Lord refers to Himself as Son of man.
J.T. Well, that is what the Lord put before him,
{36}
as much as to say, 'Go on'. The vista of glory opening up is unlimited, because the light that is shining is unlimited; "Thou shalt see greater things than these". (@John 1: 5) You cannot say you have got all the truth, for we never get to the end of it. Not that we shall be learning after we get to heaven, for we shall be finished down here. It is a question of what the Lord can do in our present state. He can make us finished products in spite of what is there, that which is born of the flesh, but the power of the Spirit is operating.
E.B. Would this 'opened heaven' be like the 'opened heavens' in the epistle to Hebrews?
J.T. Very much. "Ye shall see the heaven opened" (@John 1: 51) -- alluding to Jacob in Genesis. He is dealing with an Israelite and Jacob was a great Israelite. Israel is the name he got, and Nathanael is a good sample of an Israelite.
F.B. By way of contrast, would Zacharias in Luke be a slow learner, while his wife was a quick learner?
J.T. Quite so, and he had to suffer nine months of dumbness. Manoah's wife was a quick learner also.
Jno.H. Why is it "Son of man" in the last verse?
J.T. Some eighty times or more the Lord calls Himself the Son of man. It is a word which would fit in with the case of Nathanael, for He would not be limited to Israel. It would come out presently in Paul's ministry. It says in chapter 2 the disciples believed on Him. They were disciples before but they had not believed on Him. The shining of glory makes full disciples, and that was the point here. It means that the subject, the pupil or learner is to be ready for wider things. The Son of man implies something wider than the King of Israel. The Son of God is here too, and that is greater than the King of Israel, or the Son of man.
E.J.F. He changes from the "thou" to "ye".
{37}
Does that mean that others would be associated with him as he goes on?
J.T. Yes. That is good. "Verily, verily, I say to you, henceforth *ye* shall see …", meaning you are called to bring in others. None of us is here for himself. If he is a true Christian he is to bring in others. We don't want to go to heaven alone. We want to go with the brethren.
Rem. Paul could say in Corinthians "We all". Would that be including the Corinthians and himself?
J.T. I would say so -- in such good company.
S.B. Is it intended to direct our attention to the fact that our learning should be in line with another sphere and another Man. You remember it says of Paul "much learning doth make thee mad".
J.T. You are quoting what Festus said as recorded in the 26th chapter of the Acts. I am saying that so that we might refer to the scripture and have it exactly. Some at Corinth were saying "His bodily presence is weak and his speech contemptible".
Rem. Although Festus said "much learning doth make thee mad" they would not have said that about Paul's ordinary learning.
J.T. "Henceforth *ye* shall see the heaven opened and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of man". The Lord opens that up to all of them. Whoever the "ye" may have meant, it was very extensive in the Lord's thought. You want to carry the brethren with you.
There is much more that we might dwell upon here as to the greatness of what is coming. But for the sake of the sisters we might look at chapter 20. Verse 14 says "Having said these things she turned backward and beholds Jesus standing there, and knew not that it was Jesus. Jesus says to her, Woman, why dost the weep? Whom seekest thou? She, supposing that it was the gardener, says to him, Sir, if thou hast borne
{38}
him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away. Jesus says to her, Mary. She, turning round, says to Him in Hebrew, Rabboni, which means Teacher". These remarks are just to help to carry all of us in what has been said; that is the thought of learning. Although Mary is very dark in the early part of the chapter, yet she is full of affection for the Lord, but loving Him as thinking Him dead, whereas He was risen. He had risen from among the dead. There was considerable darkness in her soul, but the passage shews that the Lord dealt with her personally. We are told in verse 15 that He calls her "Woman", saying "Woman why dost thou weep? Whom seekest thou?" He is dealing with her soul, with her affections. But she replies supposing it was the gardener. "She says to him, Sir, if thou hast borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away. Jesus says to her, Mary". That means that he is now dealing with her personally, referring to her affections, mentioning her name, which means suffering. She had, had experience, the experience of suffering. "She, turning round, says to him in Hebrew, Rabboni, which means Teacher. Jesus says to her, Touch me not". As much as to say, that is enough. That is the point He wanted her to come to, that she should call Him Teacher. He was *her* Teacher. I am learning of Christ; I am not a Presbyterian, not a member of the Church of England, nor a Catholic, nor any other sect. I am a Christian. I have learned of Christ. The persons who were called Christians had learned for a year from Paul and Barnabas.
Ques. I was going to ask if what hinders us is the teaching of current religion rather then learning in the way of which you are now speaking. I was thinking of the man in @John 5. He seemed to make no progress whatever, he was still connected with the
{39}
religious system; and in relation to Colossians and Hebrews, the effect Judaising teaching had on them.
J.T. Quite so. Very good. The Lord said to the man in @John 5 "Sin no more", and He says also to the woman in the 8th chapter "Sin no more", meaning, I should think, they were not subjects of progressive teaching. They were doubtful. And a great many today are doubtful.
P.H.H. Do you think that this rapid learning must be accompanied by the tendency for adjustment? I was thinking of Mary; first of all it says she turned round and said "Teacher". That might indicate "an Israelite indeed in whom there is no guile". It is our side of the matter to be ready for adjustment at all times.
J.T. Quite so. Hence the word to Paul was "And now why lingerest thou? Arise and get baptised, and have thy sins washed away, calling on his name", (@Acts 22: 16). That is what he needed. Things still clung to him. I would think in that sense, according to what you say, baptism and the Lord's Supper are the great things for Christians who are seeking the truth, taking them on in their true sense. Paul had to rise and wash away his sins. He had to do it himself; but then he had to learn to come into fellowship. Normally Christians are so shy of fellowship. But I am sure these are true things which should be impressed. It says, Be baptised. That is, renounce the world, lay it aside, leave it, and then come into the fellowship, where you get distinct proof in the soul, and light, love, enjoyment; where would you get it in the systems? It is among the brethren you get that, where the Spirit of God dwells, involving the assembly.
F.C. Is that why in @John 20 it is the Person, while in @John 1 it is "What seek ye"?
J.T. Quite so; now the Person. The beautiful
{40}
word "Mary". First He said "Woman" -- a noble title. He does likewise in the case of the woman in the fourth chapter, and she says "Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet". In chapter 20 He says "Woman" to make way for "Mary" which name meant much.
J.S. Would Lydia come in, in that connection? Would you say she was a quick learner. It says she was baptised and her house.
J.T. I would say that. And the remark was made "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there". It was to come in, not merely for a meal, but to abide there. She was a real hearty Christian.
P.J. The woman in @2 Kings 4 was farther advanced then her husband. She says "I perceive that this is a holy man of God".
J.T. And thus they made a dwelling place for him.
{41}
THE ASSEMBLY -- THE CUSTODIAN OF GOD'S TESTIMONY
@Matthew 16: 13 - 20; @Matthew 18: 15 - 20
J.T. What I have in mind is to call attention to the assembly. This is the gospel which speaks of it directly as the custodian of the testimony of God in this world. It is well-known that the gospels are intended to confirm the epistles, and this gospel supports Paul's letters to Corinth. @1 Corinthians 12 tells us that God has set certain gifts in the assembly including the gift of government, which is an important item, to preserve and support what is of God; and to exercise needed discipline and correction. It is thought, therefore, that the Lord my take account of us as we are and of our history in this city and grant us such help as is needed, so that the assembly may have its place in all that relates to the testimony in this city, inclusive of the persons in the assembly. They are especially in view, particularly in @Matthew 18 which supposes that difficulties would arise and it provides light as to how they are to be met.
P.H.H. Would you please explain a little more what is in your mind when you say that the assembly should have its place with us in relation to the testimony.
J.T. Well, I think it is a divine system calculated to fit in with conditions as they are, meeting every exigency that may arise, whether it is by teaching, or preaching, or ministry generally. It is not the assembly in its heavenly relations which is before us. That is dealt with in Ephesians and is in mind generally in the Pauline epistles, but what is before us here is the assembly militant as having to do with adverse circumstances in the wilderness where evil has to be met.
W.W. Would this be like the children of Israel
{42}
passing through the wilderness in view of reaching the land?
J.T. Well that is just what is in mind. But they reach the land. The tabernacle, of course, represents the assembly in the wilderness, although as in the land the tabernacle was set up at Shiloh, which was a provisional position until the temple was built, as it is said "Solomon built him a house". (@Acts 7: 47) So what we are dealing with now and what Matthew contemplates is the assembly in the wilderness.
Ques. Had you in mind that as the truth of the assembly has a place with us, independent activities or movements are eliminated?
J.T. Well, that is a good way of putting it because independency has been the instrument in the hands of the devil whereby damage has been caused and requiring a change as indicated in verse 19 of @Matthew 18. The earlier part of that chapter beginning at the 15th verse contemplates the assembly in order, but the 19th verse contemplates a change as the word "again" implies. The Lord had said "Whatsoever ye shall bind on the earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on the earth shall be loosed in heaven", and then He adds "Again I say to you, that if two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens. For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them".
But the remark as to independency may need a little elaboration so that we may get an understanding of what is in mind.
Rem. I thought you were speaking of the assembly as the custodian of the testimony, and you spoke of gifts being set in the assembly. I was wondering whether you had in mind that the truth of the
{43}
assembly as having place with us would rule out freelance activities or independency either on the part of individuals or of gatherings. There would be the unifying of thought and of judgement of what is said. I was wondering if that was what you were emphasising?
J.T. Well it is. In the 12th chapter of 1 Corinthians the gifts of government are referred to but the earlier part of the chapter deals with spiritual manifestations, running down to the end of the 27th verse "Now ye are Christ's body, and members in particular". Then it adds, "And God has set certain in the assembly: first, apostles: secondly, prophets; thirdly, teachers; then miraculous powers; then gifts of healings; helps; governments". I thought of calling attention to that because where difficulties arise involving the persons of the saints, the matter of government and the discernment of conditions that have caused the difficulties is so necessary. Solomon would represent that side typically. In his realm he had to deal with the persons of the Israelites and right and wrong amongst them, hence we have the judgement between the two harlots. He discerned who the mother of the child was and that idea may be extended to the assembly and the saints as in it. The motherly spirit would care for the life of the child, or as we might say, the lives of the brethren, their general welfare, and hence if conditions exist which involve the brethren, perhaps their imprisonment or their being deprived of their liberties, all that has to be dealt with. We cannot be healthy if any members are, so to say, in hospital. I do not know that the idea of a hospital applies to the assembly but certainly if any of the saints are deprived of their true position, then there is the need for adjustment, and I should think the idea of governments -- persons who understand government -- then comes into action.
{44}
Ques. I was going to ask how would the government be discerned.
J.T. Well, the question of history comes up in such an enquiry because of what may have happened, as, for instance, in @Luke 13 the woman who was bent over for eighteen years. The Lord dealt with that, of course, but the assembly also has power to deal with conditions like it, and it is a question of administration, I would say, and what is discerned in my history by certain persons who can deal with such matters. We learn by history. We have already noticed that elsewhere. Troubles arise, as for instance in Israel, when Moses was enjoined to choose out seventy men to take part with him in the government. In the New Testament also the apostles according to the 6th chapter of the Acts suggested to the people that they should choose out seven men full of the Holy Spirit, persons who would be capable of meeting the emergency, which was a question of complaint on account of certain widows being neglected. The apostles said it was not for them to leave the word of God and serve tables, and they put it on the multitude to choose out seven men, well reported of and full of the Holy Spirit who could take on the matter of administration, but they were men who could be known historically as fit for the service.
Ques. Does it show that if we are to get benefit from those who teach and those who have the gift of government we should be submissive and have an open ear to what such can bring in?
J.T. I think what you suggest is very good, and do you not think what has been suggested as to history is good too. We know those who have been going on amongst us for years and which persons are most likely to be useful in any given emergency.
Rem. It says of Solomon that "all Israel heard the judgement which the king had judged; and they
{45}
feared the king, for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him, to do justice". (@1 Kings 3: 28) The thing became apparent.
J.T. Quite so.
W.H.T. Does this matter of revelation still enter into our having a right understanding of the assembly?
J.T. Well, we are dealing now in this chapter with the primary thoughts of God, what you might call the inaugural thoughts of the assembly, what the Lord had in mind as to it. He was speaking before it actually existed, because it did not actually exist until He went up to Heaven, having died and risen and the Holy Spirit having been given, because it is the descent of the Holy Spirit which constitutes the assembly.
W.H.T. What I really had in mind was the need of revelation and that there was in the assembly what would meet every question which might arise.
J.T. Well that is true. That is what was in mind in making the proposal.
P.H.H. In the second half of chapter 18 it is contemplated that there is a spirit of reckoning. Would that enter into these matters of brethren and their difficulties? Half of the section speaks about one sinning against another and so on, then later it speaks about the king who would reckon with his bondmen. Would that spirit enter into it in a practical way in regard to government? Verse 23 says "For this cause the kingdom of the heavens has become like a king who would reckon with his bondmen". Does what you are saying about governments assume that there is ability to reckon things in the assembly?
J.T. Quite so, very good. The latter part comes in obviously to augment what is already said in the 15th verse where it reads "But if thy brother sin against thee, go, reprove him between thee and him
{46}
alone. If he hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother". That is what Peter evidently had in mind to enlarge on when he said "Lord how often shall my brother sin against me and I forgive him? Until seven times? Jesus says to him, I say not to thee until seven times but until seventy times seven. For this cause the kingdom of the heavens has become like a king …" -- or as the margin says 'a man a king', meaning that manly feelings would be in it and not simply kingship or kingly feeling. Solomon of course was a king, but there were these feelings of a man, as it is said in the prophets "A man shall be a hiding place …" And so having begun to reckon, one debtor of ten thousand talents was brought to him. Is what you have in mind that this king represents what is needed in government and in the administration of matters among the brethren?
P.H.H. Yes. It works out in the man; the spirit of reckoning between the king and the great debtor and then the relative situation of the great debtor to a small debtor. I wondered whether that was in line with your mind about the brethren getting help and not remaining in hospital, but getting the benefit of teaching and of the gifts of government in the assembly.
J.T. Therefore the great advantage of a kingdom, which includes the idea of adjustment of difficulties between the subjects of the kingdom, between man and man as it were. So that the assembly becomes the vessel, for the idea of the vessel comes in as in 1 Corinthians, as it says "So also is the Christ"; a remarkable expression! What would apply directly to Christ personally is evidently applied to the assembly. That is, Christ, being the great Administrator, is brought down to the idea of the assembly. It is as if the Lord Himself were adjudicating. These governments would represent Him in judgements
{47}
arrived at, and hence @Matthew 18 where a matter between two brothers has arisen, we are told of the procedure that is to be entered on so as to reach a right conclusion. The assembly is the arbitrator as to what happens to the offender, the Lord saying further "but if he will not listen to them", (that is, two or three witnesses) "tell it to the assembly" -- meaning it is a last appeal, such as heaven will recognise and endorse. So that you are on sure footing for we are never driven to the wall in these difficulties. It is not contemplated that we should take months or years in settling a thing. There is a means of settlement, an authoritative means of settlement, as it says "if also he will not listen to the assembly, let him be to thee as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer" -- meaning he is an outlaw, so far as the person who is sinned against is concerned. Then it says in the 18th verse "Whatsoever ye shall bind on the earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on the earth shall be loosed in heaven". So that we are on the surest possible footing in moving on these lines in settling matters.
S.B. How do you view the assembly here?
J.T. Well, as I have just remarked "Whatsoever ye shall bind *on earth*" -- it is the assembly as on earth that is executing this office.
S.B. What I had in mind was whether this was the care meeting or the assembly meeting?
J.T. It is the assembly that is in mind. The care meeting would fit in with the procedure in verse 16. The care meeting is tentative and has no authority; the assembly alone has authority. The thing is finalised in the assembly.
Ques. I would like to ask whether "telling it to the assembly" refers to the assembly meeting which would be convened in a case of discipline?
J.T. Of course in @Matthew 18 it is not so much
{48}
the actual composition of the assembly that is in mind. But it is seen by implication that the assembly is spoken of as a thing that is recognised in heaven, and whatever there has been prior to this it is now seen as functioning. We have to appreciate when the assembly makes a pronouncement and "if he will not hear" means that a pronouncement has been made.
Rem. In the care meeting, as has been mentioned, the deliberations are rightly in view of the assembly but the care meeting has no executive capacity, the assembly retaining that. But an assembly meeting is not convened for deliberations as all that has already taken place in the care meeting.
J.T. So that the care meeting will have to be put into verse 16 of @Matthew 18. First of all it is the reproval of the man. "If thy brother sin against thee reprove him between thee and him alone". The care meeting would not have to go through all that, and it does not necessarily imply that an assembly meeting will be required, as it goes on "if he hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother". There is no need of a care meeting, except that the brother who has been offended is caring for the other. But the care meeting is implied when it says "But if he do not hear thee, take with thee one or two besides, that every matter may stand upon the word of two witnesses or of three". The care meeting is tentative and the question of witnesses comes up. "But if he will not listen to them" -- that is plural -- one or two, besides the one offended. "If he will not listen to them, tell it to the assembly, let him be to thee as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer".
J.M. You do not think that the care meeting could impose restrictions pending the finalising of a matter?
J.T. I do not think that would be right at all.
{49}
Anything that is done in that way would be on moral grounds. If a brother has sufficient moral power to speak to an offending brother and advise him authoritatively, that might be observed, but it is not final.
Ques. How far does the word "reprove" carry the matter?
J.T. Well, it would be just what the word implies. You might talk to him for an hour with that in view.
Rem. There is a note in John's gospel which says "To show the true character of anything, so as to convict, and hence reprove by showing a man's fault". Note 'e' to @John 3: 20.
J.T. That is a word that ought to help us all. Here in Matthew, however, it is between the two persons, "Between thee and him alone".
W.H.T. Do you consider it important and necessary for the offender to be present at the assembly meeting or at least that he should be given the opportunity of being there?
J.T. Certainly. If it is convened for disciplinary purposes in which he is involved, he ought to be there, and if he is not there he is an offender for that. If he knows the assembly meeting has been convened and he is not there and his will is in it then he is adding to the sin.
S.B. Is it not convened that he should hear them?
J.T. Quite so.
S.B. I should like to ask, could he be gained by the assembly?
J.T. Yes. The word here is "If he will not listen to them, tell it to the assembly; and if also he will not listen to the assembly, let him be to thee as one of the nations, and a tax-gatherer". The assembly would seek to gain him if possible, but the position now is more authoritative.
{50}
Ques. It is not suggested that the assembly becomes a deliberative meeting of any kind?
J.T. I do not think so. That has often come up and I am sure it is proved from historical facts among the brethren, that it is not deliberative.
Rem. So that the utmost care to do justice should enter into the deliberations of the care meeting prior to this, and if the spirit of forgiveness, to which attention has been called, is present, and if the person refuses to hear, it really increases the difficulty.
J.T. Because his will is in it.
W.W. What about the time between the care meeting and the assembly meeting? Should sisters not hear of it in that period?
J.T. There is no reason why they should not. We have scriptures that would bear on that, for instance "Let them ask their husbands at home"
W.W. But there are some sisters who have no husband.
J.T. Well, if they have fathers or brothers, or neighbours who are brothers they can ask them.
W.W. Before the assembly meeting?
J.T. I think so.
Ques. Should sisters not be conversant with the exercises of the assembly generally so that there should be no surprises?
J.T. Quite so. It is a general matter. If we are characteristically in the assembly we want to know what is current.
Ques. Is it not a remarkable thing how exercised persons do know?
J.T. Take a person like Anna in @Luke 2; there are such sisters in the assembly. Well, she would want to know, no matter what it was, and she would enquire and pray accordingly, and be a great help.
S.G. Would it be proper for the brothers, as having looked into the facts of the case, to go forward
{51}
to the assembly meeting with a tentative judgement or decision?
J.T. Well, I certainly would have a judgement, and tentative is a good word. You are preserving the function of the assembly and that alone can be final.
Rem. If the offender comes to the meeting when the assembly is convened and listens to the judgement of the assembly and afterwards continues to come to the meetings and takes true ground, such a person would be recovered, would he not?
J.T. Quite so.
S.B. How does that come to light? Does it not show that there is a final voice at the assembly meeting?
J.T. There is a final voice. Each is to abide by it, particularly the offender. Here the Lord implies that it will not be so in some cases -- "if he will not listen to the assembly". The Lord implies there that certain would not listen, and that is the great difficulty usually in these cases, that the obedient ear is not there, obedience is the point and it carries us back to the principle on which the gospel is received, for it is said to be for the obedience of faith among all nations.
Ques. Does the assembly meeting furnish an occasion for the offender to speak?
J.T. I would say so. Grace reigns, and there would be a readiness to listen. If the offender had a wish to speak there is no reason why he should not. He is still in principle in the assembly because the judgement has not been pronounced. The matter is proceeding.
S.B. What would be done in the case of an assembly meeting where a sister would be involved?
J.T. She could easily intimate what is in her mind.
S.B. Could sisters do so in the assembly meeting?
{52}
J.T. Well, why not? How did the Lord act with Mary Magdalene and the woman in Samaria? He would clear them at once if the state were there and indication given that there was some judgement of the matter; but it would be done in a comely way.
S.B. I would like help as to that. I have difficulty as to how that indication may be expressed.
J.T. There are many ways in which you can intimate your mind. Why should not a sister indicate a change of mind? She can sing a hymn. Why should she not make a confession? It could be done in a suitable way.
W.A. Should there not be an expression of love in matters of this kind that are evident in the assembly. The 13th chapter of 1 Corinthians follows the 12th where governments are mentioned, and shews how love would come in to help.
J.T. Quite so. The chapters are consecutive as they are in Matthew too.
Ques. Does the word "listen" imply repentance?
J.T. it does. It is not simply that he hears but he is attentive to what is said and assenting to it too.
G.H.P. Does the opening part of verse 17 contemplate that a person might be gained at the care meeting stage and the case may not have to go to the assembly meeting at all? If so, has it particular relation to @Matthew 18, or does it apply generally. I was thinking of a grievous public sin.
J.T. Well, that would have to be taken into account, because sin is graded. We have to take account of the grades, and a case such as you indicate now has to be regarded as more serious. What we were considering had become bad because of his refusal to listen. What you contemplate is something which has happened outside.
Ques. Does it mean in the setting here that the
{53}
offender is only to be seen once, or is there to be a continued effort to gain him before finally going to the assembly?
J.T. I am sure patience would enter into that. Another thing which should be noted is the procedure in @Leviticus 14 as to leprosy. How much patience is shewn by the priest in visiting the person who has got the disease! It is remarkable the amount of holy scripture that is allotted to this matter of leprosy, two chapters (13th and 14th) being devoted to it, and that is what is suggested now, that there ought to be plenty of patience.
S.G. In relation to the priest shutting the man up, without bringing it to the care meeting, is there any way in which he could bring in a modified measure of restriction in view of saving the brother before it goes to the accustomed place, viz. the assembly meeting?
J.T. Well, of course, the law of leprosy implies that the person is restricted while leprosy is at work. But then another thing that arises is that it is never suggested that there is no priest. That perhaps is the difficulty -- the absence of priestly state. These two chapters in Leviticus do not suggest there is no priest -- there is always a priest.
S.G. Would that priest be present at the care meeting?
J.T. Definitely; he should be present, and the offender too.
S.G. Could there be any restriction by the care meeting?
J.T. The care meeting has no authority to impose anything.
S.G. Supposing the care meeting put a ban of silence upon a brother, what would you say?
J.T. I would say that it was not right.
Ques. Will you help us as to Leviticus in regard
{54}
to this matter because that is a scripture that has been in mind, that the person there who has been in trouble is restricted.
J.T. Well, that is so, if there is evidence of guilt, evidence of leprosy, but then there is not always such evidence.
Ques. Would not the evidence be seen in a wilful spirit?
J.T. Well, quite so. But what are you going to do with him? The will might be just for a moment and pass away. I think the procedure here in @Matthew 18 is the thing to go by, that we have to wait for the assembly to act authoritatively.
Rem. In regard to Leviticus, if the procedure already mentioned had been carried out and there had been deliberation, over a long period, resulting in the brothers in care deciding that the matter should go to an assembly meeting, would you regard it as very unusual that the person who had so much time and opportunity to repent should only repent in the short space of time between the care meeting and the calling of the assembly meeting. Would not that enter into the history of which you have spoken? It would seem to be unusual for such a drastic change to take place, although we should have to allow for the possibility.
J.T. We would have to allow that it is possible. So that when Peter says "Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me and I forgive him? until seven times? Jesus says to him, I say not to thee until seven times, but until seventy times seven". I am referring to this to show the principle of forgiveness. This word of the Lord's has to be kept in mind and we have all to look into our hearts and see where we are. This whole paragraph refers to the matter of forgiveness. Why should there be prolonged conditions of restriction on brethren? Why should not
{55}
grace bring about something? We may put people into prison and keep them there, and it may be because of that they are not getting on in their souls.
S.G. I would like further help as to the difference between the priest shutting up the man and the inability of the care meeting to restrict. I would like to see the difference.
J.T. I would say there is some relation between the care meeting and the priest. Leviticus is, of course the priestly book and therefore it is a question of the priests, not the care meeting. If the leaders in the care meeting are priestly you will reach some end, but if there is some wrong principle governing them, or feeling, we reach nothing.
Ques. Is the priest spirituality?
J.T. Yes, and intelligence.
H.B. Would the priest shutting up correspond with the moral and spiritual advice to the brother that would restrain him from activity rather than an authoritative action?
J.T. Quite so. Therefore the priest is the leading thought in all this. We are dependent on the understanding of priesthood in order to meet it. We often refer to @Galatians 6: 1. "Ye who are spiritual restore such a one". You may say that is the care meeting, but it is not the care meeting. Everyone in the care meeting may not be spiritual. Therefore we are driven to the idea of spirituality, and those in the lead ought to be spiritual and to influence all the others so that the priestly idea is dominant in the care meeting.
Ques. Would not the one that we call an offender be called upon to listen to that?
J.T. Quite so. But that is not the assembly, which has its own place. You cannot restrict a man because you are in the care meeting. The care meeting does not do that. It is a question of the
{56}
priest, and hence when you come to actual disciplinary action you must have the assembly.
S.G. Would the priestly action come in on individual lines like Paul to Peter in the occasion when he was remiss?
J.T. Yes, it would. The care meeting has a great place, but it is always tentative and looks towards the assembly for any action.
W.R.M. Can one who is in fellowship be deprived of any one of the privileges of the fellowship?
J.T. The question is what the word fellowship means. If the word means what it normally means, he should not be deprived. He belongs to it. He has entered by the gates into the city. Entering in by the gates means you have a right to partake of the tree of life.
Rem. I was wondering whether sometimes we get into a difficulty by avoiding a ban officially by the assembly but doing the thing tacitly by inference. Would you agree with that?
J.T. Quite so. If the brother is free from what you might call blame, or even what we get in 2 Thessalonians where you have the idea of restraint perhaps in the brethren, he is in fellowship. "Admonish him as a brother" the apostle says. Well, if he is to be treated as a brother the privileges of the assembly belong to him.
S.B. It might be thought that what you have said about the authority of the assembly in this final stage would somewhat encourage the offender, but does it not put him in a more serious position in regard to the assembly?
J.T. It certainly does. The assembly is intended to be custodian of all that God has down here and that is what we are dealing with, and @Matthew 18 augments and clarifies it from our side. Peter is mentioned as having the keys of the kingdom and
{57}
that is for the protection of the assembly, "On this rock I will build my assembly and hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it".
S.B. Would that be why there is no mention of forgiveness being exercised?
J.T. Well, it is, and the function of the assembly, the authority and power of the assembly appears, taking care of what is of God and including persons breaking bread. So the assembly can go on. The brother's position is clarified.
R.McG. If the thought of the brother being recovered is taken account of fully, has his past history to be kept in mind? I was thinking of what has been said as to history, that we have to take account of it if a brother offends, and even if it has got to come before the assembly, but if he has been restored would you have to bring up his past history after that?
J.T. No, why should you? He is restored.
Rem. So old scores are not to be paid off. Justice is mentioned so many times in relation to Solomon. It is the idea of a wise and understanding heart and largeness of heart -- a word to all who have to exercise government in any measure.
J.T. First it is the kingdom and then it is the house itself. We should look at the saints, not simply as the kingdom, but as the house. How beautifully Solomon went up to the house of the Lord -- the manner of his going up! That is what is in mind in Matthew. The kingdom is available for that purpose. So that there should be such a beautiful scene as in @1 Kings 10 where the queen of Sheba came up. That is the idea of the testimony.
Ques. Can the assembly meeting take a lesser action than withdrawal, can it impose restrictions without withdrawing from a person? I was thinking of the question that was asked about a care meeting
{58}
imposing a ban of silence which you would disallow, but could the assembly meeting do that?
J.T. Well, I don't know. I recognise restriction, but the assembly can do that -- not the care meeting.
Jno.G. I would like to ask, if it is not diverting, would we be justified in showing any measure of reserve towards a person who has given concern before the assembly takes authoritative action?
J.T. I would say yes. Certain things are required and the brother should commit himself to them. It is not desired to excommunicate or put the brother or sister away, yet the circumstances in his history are such that there should be restraint -- he should feel he is under restraint -- but the assembly has its place in the matter -- it is the assembly that is doing it.
Jno.G. I was thinking of one, say, who has given concern to the saints. Ought we to maintain our relations just as with any other saint until the assembly takes authoritative action, say withdrawal?
J.T. Well, that would be a question of the priest, and of course I do not know how it would work out in your case. You are the person involved -- how would it work out?
Jno.G. I am not sure it you have got what is in mind. If one is giving concern and is before the saints in care capacity, should we maintain our relations towards him or her as with any other of the saints who are going on well until the assembly takes action of withdrawal?
J.T. I would think so. The priestly element would help us and that element should be in the assembly. If it is not there you cannot talk about the assembly, but if it be there the brethren concerned would understand, and yet nothing is done authoritatively, for the priestly side is a question of the Spirit of God operating in our souls.
Rem. Withdrawal is emphasised in @2 Thessalonians 3: 6
{59}
"Now we enjoin you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw from every brother walking disorderly and not according to the instruction which he received from us".
J.T. Well, there might be that. I would say that the passage in @2 Thessalonians 3: 6, would bear on this point. There is a distinction between that and 1 Corinthians chapter 5 where you have actual withdrawal; that is, it is putting away or removal.
Jno.G. That is in relation to an individual. Could we extend the principle to a company?
J.T. Well, I don't know. You mean, I suppose, something has gone wrong in a local meeting and it has become leavened?
Jno.G. I mean, if a locality is not going on well, perhaps it is considered that there is unjudged evil there, would the saints in surrounding gatherings maintain a measure of outward reserve until that would be judged?
J.T. Well, I am not so sure about that. There has been history amongst the brethren which has afforded much help as to matters of that kind, such as the Ryde trouble. The assembly there was held by certain meetings to be leprous. Brethren were for a time uncertain about the condition at Ryde, but at any rate it was still acknowledged to be an assembly. It was made clear at the time that so long as an assembly is acknowledged as in fellowship, it has all the privileges of the assembly and any brother is free to go there. It took quite a long time for all this to emerge but the position was as stated. It applies to what you are raising now and we have to be clear that if an assembly is recognised as in fellowship there can be no restriction on anyone visiting it. We have to wait for some authoritative person or persons or assembly to pronounce as before God a judgement on the situation.
{60}
Ques. In that connection I would like to ask a question. If there is a gathering in which there is a measure of difficulty which is known, is it within the jurisdiction of a neighbouring meeting to request others to keep away from that meeting?
J.T. I think not. The matter is serious. It is a matter for heaven, and heaven acts through the priest here.
Rem. So that a priestly person with the good of the saints heart, and a little food supply, should not be restricted from going to the place to help.
J.T. Certainly not. How are they going to get help? History helps us and we have the case of Glanton to guide us as to this matter. Such things are part of our experience and should help us in other things like them.
Jno.G. Supposing that help has been tried for a long time and there is still no improvement of conditions, what then?
J.T. Well, I would say the surrounding gatherings are in question if they cannot help. We had it at Newcastle, and the Lord came in and set the thing right. There was will at work, not only in the assembly concerned but also in the assemblies around. A whole district may be affected. One could cite many other similar cases.
Rem. If a meeting has assembly status you would avoid any activity or suggestion that would weaken that as long as it continued.
J.T. Quite so. There is no suggestion in Paul's letters that the meetings in Galatia should be abandoned or that brethren should keep away from them. Likewise there is no suggestion that the gatherings around should avoid Corinth.
Jno.G. What constitutes assembly status in that setting?
J.T. Well, so long as the Spirit of God is there and
{61}
there is no evidence that He has been set aside. If the Spirit of God is quenched then I would say that that company is undeserving of recognition as an assembly. But Paul did not say that of Corinth or of the Galatian assemblies.
Ques. If in a small meeting a case of judgement arises and they have no gifts of government in that meeting, what will they do?
J.T. Well, I don't know. You would have to show that it was so. You are speaking now abstractly.
Rem. I am thinking of some of the smaller gatherings and a difficult case arising and no actual gift of government in that locality.
J.T. Well, what about the second part of @Matthew 18, which contemplates only two or three. It does not contemplate the gift of government -- it contemplates brethren who gather unto the name of the Lord. "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". And the previous verse says that "if two of you", (meaning two of the assembly) "shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens". Therefore what you enquire about is implied in these two verses. There is no question of gift. It is "two of you" or "two or three". It is simply the persons -- the personnel of the assembly, and they agree in prayer about a thing and they meet together, two or three of them, and the Lord says "I am with you". In the latter verse the Lord says He is with them, and in the former God answers their prayer. If you have two or three who are characteristically of the assembly, or two who pray -- the same remark applies, why cannot the matter be settled?
S.B. What if the two do not agree?
{62}
J.T. They do here. If even two out of twenty or out of a hundred agree, the Father will act.
S.B. If they are three and three, what then?
J.T. The three, if they are right, will get support from God. Heaven recognises such persons, however few. The persons have to be taken care of, and heaven knows the persons. The Merarites in their levitical service were to take care of the persons. If there are three wrong and three right, the three right will be heard in heaven.
S.G. If the three and three continue in deadlock for a long time until eventually there is an appeal to a nearby meeting, and the nearby meeting acts in a certain measure towards it, how should we be regulated as surrounding the locality?
J.T. The nearby meeting may not be right.
Ques. "Unto my name" would be important. Would not that diminish any petty feeling, and completely eliminate personal prejudice?
J.T. Quite so. It says "Two of you", and again "Unto my name". Heaven recognises what is there.
S.G. If the nearby meeting has all the facts and others have not, are the latter not at a disadvantage?
J.T. Why have the others not the facts? If they are there nearby and acting in a neighbourly way in accordance with @Deuteronomy 21, why have they not the facts? They are there to be had, surely.
Rem. You cannot get the facts if you stay away from the place.
J.T. Quite so. If any nearby brethren want to help, let them go where the thing has happened.
Rem. They should bring in help where the trouble is.
J.T. Quite so. According to @Matthew 18, the thing ought to be brought before the assembly. If the assembly exists characteristically the thing ought to be brought to them.
{63}
Ques. Does that entail that there should be two or three witnesses?
J.T. Well, there was only one in the days of Abigail; one of Nabal's young men brought the testimony to Abigail about what happened, and that brought the matter to a settlement. Lay it before the assembly. We are not told how many are to do it. The word is, "tell it to the assembly". The brother who was offended in @Matthew 18 was to tell it to the assembly. No matter how many there are who are not of the same mind, he is doing what is right.
F.B. What you brought before us recently was that the basic thought in the assembly is love -- I suppose it is the lack of love that causes trouble?
J.T. Love never fails. I am certain that love, if it existed, would never allow an issue to be carried over years or months. It never fails. This verse contemplates two conditions that heaven recognises. First, two saints agreed, and second, praying to God. Heaven recognises them -- the Father does and answers it for them -- not for the assembly -- for *them*.
Ques. Would we be quick to act if we were conscious of the fact that if one member suffers the others suffer with it.
J.T. Quite so, and that is the skill with which Paul wrote his letters to Corinth. The 13th chapter is the great chapter of love. It never fails. The whole chapter is about love.
Rem. I suppose the Corinthians did not know that Paul wrote his first epistle with many tears?
J.T. Quite so.
{64}
A PROPHET'S COMING AS REPRESENTING THE LORD
@1 Corinthians 11: 34 (last clause); @Matthew 16: 1 - 2; @1 Timothy 4: 13 - 16
It will be observed, dear brethren, that the apostle in all these passages speaks of his coming. He is not speaking of the Lord's coming but of his own, which in some sense is like the Lord's coming for he peculiarly represented the Lord both in love and in intelligence. We read of Samuel in his day that he had a circuit. He is a similar servant, though perhaps in a way not so great, and he covered his circuit annually. His coming to a certain place would in a way represent Jehovah. We know from the narrative of his life and ministry that coming to any place he would cause a stir, cause an interest, and so it was that the land in principle was influenced for good and for order and all that was becoming to the kingdom by the annual circuit made by the prophet Samuel. God had given him a great place amongst the people so that it says "… Jehovah was with him, and let none of his words fall to the ground. And all Israel, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, knew that Samuel was established a prophet of Jehovah". (@1 Samuel 3: 19 - 20) A prophet is not simply one who can foretell future events, but one who can bring God into localities and bring His mind to persons. Now the apostle Paul is not formally said to have a circuit, yet he reminds the Corinthians and he tells Timothy of his coming and I have read these verses in this connection. The first scripture bears upon the order of the Lord's Supper, the apostle having said much as to it in this chapter which ends up with the word "And the rest will I set in order when I come". Thus they were to understand that Paul would come not as an ordinary brother, an ordinary visitor or as an ordinary servant, but as an
{65}
apostle. Indeed he sends word beforehand as to how he should come, saying "What will ye? That I come to you with a rod; or in love, and in a spirit of meekness?" I need not say that I believe he would come in love, even with a rod. So evidently he had in mind that they needed to be told concerning other things as well as the Lord's Supper, such as headship -- Christ the head of every man, but woman's head is the man, and the Christ's head God. But I am thinking now particularly of the Lord's Supper, not indeed that much is not needed in regard to headship, for there is very much needed as to that point. That is that the idea of headship descends from God to Christ, and from Christ to man and from the man to the woman. There certainly is much to be said -- and much has been said -- about that and there never seems to be any end to it. That is not for any credit to us that we are so long in taking in this great truth of headship.
Now I speak of the Lord's Supper. I can only devote a certain time to each scripture -- to each subject. The next is the collection in chapter 16. The apostle, you will observe, speaks of that saying that there should be no collections when he came. Then in Timothy what is in mind in regard to the portion read is the servants -- a matter of which we have spoken much recently. That is to say, it is a question of instruction to servants, whatever the character of the service might be. It is persons who have gift, the passage speaking of such and there are those still.
Now referring to the Lord's Supper we spoke of it last evening in this city as bearing upon quick learning -- the importance of learning divine things quickly. Not simply to get over them quickly but to learn them properly. Not to be as those who are always learning and never able to come to the
{66}
knowledge of the truth. The Christian way of learning is set out in Nathanael who represents one who is exercised -- a good word to use as to divine things. There is no need that we should continue in uncertainty but as we said about Paul, he is told not to tarry but to arise and wash away his sins. One is damaged by sin attaching to him. He may be forgiven in the ordinary sense, for forgiveness is preached and is not something to which we attain, but then to wash away our sins is an action of our own and we ought not to delay doing so and thus deprive ourselves of Christian fellowship and all its privileges. So the word is "And now why lingerest thou? Arise and get baptised, and have thy sins washed away, calling on his name", @Acts 22: 16. That was the word to Paul then and it is the word to us now, and there is no soul progress until it is done. The Lord has done things for us that we cannot do but then He leaves certain things for us to do and it is a moral necessity attaching to us, and especially if we are affected by sin in any sense, whether it be in our commercial relations, or in a social way or in a religious sense, we may be tainted, by sins in some form and it is our duty to see that they are washed away. I cannot provide the answer to every question that may be in the minds of brethren but if a word be given out it is for us to learn from it and, if we are hindered by sin which so easily besets us, that has to be washed away and we are to call upon His name. We can only hope to effect this by calling upon the Lord's name. He helps us.
I have referred to the necessity of the Lord's Supper, and before taking that up we must be cleansed -- it is the washing of water by the word which involves cleansing. Then following upon baptism we have the Lord's Supper. So Ananias told Saul to arise and have his sins washed away. Why should we delay on
{67}
such a point and deprive ourselves thus of the great privilege of the Lord's Supper? Baptism goes before that. So having our souls cleansed and as it says our bodies washed with pure water, that is the water of the word -- the word of God in its moral bearing washes away from us ourselves and our circumstances and our sins. We do so calling on His name. The truth of baptism is developed in Romans and we have it elsewhere too. Peter refers to it telling us that baptism saves. I am quoting Peter now, not Paul, where he says "… into which few, that is, eight souls, were saved through water: which figure also now saves you, even baptism …" @1 Peter 3: 20. It is one thing to be saved by fire but we are also said to be saved by water, and that is a question of the moral bearing of the death of Christ upon everything we do. What follows upon that is the Lord's Supper. Why should I deprive myself of the Lord's Supper and the holy fellowship of God's Son, the fellowship of the Spirit too and the fellowship of Christ's death? Why should I deprive myself of these great matters? It is obvious that we should not, and I believe that Paul has such things in mind when he says, "The rest will I set in order when I come".
Now you will understand by what I have said as to similar persons how a man like Paul, an apostle, would affect the saints as he came to a place. He had been to Corinth and had remained there for eighteen months, and yet after he left he had to write as he does. Things had arisen in his absence that had not come to light when he was there, for if they had he would have restrained and restricted them. So he writes this first epistle and the second half of this 11th chapter refers to the Lord's Supper. If there are those within the sound of my voice who are partaking of the Supper, one would urge you to look into the matter and see if there are not some things to do in
{68}
your case. You may say, But there is no one here like Paul or like Samuel. Well, there are gifted men here, and the gifts have come down from above the heavens as it says "… who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things; and he has given some apostles, and some prophets and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers …" (@Ephesians 4: 11). There are such -- not apostles, of course -- but I cannot say that there are no prophets. You may say, I have never met a prophet. Perhaps not, but in the sense in which I am speaking you may have, and if you have and have not been moved, then the Lord will have to say to you. You will understand I am not speaking of prophets as foretelling things, but speaking of those who represent the Lord, which Paul did more than most; persons who represent the principle of care and authority and who on the Lord's behalf come into your circumstances and into mine with the intention to move us as to our condition and conduct and associations. The question is, am I going to move? The apostle meant that there would be things that would have to be done when he came, and that is why I read this passage. For the principle is that we should be an influence for good amongst the brethren and as helped by the Spirit of God to affect them Godward and Christward and saintward so that things may be right. That was a great matter with the apostle -- the setting of things right; not only converting people and the forming of assemblies but the setting of assemblies right. They were to be affected if anything of this kind comes in and things are not settled. I could continue speaking about the Lord's Supper which is dealt with in this chapter from verse 23. I would ask are there any here who are not partaking of it; if so, why are you not? The apostle is saying certain things here, really it is the Lord's word as he says elsewhere, "If anyone thinks
{69}
himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", (@1 Corinthians 14: 37). That is what this epistle to the Corinthians is, and therefore as reading it an obligation is put upon each of us to move in relation to the truth ministered, and if there is anything to correct or adjust in my body, in my personal condition, or in my family or my business or in the assembly, if there is anything to correct it is time to move. No matter how simple a word may be we should hear it and accept the obligation to judge ourselves. Some of us will have the privilege of partaking of the Lord's Supper tomorrow, and what a privilege it is! How much it is to Christ for His saints to come together in assembly to partake of the Supper! The Corinthians, as we know, did not do so properly and hence the apostle writes to them as he does, saying here "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep", (@1 Corinthians 11: 30). It was because of their conduct at the Lord's Supper that many were weak and infirm. Then he says to them, if there by anything wrong for them to judge it. We are not to wait for a month or a year, but we should judge the thing at once. So we ought to judge ourselves at once and not wait to be put out of fellowship, but as it says here "But let a man prove himself, and thus eat of the bread, and drink of the cup". So the thing is to get the matter settled. God has set up a wonderful system of things with Christ above and the Holy Spirit here, and there is infinite power in Divine Persons to settle matters, and so we should continue to eat the Lord's Supper.
Now the next thing is the collection, which likewise involves love. Corinth was a long way off from Judea and the saints at Corinth were about to make a collection for these saints who were afar off, and that
{70}
is love. They had never met them. It is no philanthropic matter, it is a love matter and it is to be expressed now not in the Lord's Supper but in the giving of the saints. There is not much need now, thank God, for wages are high; but big wages may become a curse, money may become a curse. Love's challenge here is the giving of the saints -- the collection -- and the brethren act together. We have instructions in the scriptures for giving individually. Persons who are well off are to give according to the teaching of @Acts 11. So as in that position we can give as much as we like and as we can. It is not assembly giving but persons who are well off. There are not now many such but nevertheless this is a word for them. If there are those who are well off the idea is to use the excess for the relief of the saints. Heaven will make much of it, and it will render a return more than any bank will give. So in @Acts 11 these well known servants, Barnabas and Saul, are selected to carry this money to the saints. It is a beautiful touch which God gives for His ancient people, stirring up the hearts of these converts among the Gentiles to think of them in this practical way. The apostles Peter, James and John, it will be recalled, were concerned that Paul should not forget the poor Jews. God has them in His heart yet, whatever men may do to them, and they have done some terrible things during recent years. But they are in God's hand and the word is "So all Israel shall be saved", (@Romans 11: 26). It is the Israel of God and they must be saved. The word would apply to persons not yet converted, perhaps, and yet God thinks of them and has them in His heart. So the collection here in Acts was for the poor saints in Jerusalem, they are not Jews exactly. The Lord's word to Judas was "ye have the poor always with you", (@John 12: 8). Judas thought of them then when
{71}
the Lord was enjoying a love feast with His own. He brought them in at the wrong time. Judas is never right -- a man like that is always wrong. So Paul says as to remembering the poor, "which same thing also I was diligent to do", (@Galatians 2: 10). I mention all this now because I believe it represents this great feature of love in our hearts for persons whom we have not seen. It is a question of giving to the saints on the earth, the excellent, of whom the Lord says, "In them is all my delight". (@Psalm 16: 3). Now the word here is concerning the collection for the saints. The apostle says "as I directed the assemblies of Galatia, so do ye do also. On the first of the week let each of you put by at home, laying up in whatever degree he may have prospered, that there may be no collections when I come", (@1 Corinthians 16: 1 - 2). I am reading from the New Translation which many of us here have in our possession. It is the best translation of the Bible in the English language. One feels protected by it because of the inaccuracies of the Authorised Version, not that I would belittle that version, but the New Translation is the best. In regard to these verses just quoted from the 16th chapter of 1 Corinthians, there is not much to be added now, for there is not much time, except to say that we are in our minds moved back from the truth of the Lord's Supper which is in an assembly setting, to the home. The word 'home' is used by the apostle here in connection with the collection. He regards the saints as in their families. Heaven has great regard for the saints as in their families -- the fathers and mothers, sons and daughters and brothers and sisters. Heaven has great delight in the children in that they are brought up in relation to the testimony, like the house of Stephanas referred to later in the chapter, who devoted themselves to the saints for service. That gives the household a wonderful place and every
{72}
child is in mind, and each ought to be able to do something for the saints. The very name saint becomes a known name in the vocabulary of the child in the Christian household. So the apostle says here "laying up in whatever degree he may have prospered". The word "concerning" (@chapter 16: 1) refers to a letter they had written to the apostle or to a matter which would be understood among the brethren. So he says "Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I directed the assemblies of Galatia, so do ye do also". We learn from this as from the earlier reference of the apostle in @chapter 7: 17 -- "and thus I ordain in all the assemblies" -- that whatever the principles, or practices or customs amongst the brethren, they are to be all alike. The idea of a congregation is foreign to Christianity. Individual assemblies, each independent of the other is not according to God. The assembly of God is one and it can be viewed either in a local or universal way. I am speaking of the universal thought now as the apostle says "Thus I ordain in all the assemblies", and so in @1 Corinthians 16 the home is referred to. The Christian home should be adorned and sanctified -- that is a great matter. The houses of the brethren should be sanctified and all in them should be brought into things. The children of Christian parents, according to @chapter 7 of this epistle are already sanctified as born. So you see how tender the thing is and how the young should be handled with care -- like as with the Lord Jesus when He took the infants into His arms and blessed them. So the word in @verse 2 is "On the first of the week let each of you put by at home, laying up in whatever degree ha may have prospered, that there may be no collections when I come". You may say that may seem a very insignificant thing, but it is very important from the stand point of the truth of which I am speaking. The
{73}
apostle had a great place and great influence in the assembly; his name was revered amongst them and hence the effect his coming would have upon them. He refers to it also in the second epistle and there we see his coming would be dreaded too, at least by some. He said there that if he should come again he would not spare (@2 Corinthians 13: 2) and he spoke too earlier of coming with a rod, so in a sense they might well dread his coming. And if we are going on with something not right something like this will come in.
So here it is a question of the collection and of ministering to those who are gifted and who help in relation to the truth. These are important things and so the apostle says here, I did not influence you at all as to giving money -- but I am doing it in a letter. He reminds them of the authority he had and there are several instances where attention is called to the authority Paul had, and which he exercised to discipline them. He brings in the rod to reach them if necessary. So Paul says here, In approaching you in this matter of giving I leave it to yourselves. It is a question of bringing out what a brother has in himself. It is a question of love for God bringing out what love is. In the 13th chapter of this epistle how much is said about love, and that is the point I am dealing with now. It is the point too in the Lord's Supper. What love enters into that occasion! And here love enters into the giving -- whether I am giving little or giving much it is a question of love. We read that the Lord *sat* over against the treasury; that shews that His attitude was one of deliberation; He was noting how they gave. There was one who gave little, but the Lord says that she gave all. I could go to chapters 8 and 9 of the second letter to the Corinthians which deal further with this matter of giving but I trust you will all go through those two chapters which
{74}
enlarge on this matter. We see in all this the stress that Paul lays on this matter of giving but he says here, I am not going to urge giving when I am there; I do not want any collections when I come. It is a great matter for servants to be skilful, that is not only what we say but why we say the things. It is a question of saying the right thing at the right time, and this is what Paul says now. I am not going to influence you in this matter but I leave it with you. This is Christianity, that each Christian is shining like Christ, as it says in @Philippians 1: 19 "the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ". The apostle here in the second letter to the Corinthians refers to the assemblies of Macedonia and to the extent of their giving, and he desired that the Corinthians might do better. His presence amongst them would bring that out. The Corinthians were his own converts and he says to them, I have you in my heart continually. Wherever he went he would speak well of them, and in writing to them he says "Ye are our letter" -- @2 Corinthians 3: 2 -- and yet in truth they were very naughty, at least some of them were. But the apostle knew how to clothe them according to his love for them, but he never overlooked their naughtiness, for he says later to them "And having in readiness to avenge all disobedience when your obedience shall have been fulfilled". @2 Corinthians 10: 6. That would include the matter of the collection, of the giving of the saints, which the apostle writes about and to which he would look for a response.
I will now say a little as to the verse read in Timothy: "Till I come, give thyself to reading, to exhortation, to teaching. Be not negligent of the gift that is in thee, which has been given to thee through prophecy, with imposition of the hands of the elderhood. Occupy thyself with these things; be wholly in them, that thy progress may be manifest to all. Give
{75}
heed to thyself and to the teaching; continue in them; for, doing this, thou shalt save both thyself and those that hear thee". This word is to Timothy. Paul had said of him "For I have no one like-minded who will care with genuine feeling how ye get on", @Philippians 2: 20. Timothy had a care and feeling for the saints on that line, but Paul wanted him to be helped and wrote this epistle to him. So he says here, "Till I come, give thyself to reading, to exhortation, to teaching. Be not negligent of the gift that is in thee, which has been given to thee through prophecy, with imposition of the hands of the elderhood. Occupy thyself with these things; be wholly in them, that thy progress may be manifest to all. Give heed to thyself and to the teaching; continue in them; for, doing this, thou shalt save both thyself and those that hear thee". Now this word is to be understood for it is the outcome of a servant's service and ministry. So this whole passage is now to the dear brethren here in the ministry. You will understand what I mean by that phrase. It is a question of the Levites, those who come under the influence of Eleazar who is spoken of as the prince of the princes of the Levites. He would have great influence and it is a question of spiritual expression and influence as we are near the Lord and become like Him. It is a spiritual matter I am speaking about. One has remarked both in this country and in America, in all parts where brethren are found, there is a remarkable movement in the number of young and middle-aged men coming into service. Those who are older are thankful that the work is thus going on. One generation passeth away and another generation cometh, and this particular verse in Timothy is a word for the coming generation, as having ability to carry on the work. This is what the apostle had in mind when he says, "Till I come give thyself to reading ..." It may be public reading
{76}
or in private, but it is reading. That is the point to have before us. What do we read? Read the scriptures above all else. Paul speaks of books -- of his own, books he intended to read. There are books which are profitable for ministry and as well they are for the help of the saints. We can thank God for the books that the Lord has left for us to read -- there are many such and then there are the books that are still being issued for the saints and these too are from the Lord. They are books of ministry, for that is the proper word for them. So Timothy is told to give attention to reading -- a wholesome word. It suggests to me that the brethren need to read. We have the Bible and we should read it above all others. Paul says as to Timothy, "From a child thou hast known the sacred letters ..."@2 Timothy 3: 15. The children should make themselves familiar with the scriptures and then when they come to the meetings -- meetings such as these -- we know what is being talked about. I am urging the young to give attention to reading.
The next word is exhortation -- it would, of course, have peculiar force in the case of a man like Timothy, but we should all learn to be in exercise in relation to the meeting for ministry, learning to give a word of exhortation on such occasions. God has been pleased to revive meetings of this character where prophecy is ministered. No one need say that it is not so, for I know it is and have heard ministry on such occasions which brought God to our souls in spiritual power. In connection with meetings of this kind we are told in @1 Corinthians 14 that some unbeliever or simple person coming into a Christian assembly and hearing prophetic ministry, falls down and does homage to God in the presence of it. "He is judged of all"; it says, "the secrets of his heart are manifested". He is searched through and through like the woman of Samaria, who says as to the Lord "Who told me all things I had ever
{77}
done". So the man in Corinthians reports that God is indeed amongst us. By meetings of this character we are adjusted -- for that is the thought in the word of exhortation.
Then we have teaching. There are things which follow the meeting for ministry in which the Spirit of God is free to bring forward spiritual ministry -- ministry that will be authoritatively supported by the Spirit of God and the scriptures. There is to be nothing less.
Further it adds "Be not negligent of the gift that is in thee, which has been given to thee through prophecy, with imposition of the hands of the elderhood". Whatever you may have got in the form of gift, see that you do not neglect it. The thing is to use it and you will get increase. It is remarkable that a man like Timothy has to be exhorted not to neglect the gift that he had. So that even distinguished servants may have some defects but it is not for me to enlarge on that now. So Paul says to Timothy, "Be not negligent of the gift that is in thee, which has been given to thee through prophecy, with imposition of the hands of the elderhood". It is the hands of the elder brethren. Apostolic hands had been laid on Timothy too, but it is not that here. He refers here to the elderhood -- these are elder brethren whom at that time heaven recognised and they imparted gift to Timothy by the laying on of hands. Such is Christianity as it was and we are bringing those thoughts down to what we are now.
Then he says, "Occupy thyself with these things; be wholly in them, that thy progress may be manifest to all". Let this be a word to all of us here who are ministering. That we are really gifted men provided of God for the needs of His people at the present time. "Give heed to thyself and to the teaching". He is to watch himself. He is to be looked after himself. A
{78}
very important word. How much we can do as to ourselves. We are to see to it in this matter that we do not neglect to fast. I have to take heed to myself -- to watch that things that do not help me are not allowed a place but are refused and avoided. "Give heed to thyself and to the teaching; continue in them; for, doing this, thou shalt save both thyself and those that hear thee". You can see how spiritual things spread out -- how they become enlarged as we let them have a place with us for there is no end to divine things. Let us not forget that there is much for each of us in these things.
May God bless the word.
{79}
ADMINISTRATION AS CONNECTED WITH THE LORD'S SUPPER
@Luke 22: 14: @John 20: 14 - 18
J.T. The verse which has been read in Luke was in mind as calling attention to administration in connection with the Lord's Supper, and then we shall see in @John 20 how the feminine side is opened up as the Lord is known as risen, with a view to the assembly femininely, referring particularly to @Revelation 21 where she is seen coming down as a bride adorned for her husband. She comes out of heaven. The incident read in Luke is found also in Matthew and Mark. @Matthew 26: 20 says "When the evening was come he lay down at table with the twelve"; @Mark 14: 17 mentions that "He comes with the twelve". Then @Luke 22: 14 "When the hour was come, he placed himself at table, and the twelve apostles with him". The three synoptic gospels referring thus to the twelve has a voice as to administration, seen particularly in Matthew and Mark, and then Luke adding the thought of authority in the administration, the apostles being mentioned. These passages would show that administration enters into the Lord's Supper, not particularly, however, at the time of the celebration of it, although it must be there too, but as entering into the general constitution of the assembly. Peter being appointed by our Lord as having the keys of the kingdom, and the allusions to what heaven endorses in apostolic service refer to it. @John 20 speaks of the Lord breathing into the disciples and saying to them "Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained". Heaven is brought in in Matthew. "Whatsoever ye shall bind on the earth shall be bound in heaven". Hence the idea being linked up with heaven suggests
{80}
the continuance of the assembly in character to the end, for heaven has not changed its mind because of any failure. Especially is this so in Matthew where this is seen in the answer to any two who pray as united, any two of the assembly -- things are done for them, as it says, "It shall be done for them". Although we have the sisters in all the gospels at the resurrection, the feminine side is seen in John's gospel particularly. The Lord had said in Matthew that they would see Him in Galilee. He sent a message of that kind to them. But in John it is a teaching message although the gift of teaching is not implied, but the teaching is there, involving the family. The feminine side of things would enter into the message, and involves that it is carried down and comes out in the heavenly city.
P.H.H. When you speak of administration in regard of the earlier scriptures, have you in mind that certain things are handed down to us right to the end and with authority?
J.T. Yes, I think that is important to keep in mind because the Lord sees to that, and then as a feminine element he would maintain that, and the epistles, especially Paul's epistles, as well as the Acts, show that the feminine element was carried down. It began at the resurrection and is formally linked up, according to the passage read, with Christ risen. So in @Acts 1 where we have the apostles -- that is all that remained in the upper room -- we have Mary there, "several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus". And throughout we have the feminine side, as if it were not simply in a general way meeting conditions as they arose, but the primary thought of God as to the assembly. He had in mind that it should come out in a feminine way as we learn in @Revelation 21 verses  1 and 2 -- "And I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth had passed
{81}
away, and the sea exists no more. And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband". This is not simply a millennial scene; it is an eternal scene, answering to the primary mind and counsels of God, that the feminine idea should be linked up in a great system in the heavens which should abide.
Ques. Would the administrative side be seen in the next reference to the city in @Revelation 21: 9. "Come here, I will show thee the bride, the Lamb's wife". Is that an administrative idea?
J.T. I think so, although connected with the millennial scene, which is important too, because the types support it. Rebecca was brought into Sarah's tent and she appears as a type of the heavenly city. She had a part in Sarah's tent, and would be thus formed in relation to God's purposes as to Israel. The millennium, of course, is marked by that. The number twelve appears in connection with the gates of the city, as we have in the 12th verse "having a great and high wall; having twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names inscribed, which are those of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel". That would be the city viewed in its millennial relations. But the first reference to the city in @Revelation 21 would correspond with the history of God's counsels and would be found in measure in the book of Proverbs, which shows that it is a question of men. Wisdom's delights are with the sons of men. In the historical order of God's counsels, (the word 'historical' calls for the beginning) the twelve tribes of Israel are not there. They come in as an after-thought, so to speak, and evidently not to continue eternally. But there must be something which is to have influence on us now in the interim between the appearing of the twelve tribes in the 29th of Genesis and the appearing
{82}
of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel in the heavenly city as connected with the millennium. There must be something for us now in the stress as to twelve, entering into the historic number, that is, entering into Christianity.
H.B. What part, then, does the feminine side have in the administration of the assembly today, and how does it work out?
J.T. Well, I think in the mind of God it works out in a modified sense. It softens the masculine side. This appears too in the history of the nations. The idea of the feminine in government runs right through many nations. It is seen in Israel "upon thy right hand doth stand the queen in gold of Ophir", and in many instances we find it in the history or government of the world as Israel is set aside. The feminine is carried down as in Esther.
S.G. I was going to ask you about @Psalm 45 which is entitled "A song of the Beloved". "King's daughters are among thine honourable women; upon thy right hand doth stand the queen in gold of Ophir". Does that fit in?
J.T. She is seen there in connection with Christ as the Messiah -- on His right hand doth stand the queen; but later in the psalm the feminine side is seen in "daughters". The psalm supports the idea of the influence of a softening element which God intended should be in government. The thought of dominion was seen in Adam and Eve and that is carried through.
M.A.W. Is it seen in the case of the prophet Nehemiah where he approaches the king, and it says, "The queen also sitting by him", @Nehemiah 2: 6?
J.T. That is an illustration of the matter. The queen was there. She says nothing but it was important in Nehemiah's eyes anyway. It was a critical time for him -- for Israel, as to how matters
{83}
would stand. Things were hanging in the balance, and the balance was turned in favour of Israel, and so it was in the case of Esther.
P.H.H. If I understand you rightly, you say the feminine introduces the suffering side in the interim; it would also appear in @Genesis 1 and @Revelation 21 connected with God's counsels and His eternal purpose. The suffering side having done its work, is that it?
J.T. I think it is important to carry down the feminine side from the outset. The idea of the twelve tribes of Israel is not at the outset, coming in later and finishing earlier than eternity, but the feminine side runs through.
Rem. Do you mean that what is administrative is in fact provisional to meet conditions as they may exist, whereas the feminine side was primarily with God and all administration has in view leaving that clear for the woman to appear as with Christ according to the divine counsels.
J.T. Hence the service of the assembly in the millennial day is clearly modified, although we have an allusion to so many cities yet the assembly is feminine as related to Christ; the bride arose by herself, as we see in the book of Proverbs; she arose in the absence of her husband, but of course the millennial day does not suppose the absence of Christ, but the present day does.
P.H.H. Would the millennial day be on the principle of His fulness as verse 22 of @Ephesians 1, God "gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". Would it be right to connect the assembly there with Christ's fulness?
J.T. I would think so. The allusion is to the woman's place in relation to the man primarily. That is much in view in Ephesians, meaning too that it is an eternal thought.
{84}
J.M. Does administration cease with the millennium?
J.T. Well, I do not know. It is a question as to whether the idea may not continue. Perhaps if we were more accustomed to spiritual things and spiritual conditions we should understand what is said of the Lord -- "Then the Son also himself shall be placed in subjection to him who put all things in subjection to him, that God may be all in all", @1 Corinthians 15: 28. Whether administrative conditions are found there would probably be understood more clearly if we were more spiritual, but I would suggest they are, that they will go through, because the idea of administration existed in the government of the universe before sin came into it.
Ques. Had you that in mind in calling attention to verse 2 of @Revelation chapter 21, the fact that the city is seen in the eternal day?
J.T. Just so. The very term 'city' indicates administration.
Jno.G. What is the value of the modifying feminine element in the administration?
J.T. I think we may say it appears constantly amongst us, and hence the reference in 1 Corinthians, "Let them ask their husbands at home". That conveys that administrative matters are to be understood by the sisters.
A.B. Is the modifying element seen especially in Abigail in restraining David? He could say, "Blessed be thy discernment, and blessed be thou", @1 Samuel 25 verse 33.
J.T. Very good. She is especially a type of the assembly.
Rem. You were thinking of the feminine element as entering constitutionally into the assembly as such, not only as the sisterly element?
J.T. I think of the assembly as representing it;
{85}
and so the Lord's early communications to the disciples after He arose would have in mind that they would enter into the feminine side because the whole assembly is feminine as we see in @Revelation 21 -- "I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea exists no more. And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband". It is a feminine thought.
S.G. Does the grace that dominates administration in this present period emphasise the feminine side?
J.T. I think it would. If there be that modification that is needed, it is a question of whether the brothers take it on. It reduces the hardness which often appears in the brothers, when the wives modify the husbands. They may, of course, at times do the very opposite, but we are speaking now generally of the power of modification in government -- how it softens. The case mentioned in Nehemiah clearly supports it, because the Persian queen appeared in Nehemiah's time -- the queen also is sitting by; she said nothing, but she is there; and so the "queen in gold of Ophir" is there. It is a complete idea. The daughters are subordinate to that, but the queen is the complete thought.
M.A.W. Would you say it is important that the women are mentioned in @Acts 16, especially Lydia, the one who was affected by Paul's word?
J.T. Very good. See what modification was there. The epistle to the Philippians has this thread running through it. The apostle alludes there to "those women" also. We see it too particularly in Lydia by herself as over against the man of Macedonia -- the man and the woman.
S.G. You mean Lydia would balance the jailor?
J.T. She would. He was evidently a hard man
{86}
but he became softened. We cannot say Lydia effected that but the whole position is the point to get at, to see what enters into the position at Philippi: the feminine side in it must surely bear on what we are dealing with now, what is going to come out of heaven.
Rem. Is it remarkable that the exhortation in Philippians has two sisters specially in view, @Philippians 4: 2?
J.T. They were to be of one mind in the Lord. It is very important that the sisters should be of one mind.
H.B. Would what you have been drawing attention to underline what the apostle writes to Timothy as to the overseer being the husband of one wife?
J.T. I think that is good. That may often be questioned -- why should he be the husband of one wife, and why a woman put on the list should be the wife of one husband. Well, it would seem that polygamy as in the East would be inimical to church development, whereas one man and one woman in marital relations as in the Western world is representative of church relations. We see it exemplified in Aquila and Priscilla. Polygamy must have worked against the truth of the Church and so as we have often noticed, we have very little result in the gospel in Asia, especially in Eastern Asia.
Ques. I was going to ask in relation to Prisca and Aquila as mentioned in Romans, Prisca taking precedence, but mentioned as "my fellow-workmen in Christ Jesus, (who for my life staked their own neck; to whom not I only am thankful, but also all the assemblies of the nations) and the assembly at their house". @Romans 16: 3 - 5. Is that the balanced thought you have in mind -- their house?
J.T. Just so. It is one of the most interesting points you get in the scriptures. I think one is mentioned first the same number of times as the other.
{87}
Ques. Would Paul's word in Corinthians help -- @1 Corinthians 11, verse 11? "However, neither is woman without man, nor man without woman, in the Lord. For as the woman is of the man, so also is the man by the woman, but all things of God". -- the masculine and the feminine being balanced. Do you think there is a tendency to stress one or the other at any time, whereas the matter is to be balanced?
J.T. Well, that is what I was thinking at the beginning, and we have got onto that side largely in this reading but we have to move on to the reference in. @John 20, which I believe is what we need to understand most. Man and woman appear in that chapter in such a remarkable way, and a woman of such a history too. It is acknowledged what her history had been, and now she is taken on to carry a message to the apostles, and is already saying that the Lord is "Rabboni", meaning "My Teacher". That was, as it were, her name of Him. It would mean that femininely the assembly is viewed as taught. We see it too in Proverbs in the virtuous woman -- "Who can find a woman of worth? for her price is far above rubies". And then it delineates what a person she was. She is an ideal person, especially administratively. Her husband is known in the gates. The brethren no doubt have noticed the peculiar composition of that last chapter of Proverbs, how the original text in Hebrew is employed in a remarkable way to work out the history like an embroidery. We get in too in the Psalms. Things are worked out in words to delineate this great person, who was so hard to find, but the passage implies she was findable, because she is so perfectly portrayed by the writer.
W.H.T. Is it not remarkable that she is characterised as one who surveyeth the ways of her household and eateth not the bread of idleness, @Proverbs 31:27?
{88}
J.T. Every line in that chapter seems to be pure gold, and undoubtedly it applies to the assembly.
Jno.G. It says "She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and upon her tongue is the law of kindness", @Proverbs 31: 26. That law evidently would modify if it were in evidence.
J.T. Quite so.
P.H.H. Do you think that is why the Lord during recent years has raised the question of marital affections in the assembly, not merely in relation to the general administration which would work out in grace, as you say, but also in regard of such times as the Lord's Supper. Is it that the Lord will not end up His affairs without this expression?
J.T. Well it is part of the truth, especially the truth of the assembly, and we have already, I think, quoted in these readings several times that the Lord says of the Spirit that "he shall guide you into *all* the truth". I believe that is the point, the whole range of truth is to be worked out in the assembly before she goes up. That is the great ministry of the Spirit. The woman in John's second epistle -- "the elect lady" she is called, "and her children, whom I love in truth, and not I only but also all who have known the truth, for the truth's sake which abides in us and shall be with us to eternity", -- this elect lady is noticeable as coming in, in John, who, as we have often remarked, is to go on to the end, as the Lord's own words indicate "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?" In John's ministry the Lord provides for the assembly right to the end, and undoubtedly Mary Magdalene is one of the types used. She is seemly and moves according to circumstances but moves towards the truth -- towards Christ; she first names Him "Rabboni", and then she is given to understand that she is not to touch Him, meaning that the Jewish element is not to be linked up with
{89}
Christ in the heavenly land, "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren ..." She is detached in her mind from the whole system of earth, because that is implied, I believe, in the fact that before He sends the message He says "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father ..." He is now ascended to His Father and the assembly is formed while He is ascended to His Father. Mary Magdalene represents ministry such as the Lord has given to brethren for a long time to form the feminine side, so that the heart of Christ should be ministered to.
I think anyone who follows the gospels can see that John is intended for the last days. In @John 20 the door is shut and everything is perfect in that chapter so far as the Lord's visit to the upper room is concerned, whereas Luke indicates there were imperfections when the Lord came in. In fact, Luke would not say that the Lord came in; he would imply He was always there. "He stood in the midst". Luke does not say He came and stood, whereas John does. John says "When therefore it was evening" (notice the time of the day) "on that day, which was the first day of the week ..." The first day is mentioned again here. It is mentioned more frequently in John than in the other gospels, and there can be no doubt that it is the first day not, simply the day after the sabbath, but the first day, the doors being shut, "Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace be to you". There is no fear or perturbation there. Things are just normal. That is the abstract view which God is entitled to present to us. The abstract view is what goes through, everything else has to go.
W.H.T. If it is not diverting you, I was going to ask should we not be concerned about reading John's epistles more than is done?
J.T. Well, I think you are entitled to say that,
{90}
and in what we have already said about reading -- "Give thyself to reading" -- John's writings are especially in mind. He says that the world itself would not contain the books, meaning that there was much to instruct the minds of the brethren, because books are for that purpose. The Lord's Supper, as a matter of fact, to start with, is not for our hearts but for our minds. It is calling Him to mind. John has in mind that we should read. So to revert again to the elect lady -- she is so honoured by the apostle: "The elder to the elect lady and her children, whom I love in truth, and not *I* only but also all who have known the truth, for the truth's sake which abides in us and shall be with us to eternity". Peter says "She that is elected with you in Babylon salutes you", @1 Peter 5: 13. That is another reference of the apostle Peter which would correspond. Paul's reference to Phoebe is a corresponding thought too. How respectful he is in speaking of her, as if God would lift up sisters when there is dignity there and comeliness and all that God approves as corresponding with the assembly. God would lift that up and make it to shine among the brethren.
G.H.P. Would verses 10 and 11, in regard to one coming and bringing not the doctrine, indicate that this modifying principle as represented by the feminine side is not incompatible with the maintenance of divine principles?
J.T. Quite so. The maintenance of discipline. "If anyone come to you and bring not this doctrine, do not receive him into the house", that is the very opposite to Lydia -- "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there". But this man is refused.
M.A.W. Why does John write as an elder and not as an apostle?
J.T. Well, that would go with his way, I think.
{91}
He was an elderly man, I suppose. Ultimately the brethren began to know he was an elderly man. History tells us he was very old. Paul calls himself old but he was much younger. John, I think, would have advanced actually to a great age and must have become endeared to the brethren for he retained his dignity and power throughout.
S.B. "Little children" and "whom I love" would be linked together.
J.T. Well, just so. John speaks of them in the first epistle too; he calls the disciples (the persons to whom he wrote) "children" two or three times, but he speaks of them as in the sense of full-grown children, and in the first chapter of his gospel he refers to believers having the title to take the place of children of God.
Ques. Is John using the term "elder" in the sense of maturity rather than what is official?
J.T. Quite so, and how the children, young Christians, would be influenced by him! They would become known to him, as an apostle who endeared himself. We read of the millennial day that old men and old women will be sitting in the streets and the children playing, in Jerusalem, as if there was a beautiful link between them. There is no doubt that John uses the word "elder" from that point of view.
P.H.H. The character of the elect lady seems to set John free to give this message to the saints. He changes from a personal address to her to saying "ye" and "you"; would that be more on the line of responsibility with regard to the truth and fellowship?
J.T. Well, it is a remarkable change, and possibly all these references would be over against the wicked woman, Jezebel.
Ques. Is she presented in a way as equal to John. He says "And now I beseech thee, lady, not as writing to thee a new commandment, but that which
{92}
we have had from the beginning, that we should love one another", 2 John verse 5. Is she in that way honoured as he is not writing to her as one who is inferior?
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Would John himself be helpful in this matter? -- the Lord commits His mother to him?
J.T. Quite so. It is a remarkable incident because she was the Lord's mother until that moment; He tells His mother to behold John, and He says to John "Behold thy mother. And from that hour the disciple took her to his own home", which I think fully endorses what we are saying. What a man he was!
E.B. Do we also see this principle of modification in Abraham, in regard to the visitation of Divine Persons? He hastened into the tent to Sarah.
J.T. Yes. She did not come up to Abraham, however, but still was recognised. Her cakes did not appear on the table, but still she is there, and she is there in relation to Christ, in relation to Isaac.
Rem. She arrives ultimately, anyway. She may have missed a little at the time, but she arrives at the place later.
J.T. She is a model for us and rises to a type of the assembly in @Galatians 4: 26 -- "Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother". That refers to the assembly.
P.H.H. May I ask you to revert for a moment to @John 20 and the exalted character of the message that the Lord gives to Mary. Would it be right to say that what she represents in the saints justifies the Lord in giving such an exalted message?
J.T. It may be that is the secret of what we are having. It is not to make any reflection on earlier ministry, but going back twenty-five or thirty years, the Lord has, I believe, taken account of the features
{93}
of the assembly coming out in the brethren. During this period we have had the truth as to the Lord's Supper stressed, also the collection, and the order of the service of God. All that has come out, and I believe God has taken account of it and He is giving us more and will give more. There is no limit to what may be given, although there is the idea of the completion of the word of God, but there is no limit to what the Lord Jesus may say to us as His assembly, if we hold on to assembly qualities, feminine qualities, sisters, of course, literally so, holding on to their places in the family as wives and mothers usable to the Lord, and the husbands modified by them and accepting modifications as Abraham did, for he was modified by his wife. Jehovah says "In all that Sarah hath said to thee hearken to her voice". It is a principle for the husband; and if we proceed on those lines we shall get more, for the Spirit is here for that very purpose, to guide us into all the truth.
S.R. Might the suggestion as to hearkening to sisters be applied in relation to matters of care?
J.T. I would think so, as the brothers take the sisters into their confidence and talk over things. So that the care meeting should be tentative because the care meeting has no authority -- it is a tentative matter throughout and the brothers need sometimes to be reminded of that, and the sisters ought to be able to remind them of that.
S.G. Do you think that the feelings and impressions of the sisters should have a bearing on the deliberations of the brothers?
J.T. Well, they should, I am sure. I have had great help on these lines and no doubt every brother here would say the same. It is for us to pursue these lines, and increase in them more and more as the scripture says.
Ques. When you say that the brothers take the
{94}
sisters into their confidence, you have not in mind I suppose, a formal announcement of what has taken place at the care meeting, but rather what takes place in the home on the ground of enquiry?
J.T. I only heard recently that in some places a formal resume of the care meeting is given. I am sorry to hear that for I do not think it is right. I think the idea is for the husband to tell the thing; as it says, "let them ask their own husbands".
Ques. Because of the necessity of the sisters being taken into confidence as has been said, you do not think that it would be wise to ask the saints to remain behind after the meeting for prayer and details of the care meeting be given publicly?
J.T. No, details ought to be given by the husband to the wife at home.
{95}
THE BELIEVER'S MIND AS CONNECTED WITH THE LORD'S SUPPER
@Matthew 26: 26 - 30; @Luke 22: 14 - 20; @1 Corinthians 11: 23 - 24
J.T. What I have in mind is to consider the Lord's Supper as presented in the gospels and then in the first epistle to the Corinthians in order to call attention to the fact that the mind is more in view than other features in us. Luke corresponds with what is recorded in the epistles but I thought that we should also consider Matthew (representing Mark also) because he stresses eating. That would involve the lower organs -- digestion and assimilation -- what is constitutional in that sense, but Luke contemplates the mind, and the passage in 1 Corinthians contemplates both the mind and the digestive organs. It is assimilation too, and perhaps we do not give sufficient thought to the eating side in the Lord's Supper, suggesting what is needed to sustain us spiritually. At the same time Luke and 1 Corinthians make much of the mind, that is, it is a memorial which is contemplated. It seems as if the Lord intends that we should be built up so as to acquire and retain strength in the testimony and then to be clear in our minds historically. We have to bear history in mind too.
G.F.G. The eating in Matthew seems to be followed by the drinking.
J.T. Well, it would be. It is the idea first of eating the passover. I had that in mind, as it says in verse 20 "And when the evening was come he lay down at table with the twelve. And as they were eating ..." -- that is, it is the passover that is in mind. Then we have eating again in verse 26; these two references to eating are remarkable. That is in Matthew, but Luke is not concerned so much about
{96}
eating, possibly because the Gentiles are more in view in his account. Luke brings in the mind.
R.McB. Paul could say "I myself with the mind serve God's law".
J.T. Just so. Romans enlarges on the mind, and Peter refers to "your pure mind" and Paul in Romans speaks of "renewing of your mind". Because of the fact that the mind is so much claimed by what is of the world, by what is outside, it needs to be renewed. There need to be renewed tastes and desires. The Lord's Supper has acquired a great place amongst the brethren, and God has helped us as to it. It acquired a great place during the Reformation too, and indeed from Pentecost on the Lord's Supper was in evidence involving much controversy. So in recent times we find ourselves constantly alluding to the Lord's Supper in view of the service of God, but one has now in mind what is constitutional so as to take part in the service of God.
S.B. In regard to what you say, would it be helpful to see in connection with the scripture quoted in Romans, the man is connected with the mind -- "I myself with the mind ..."?
J.T. Yes, "I myself"; the person is in mind; he has resolved inwardly to serve the law of God. These scriptures are intended to support all that. Just now the world is full of news. During the war the newspapers had great difficulty in finding space; there is not much now and perhaps it is a wholesome thing for the brethren that there is not -- the less the better, for it is of the devil. He will not fail to fill the pages of newspapers, and therefore the need of constitutional nourishment and then mental ability such as will take in and make room for the things above, the things that are not seen.
Ques. In speaking of what is constitutional have you in mind the connection of the feast of unleavened bread with the feast of the passover?
{97}
J.T. Quite so. The feast of unleavened bread tends to reduce the natural taste, and the passover would occupy us with the Lord and His things, making way for the things above.
Ques. What is the bearing of the first eating in verse 21? Would you say a little about that in regard to the Supper.
J.T. Well, it refers to the passover, and it is clarified for us in Corinthians where it says "For also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed; so that let us celebrate the feast, not with old leaven, nor with leaven of malice and wickedness, but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth", @1 Corinthians 5: 7 - 8. This is the view of the Lord's Supper in the 11th chapter, but the passover is clearly the eating. It is Christ sacrificed, not Christ as having died alone, but sacrificed, alluding to the word in Exodus, the idea of sacrifice is there and it is a striking illustration of what the antitype is. The spiritual thoughts, however, are in the antitype.
F.B. If we are not eating the passover, can we rightly eat the Lord's Supper?
J.T. Well, I think that is what is implied. Scripture is linked together for us and made intelligible so that we can read Exodus in the light of the New Testament. The 12th chapter of Exodus speaks of "the beginning of months"; the young believer starting to break bread and partake of the Lord's Supper is beginning. His earlier days may be recorded, of course, but in truth he begins as he commences to take the Supper. It is the "beginning of months", and hence the beautiful account we have in @Exodus 12 and continuing on to the tabernacle system. What is to be kept in mind is that the young believer is taken account of, for the matter is reduced to a few verses by Moses. In @Exodus 12 we have a long account of the passover and all that is connected
{98}
with it in relation to the unleavened bread; but then beginning with verse 21 we have Moses passing the matter on to the elders and he condenses the account. I think it suggests that God considers for us; meetings may be too long, or other things may be prolonged unnecessarily. God would take account of what we are capable of, so that Moses reduced the account and I believe it is for the young believers, for they have to be considered. They cannot take in too much nor can they sit too long, and they have to be considered even as to time. "And Moses called all the elders of Israel, and said to them, Seize and take yourselves lambs for your families, and kill the passover" and so on. It is to be noted that there are words included in this paragraph that are not in the general account. "And Jehovah will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when he sees the blood on the lintel, and on the two doorposts, Jehovah will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come into your houses to smite you. And ye shall observe this as an ordinance for thee and for thy sons forever. And it shall come to pass, when ye are come into the land that Jehovah will give you, as he has promised, that ye shall keep this service. And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say to you, What mean ye by this service? That ye shall say, It is a sacrifice of passover to Jehovah, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt when he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses. And the people bowed their heads and worshipped. And the children of Israel went away, and did as Jehovah had commanded Moses and Aaron; so did they". That paragraph is really an epitome and it is concise and intelligible and I think it is well to have that in mind in looking into 1 Corinthians because the passover is introduced there in chapter 5 to prepare us for the Lord's Supper in chapter 11. The
{99}
idea of suffering is in the passover and the idea of sincerity and truth in the unleavened bread. Suffering and sincerity -- these are brief words but pregnant with meaning.
F.I. Is that why in @Matthew 26 we get the two things merging, that is the passover merging into the Supper?
J.T. That is so.
F.I. I was wondering whether it was for us to take in that there should be no break between keeping the feast of unleavened bread and the partaking of the Supper.
J.T. Well, I would say that.
Ques. Is there a suggestion as to the assembly in @Exodus 12? -- It says "Speak unto all the assembly".
J.T. Well, I think the Spirit of God had that in mind in using there the word that we use so much now, and seen especially in the 11th chapter of 1 Corinthians. In @Exodus 12 we have a very instructive note in the New Translation as to the word 'assembly'.
In order to proceed and not to miss what we have in mind, I would remark that in general Matthew gives us the eating side; it is a question of mastication, digestion and assimilation -- these are all thoughts that connect with building up the constitution, but Luke is not concerned so much about that; he is more concerned about our minds. We are to remember, and the word according to the note on @1 Corinthians 11: 24 is "For the calling of me to mind" -- as if one had the power to do it, not that it is an accident, but he has the power to do it. He has power over his mind and uses it for one purpose and that is to contemplate what is presented in the Lord's Supper, especially in the bread, but 1 Corinthians speaks of the same idea in regard to the cup, and we do not get that anywhere else. The gospels do not refer to it. It is evidently what the Lord Jesus gave
{100}
from heaven. That is, as if the Lord in unfolding the truth added things so that our minds should be affected by the cup as by the bread.
G.F.G. Is the principle seen in 2 Corinthians chapter 3 where it speaks of the thoughts of Israel being darkened? -- but then it says "but we all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". Is that connected with the idea of the mind being enlightened in contrast with Israel's being darkened? It says "But their thoughts have been darkened, for unto this day the same veil remains in reading the old covenant, unremoved, which in Christ is annulled". I was wondering if there was any suggestion that the saints were taking on impressions of the glory of Christ. Would you connect that with the divine side, the side in Luke?
J.T. Well, quite. "Beholding as in a glass" refers really to the mind -- what the eye takes in as well as the ear. These are two organs which refer to the mind.
Ques. I was going to ask as to the thought of remembrance connected additionally with the cup, in what the Lord gives to Paul for the assembly amongst the Gentiles: Is there some particular point of the economy which we now have with the assembly being here, and the Spirit being the central feature of it? I wonder whether you could help us as to why there is something additional in remembrance in connection with the cup that is not found elsewhere.
J.T. Well, I think it would imply satisfaction in what the cup presents to us, because young people, while they partake of the Lord's Supper, sometimes are not satisfied feeling it is not enough. As time goes on young people get more and more taken up with things outside and I believe there would be
{101}
provision for them in the sense of satisfaction, and the question is raised as to whether we are satisfied where we are as in the fellowship. Drinking is usually the idea of satisfaction.
W.H.T. Would Eutychus in the 20th chapter of Acts be an example? He evidently was not up to things.
J.T. Very good. I would think that fits very well. That chapter is full of love. It begins with love and ends with love. But one young man was there who was under compulsion. We are thankful for the young present, even though they are here under compulsion, but they may not all be satisfied, and Eutychus represents that element. He was looking out of the window at first but he fell asleep and then eventually fell -- a most sorrowful thing, and I suppose it would have been more sorrowful if there had not been an intervention. Paul went down and enclosed him in his arms. That was a feature of the position -- it is a very beautiful feature, specially applicable today -- laying hold of the young, influencing them with affection, so that Paul was able to say "life is in him" and he was brought up alive. But the chapter is very significant as alluding to assembly history in relation to the Lord's Supper; we are not to be hesitating in our meetings, and I believe what is needed is satisfaction -- to be restful in the understanding of the position.
F.B. Would the right idea in regard to the young be found in @1 Peter 2: 1 - 2, "Laying aside therefore all malice and all guile and hypocrisies and envying and all evil speakings, as newborn babes desire earnestly the pure mental milk of the word, that by it ye may grow up to salvation"?
J.T. Well, notice the word "mental". That is the word that links up with what we are speaking of -- it is a question of the mind being held. The gospel
{102}
presents what is attractive in Christ at the outset, as the woman said "Come see a man". Peter has the mind in view in the word "mental" -- it is milk, it is the nourishing of the mind.
Rem. You have dwelt on the thought of drinking in connection with the cup, but Paul introduces the thought of remembrance in relation to it additionally. I was wondering if you could help us as to why it is that sometimes we get an impression of the Lord in the bread, but perhaps do not look for any augmentation of it in the cup. Would you expect the remembrance in connection with the cup to lead to the enlargement of what the Lord has already said or the strengthening of it in the souls of those present?
J.T. Well I think that, and what I was remarking about satisfaction is an important thing with us.
A.H. You mean in speaking of satisfaction as connected with the cup it is as taking in all that the cup implies that we are satisfied with it.
J.T. Yes, all that it implies. The Lord says "My blood is drink indeed". In the scriptures drinking usually means satisfaction, I think.
A.H. Is the lack of that satisfaction very often the cause of so little part being taken perhaps by younger brothers?
J.T. Quite. In the 10th chapter of 1 Corinthians it speaks of our public conduct and walk and the cup is mentioned first. "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of the Christ?" The word "communion" is stressed in the 10th chapter because it is a question of what we are externally and what we are connected with externally -- whether on Monday and the rest of the week we can carry on with what we have had in the Lord's Supper -- whether it sustains us. And so the idea of idolatry is enlarged on in chapter 10 and the idea of discipline on the part of God is enlarged on in
{103}
chapter 11 -- that is your conduct inside is disregarding the body of Christ. Whether it is as coming into the room or sitting down together, or during the meeting, we should see to it that our conduct does not in any way discredit the body of the Lord Jesus.
S.A. What would be the force of the word "communion" in your mind?
J.T. Well it is what we have in common. We would be under command or under orders.
S.A. 'Identified with' -- would that be it?
J.T. Well the word means more than that. It implies that we are under orders. We are obligated to one another; of course we are obligated to the Lord, but the force of it is that we are obligated to one another. It is what you are doing when the brethren are not looking at you -- it is a question of honesty or uprightness. What do you understand when you use the word "communion"?
S.A. Well, I thought it was that we are identified with the fellowship of the Lord's death.
J.T. Well, it is the word "identification" or "communion" but it has obligation attached to it. I am not only obligated to the Lord and He sees me all the time, but I am obligated to the brethren even though they are not present.
Ques. Would you say it is the idea of partnership and whatever we do affects the partnership?
J.T. Just so. Partnership is the word really. I think we overlook that we are obligated to each other.
Rem. Paul wrote to the Corinthians in relation to their measure and to their state of soul. They were intelligent enough to understand what he was going to say. He says "Wherefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry. I speak as to intelligent persons, do ye judge what I say", @1 Corinthians 10: 14 - 15. Is that an appeal to their mental powers?
{104}
J.T. Quite so. I was thinking of that very word -- "I speak as to intelligent persons". He considered them to be that; as Christians we ought to be intelligent. We are not short in teaching, but we are short in consistency and in intelligence to take in things that we have heard.
Ques. Do I understand from what you say as to the Lord's body that we are not, for instance, at liberty to look about in the meeting as we please? Would that come into it?
J.T. That is right. The 11th chapter of 1 Corinthians is when we are inside. The paragraph previous to the one we read refers to their being very naughty, going, I believe, to the extent of being affected by drink. Terrible things can happen amongst the brethren and in the assembly. The Corinthians were despising the assembly. It is a word for us all and especially for the young people breaking bread. The chapter explains what is meant, and it is very concise in what it says. Paul says "I praise you not"; he tells them that "many are weak and sickly among you and many sleep".
G.H.P. In regard to the cup and drinking and the satisfaction it affords, how far does the suggestion of blessing in the cup go? Does it go the full length of what we are brought into in Christianity?
J.T. Well, I suppose it might. "The cup of blessing" -- as if the idea of blessing is denoted in it. You can hardly limit the blessing, it is a general thought. We already alluded to what Numbers brings out -- what Aaron was to say "The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace". (@Numbers 6: 24 - 26); and in @Psalm 133: 3 -- "… there hath Jehovah commanded the blessing, life for evermore". The Lord is bent on blessing and the
{105}
assembly is constituted in that way. It is the vessel of the service of God and it affords blessing.
Rem. In regard to the additional note about the cup, to which attention has been drawn; is the thought that as keeping that before us, say in thanksgiving, it would tend to this satisfaction?
J.T. Well, it would. In speaking of it in the assembly do you mean, or in each person keeping it before him?
Rem. One who would give thanks for instance would mention the fact of the remembrance.
J.T. In relation to the Lord's Supper I find it hard to get away from what the Lord was pleased to give to Paul as recorded in @1 Corinthians 11. In speaking at the Lord's Supper that passage constantly comes before us as it is so concise and yet so full. The words "the Lord Jesus in the night in which He was delivered up" always touches the heart. And then you connect it with the passover and the sufferings, as it says in chapter 5 "For also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed ..."
Ques. Is that what you meant by history?
J.T. Yes it is. It attaches to this position. There is nothing more historical in the Bible I think. From the very outset God had the race in mind; we have to keep in mind that God is thinking of man all the time. It says His delights were with the sons of men -- how beautiful that is! Not only men, but the sons of men.
R.M. Has the Lord satisfaction in seeing the saints having satisfaction?
J.T. Well, quite so. We are told in the Gospels that the Lord looked on the young man and loved him. The Lord was thinking of what He created physically and He looked on the young man and loved him. When we come to the truth of scripture, man is in Christ and eternity refers to Christ and all
{106}
that comes out of Christ. The assembly is of Christ.
T.G. The Lord would have all this in mind when He said "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer".
J.T. Just so. I thought that we should read in Luke because it is so beautiful that the Lord had that thought at that time. We have a reference there to before He suffered, and then in @Acts 1 it mentions "after He had suffered".
F.I. Would you say that as giving thanks for the cup we become stimulated, so that our affections are put into movement?
J.T. I would. That is what I would connect with satisfaction. I suppose you do too.
F.I. I was thinking that not only are we to be stimulated ourselves in that way, but as our affections are in full movement there is the stimulation of Divine Persons as well.
J.T. I think that satisfaction is the idea -- the drinking is satisfaction and works out by the Spirit in the whole of the service; the Spirit rightly begins it.
S.B. It would look as if the writer of `394:5 had experienced something of what we are speaking about -- "Thou dost make us taste the blessing, soon to fill a world of bliss".
J.T. The hymns are important; they are intended to stimulate the brethren. Singing is intended to stimulate us.
J.J-n. I was wondering how we should think of the sufferings of Christ at the Lord's table. How far should the sufferings of Christ be brought in?
J.T. Well, as already mentioned there is what took place before He suffered, as in Luke, and then in Acts "after He had suffered".
Ques. Do you think that if this thought of eating were more with us constitutionally, and if we were
{107}
built up in our souls as a result of the appreciation of the sufferings of Christ in relation to the passover, we should perhaps be more ready to appreciate His sufferings as the fruit of love, when we are together in the supper?
J.T. Just so. One of the latest Psalms speaks about the formation of our members. @Psalm 139: 14 "I will praise thee, for I am fearfully, wonderfully made. Marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well". I thought of that Psalm as entering into what you are saying as to constitutional formation -- here we have it in the abstract, but it is not abstract when I am born anew; all these things are in new birth. They are all there and they work out in the assembly, and what we are speaking of is intended to nourish us inwardly so that we might have part in the service with intelligence and feeling. I thought it would be well to have that Psalm before us; it illustrates what the scriptures can be to us and I think that Psalm helps in the subject that is now before us.
Ques. Before you leave the Psalm I would like to ask is it noteworthy that so much is made of searching in the Psalm? Do you think that as being subject to the scrutiny of the Lord, as we must be if we have partaken of the Supper, it would set us free as the verse that you have read suggests?
J.T. Well, just so. We alluded yesterday to the parts of a man -- the inwards -- spirit, soul and body. Mary, the Lord's mother, alludes to the soul and spirit and we are now alluding to the mind. @Proverbs 20: 27 says "Man's spirit is the lamp of Jehovah, searching all the inner parts of the belly". God can employ our minds; they are available to Him to search us, so that we get here "Jehovah, thou hast searched me and known me. Thou knowest my down-sitting and mine uprising, thou understandest
{108}
my thought afar off; Thou searchest out my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways; For there is not yet a word on my tongue, but lo, O Jehovah, thou knowest it altogether". So that we are under the eye of God in the service and the inwards are to be in action, the different parts of a man -- spirit, soul and body; the body is involved -- how we sit down and how we get up and how we speak. We are therefore challenged as to whether we call upon all that is within us to bless His holy name. You are not ashamed to bring anything out before the Lord in the service.
F.B. Would it not be a great preservative if we had that ever in mind?
J.T. Well, I am sure it is intended to be that. And I believe the drinking is intended to stimulate and give satisfaction, but it gives intelligence. I am thinking of a passage in 1 Timothy where the apostle says "Use a little wine"; the brethren will understand that I am not telling anyone to drink wine literally, but in order to shew how it may affect you if it is used figuratively. In the 5th chapter of 1 Timothy, verse 22, we read "Lay hands quickly on no man, nor partake in others¬ sins. Keep thyself pure. Drink no longer only water, but use a little wine on account of thy stomach and thy frequent illnesses". Now it might seem strange to bring this in here, but I believe it is an allusion as to how we are stimulated inwardly and made quick in our understanding and able to grasp things as before God.
T.G. Would self-examination, as suggested in the chapter, make way for the Spirit to form us in affection towards Christ?
J.T. Just so. That is what is in my mind. Now I would call attention to another serious thing, and that is God's discipline in connection with the Lord's Supper, a thing which has perhaps been a little
{109}
ignored. It says "In like manner also the cup after having supped, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood: this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come. So that whosoever shall eat the bread, or drink the cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty in respect of the body and of the blood of the Lord". That is to say, where there is carelessness we do not distinguish the Lord's body or His blood. Then it goes on to say in verse 30 "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep. But if we judged ourselves, so were we not judged. But being judged, we are disciplined of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world. So that, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, wait for one another" (which would allude to mutual feeling among us) "If any one be hungry, let him eat at home, that ye may not come together for judgment. But the other things, whenever I come, I will set in order"; which means that there is more that he could say about it. It was primarily in my mind to bring in the passage because of the present moment that we may renew our energy and affections and intelligence in this matter of the Lord's Supper, because it really involves discipline and our having part in the service of God.
F.B. How did this discipline take place?
J.T. Well, it takes place if one is sick, but it may not always be so. It was so here, as it says "For this cause many are weak and sickly among you and many sleep" -- a most solemn thing.
F.I. I was wondering whether you would connect the thought of searching with when we are eating the supper, or whether it would mean that we are keeping the feast in our ordinary movements here.
{110}
J.T. I would say that it is especially when we are partaking of the Supper. Beginning at verse 17 and running down to the end of the 22nd verse refers to when they were together, and Paul says "It is not to eat the Lord's Supper" -- verse 20. But that is what they were doing, and I think the point would be to judge ourselves when we are eating. "Let a man examine himself and so let him eat".
Ques. What would you think of one who absented himself from coming to the Supper for a period?
J.T. Well, I think he might be cut off from among his people. @Numbers 9 would be the truth bearing upon those who stay away from the Lord's Supper.
Ques. Would you think that normally the more a person was constitutionally self-judged the less there would be to occupy the mind on love's occasion of the Supper?
J.T. I am sure of that. There would be nothing to occupy you but the Lord's Supper. You have got control over your mind; I think we should keep that before us. In the Lord's Supper we are supposed to have control over our minds, and I believe that is what Paul means when he says "I myself with the mind serve God's law". He was determined to do it and the Spirit of God is here to help us to do it so that we are able to shut out other things.
S.B. In regard to the matter of self-examination; would it help us to note in the Psalm referred to, we are taken back to the very beginning, and it is a written record of every member?
J.T. Yes.
T.McC. Would Matthew's setting of the Supper have in mind our minds being occupied throughout the entire week with the Supper?
J.T. Yes, I think in general I would say that. What am I doing when I am absent from the brethren? There are, of course, things you have to
{111}
be occupied with in ordinary affairs -- the Lord knows that -- your family, your business, etc.: but when you come to the Lord's Supper, you have power to eliminate all that, and as at the Lord's Supper we should have power to control our minds. The Spirit helps us in that.
Ques. Has John that in mind in his epistle when he says "He that has been begotten of God keeps himself"?
J.T. Yes, "and the wicked one does not touch him".
S.W.J. The bride in the Canticles says "Sustain ye me with raisin cakes, refresh me with apples". Is that the setting? And then it says "His left hand is under my head, and his right hand doth embrace me". Does the head represent intelligence?
J.T. Very good. Generally the service of God would last a comparatively short time. Well, why can't we give that time exclusively to God? We have many other hours and days to look after our own affairs. We should have control of our minds. It says "We have the mind of Christ" which is the thinking faculty, and means we are able to do what Christ does. It is a question of determination and the apostle determined to serve God's law. God is entitled to the Lord's Day and He takes it, and as we love Him we keep it too -- not that we are legal about it, but at the same time we have respect for that day and He gives us the day so that we can devote ourselves in His service and use our minds and be able to control them. It is most important that we should be able to control ourselves. The Lord is entitled to the Lord's Day and we are to give it to Him and act accordingly. As we come to the Supper the Spirit of God is ready to help us in the service of God. We shall serve Him in heaven eternally.
G.F.G. Would the verse preceding the one in Canticles which our brother has referred to also help?
{112}
It says there "He hath brought me to the house of wine, and his banner over me is love". Would that embrace both thoughts -- the house of wine the Matthew setting, and the banner Luke's setting?
J.T. Very good. Then the allusion to the head in Canticles would be a reference to the mind.
R.M. I would like to ask, in view of what we are speaking of, how do you approach this favoured hour? Do you have in mind getting satisfaction or giving satisfaction?
J.T. Giving satisfaction, of course. It is the service of God and I am set for that -- to serve God. That is really the controlling thought throughout scripture, and is especially dealt with in Leviticus but also in Exodus, Numbers and Deuteronomy. God is thinking of His service and calling upon us to think of it too and to be in it.
A.E.D. In relation to refraining to partake of the Supper, it is a serious matter to do so, and if a saint is incompetent to judge himself, should he not refrain in such circumstances from partaking of the Supper?
J.T. Well, I think the word here is "Let a man examine himself and so let him eat". Why should he cease breaking bread? What hinders him?
A.E.D. I was thinking of incompetency with the person to judge himself; is he not doing a serious thing in partaking of the Supper unjudged?
J.T. Why should there be incompetency? What do you mean by that?
A.E.D. I am thinking of a case where the state of soul is so low that there is inability to take up this exercise of self-judgment.
J.T. I doubt that any Christian should assume that state, and if you judge yourself, God is gracious -- grace reigns. I expect you are dealing with facts you know yourself and not with scripture. It says "Let a man examine himself and so let him eat".
{113}
It does not say -- Let him *not* eat if he is unworthy. I would think that should be accepted by us all, and the Lord's Supper ought to be continued at all costs. The Lord would help us to judge things. The apostle in @Romans 7 refers to serving God's law with his mind, and then in chapter 8 the Spirit is introduced which enables us to do what we resolve to do.
Ques. Would not the often-repeated reference to the Lord greatly help us, in that where there is the recognition of His authority the power to judge ourselves would not be absent from us?
J.T. Well that seems to be so. Why not do it? Why not feel that you are obligated to the Lord?
Ques. I would like to draw attention to the expression "let a man examine himself". Is that expression (and others similar) imperative, meaning that we are called upon to do it?
J.T. Yes, that is so.
Jno.G. Do you think that the man with the withered hand who was told to stretch it out, got strength to do so by obedience?
J.T. Quite so. "Stretch out thy hand" he was told, and he did. That is just the idea -- the question of obedience and the sense of obligation.
S.A. Would John be an example of what you have in your mind? -- one who was able to abstract himself from what was around and hold himself in readiness for the Lord.
J.T. Quite so. "I was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day" -- he was in keeping with the day.
{114}
THE MINISTER AS REPRESENTATIVE OF GOD.
@1 Kings 17: 7 - 24
J.T. This last verse shows the end that should be reached, viz. that the minister is known to be a man of God. It is an important thing that we represent God in our service, as it says "the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth". Not simply 'the truth' but "truth". That is the end to be reached. Another thing to be noted is that the minister of the truth has the gospel and the assembly in mind, and particularly as to the assembly he will have to do with houses in his ministry, and with families in houses. The service requires that he is to be identified with a house in so far as it may be needed in view of exigencies that arise in households, so that he is not merely a visitor, but identified with a house and all that enters into it from God. And another point, of course, is the word of God -- that is, the idea of prophecy which God has brought into particular prominence in recent times amongst His people, and how the prophet or the minister is to be in accord with his ministry in every way and accepting the word of God. Hence we have extraordinary circumstances in Elijah's history, such as we get earlier here in the portion of the chapter which we did not read, how he was fed by ravens and the brook carried water to him, and then how he was to be changed into circumstances in which not ravens but a widow is commanded to maintain him, showing how God moves in dignity with His servants and would have them to be in dignity in obeying Him and proving what He can be if we obey and are subject to whatever circumstances may arise in the service. The fact that it is said that Elijah was a man of like passions to ourselves makes these remarks very applicable to such a meeting. We are all, in a certain
{115}
sense, servants, but some of us are particularly so, and in different countries, including this one, God has raised up many who are able to serve His people. The servants of God become examples to us and hence He calls in Elijah, a man of like passions to ourselves, who prayed and brought about great effects in the ministry through prayer. One of the most important things in the ministry is prayer. I thought I would mention these things so that the brethren might know what is in mind and each join in. I think the Lord is showing that the young are to be particularly in mind in our meetings -- the very youngest, that is those able to take things in, and this section of the chapter shows how a young boy really is brought in and viewed as composing the house with his mother. She is the mistress and the only other person is the boy. Elijah is there too, and he has to join in with the house and live on what they lived on for a whole year. So it is all very practical.
F.B. You spoke of a change of circumstances. Would the drying up of the brook be the end of one circumstance and the asking for a little water the beginning of a new circumstance?
J.T. Quite so. The water that came from the brook was directed from God, no one carried it, it came down by gravity. That is one of the things God uses in His house, for the universe is God's. We see that the ravens carried the bread and flesh but the brook carried the water to him. The second verse says "The word of Jehovah" which is the prime thought running through. "And the word of Jehovah came to him saying, get thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the torrent Cherith, which is before the Jordan. And it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the torrent; and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there. And he went and did according to the word of Jehovah; he went and abode
{116}
by the torrent Cherith, which is before the Jordan. And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the torrent". So that the first paragraph deals with the servant under the command of the Lord, and the created things -- God's creation -- feeding him and maintaining him. God says elsewhere (@Psalm 50: 10) "For every beast of the forest is mine, the cattle upon a thousand hills". He is not dependent upon anyone -- I mean, people who are worldly; God is independent of man if needs be. He can get along without the worldly or ungodly man. At the same time He can provide for His servants, so that His servants are independent of such men.
R.McB. It was a privileged household this.
J.T. We shall see that as we observe how God comes in. The widow is called the mistress of the house. It is a remarkable thing that she is so designated -- God raising the whole position to a higher level.
P.J. Would this be seen in Paul as being identified with the household of Lydia?
J.T. Well, there it was -- "Come into my house and abide there". This woman was not so free as that, but I think she would know a great deal more and would be freer after the year was out than when the prophet came to her -- it was learning time. It is a learning time that we are in now.
S.B. Does this correspond in any way with @2 Corinthians 6: 17 - 18 in regard to obedience? -- "Wherefore come out from the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and touch not what is unclean, and I will receive you; and I will be to you for a Father, and ye shall be to me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty".
J.T. It does. "I will be to you for a Father, and ye shall be to me for sons and daughters ...".
S.B. It might be possible as acting in obedience
{117}
to that word that the brook may dry up, but then another way would open up.
J.T. If the brook dried up here it would be to bring out another thing. God was going to elevate His servant into the leading family. Especially in the New Testament Paul takes up the leading households.
He is the first to take up the households in that way.
M.B. Is God's idea in this not to overwhelm the saints by certain things, but to prove what He can do in them?
J.T. That is just it. And so it was here, He would prove what He could be to His servant and how He can turn from the mere creation to the household -- a most important matter. The New Testament is full of references to households. If, for example, we look into the gospel of Matthew, we shall find the Lord serving in houses in view of the assembly.
G.M. What would the widow woman speak of today?
J.T. Divine provision for a servant. We have all got to learn to count on God in our service. We may be brought to straits but we have to count on God in our service.
S.A. Would Paul in Arabia go through this first experience that you mention?
J.T. Well somewhat. This experience was in the East. Speaking now geographically the first experience is in the East from Jerusalem and the second experience is in the West -- Zidon.
Jno.G. Would you say the first section was Asia and the other Europe?
J.T. Yes, just so.
J.M. Do you think that the value of the believer's household has been revived concurrently with the truth of the assembly?
J.T. I think that is right. And the collection for the saints too is arrived at in that connection, it all
{118}
comes in in connection with Paul who was -- under God -- the greatest minister.
Rem. There are a few remarkable verses in @Psalm 68. It begins "Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered, and let them that hate him flee before him". Then verses 4 - 6 "Sing unto God, sing forth his name; cast up a way for him that rideth in the deserts; his name is Jah; and rejoice before him. A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his holy habitation. God maketh the solitary into families; those that were bound he bringeth out into prosperity: but the rebellious dwell in a parched land".
J.T. That is very suggestive of all this, although the widow was not the object in the chapter we have read. The prime object was the service of Elijah, but it shews how God can provide for widows -- "A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows".
G.F.G. Is there a difference between "I have commanded a widow woman there to maintain thee", and in Elisha's case where the thing came spontaneously from the wealthy woman? Here the emphasis seems to be on "I have commanded ...".
J.T. Just so. And of course we should make room for the increase of knowledge in the progress of God's service that Elijah preceded Elisha. Elisha called Elijah his father and he poured water on the hands of Elijah. He was therefore like his child, at least his disciple, and would learn from him, and so you have several things in Elisha's ministry that would seem to link on with what he would have known in Elijah's ministry. It is important for young brothers coming into the meeting to observe what elder brethren have been accustomed to do and learn from them. We ought to have respect for the elder brethren and learn from them, and so what you say as to the "wealthy woman" as she is called -- she is a continuation of the widow who had nothing in the house and she had
{119}
to use the oil. That is a great matter for young brothers and young sisters to count on the Spirit to assist them in everything. Elisha told her what to do, although no doubt she learned from God directly. "He said, Go, borrow for thyself vessels abroad from all thy neighbours, empty vessels; let it not be few ..." @2 Kings 4: 3. Now we get the idea of vessels. It would look as if the woman of the wives of the sons of the prophets did not have vessels, whereas the widow woman in 1 Kings had vessels. If she had a handful of meal it was in a barrel, if she had oil it was in a cruse; it is the idea of having things where they should be. And so Elisha told the widow to pour out into all the vessels and it was only when they were all filled that the oil stayed, shewing that there is plenty of room and plenty of means from God for the ministry. All that is carried forward into the great woman, the wealthy woman, and she could provide a house for the prophet. She was marked by hospitality, that is, using your means for the servants of God. She took notice that he was a man of God and she suggested to her husband to build a room for him and provide a table and a bed, etc. She was a hospitable person. How important it is to be hospitable! We should use the houses we have to entertain the saints, particularly the servants.
W.H.T. Do we see in the Acts, Philip the evangelist opening his house for Paul and his company, and the atmosphere that existed, being suggested in the four daughters who prophesied?
J.T. Quite so. That is another point to come up. Are the daughters able to prophesy? It is almost an unknown thing now to get sisters doing that. We should observe what is said in 1 Corinthians about a woman not speaking in the assembly, but these four daughters of Philip prophesied. It is not simply that they were prophetesses, but they prophesied.
{120}
T.McC. What would the word of Jehovah be to us today?
J.T. We have it here tonight, I trust. All our meetings should have that character -- all our ministry meetings and bible readings, in fact all our meetings. There should be something in each one of the character of the word of God, and of course that enriches us and makes us different from others. There are many other companies but the Spirit of God belongs to the assembly.
F.B. This wealthy woman says that she dwelt among her own people.
J .T. Well, we are here tonight and some of us live a long way off, but as soon as we come here where the brethren are we feel we have got our own people and we want to be with them. Now it is remarkable, as we all know, that the Lord Jesus refers to this incident. The Lord Himself spoke of this incident of the widow of Sarepta and how Elijah was sent to her. We were already alluding to the fact that Elijah was the more prominent thought and yet the Lord speaks of it as though she were the more prominent. "There were many widows in Israel in the days of Elias.. and to none of them was Elias sent but to Sarepta of Sidonia to a woman that was a widow". That is a touch that you might say is peculiar to Luke whose ministry is one of grace. Jehovah says to the prophet "I have commanded a widow woman there to maintain thee", which is to be noted. It is a word that is dignified. She was not simply to allow him into her house, but to maintain him. Then it goes on to say "And he arose and went to Zarephath; and when he came to the entrance of the city, behold, a widow woman was there gathering sticks". She was the first one he met according to what we read. "And he called to her and said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink. And she went to
{121}
fetch it, and he called to her and said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thy hand. And she said, As Jehovah thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse; and behold I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die". You might say that is characteristic of a widow such as she was, and the minister has to do with this -- how to meet a person such as this who has nothing else in her mind but to gather a few sticks and to use the little she has and dress it for her and her son so that they may eat it and die. That brings in the question of life and how it comes about -- I mean spiritual life. And that is what we should see as we proceed in the chapter. We heard last night about Eutychus in Troas, and there it is the same idea; indeed there are several instances of young people dying and how the situation is to be met. It is for the minister to know how to meet such a situation.
Ques. Is the use of the word "commanded" significant? Does it imply that God knew her as a subject person?
J.T. Well, quite so. Insubjection is so prevalent, and this reminds us of the ground on which the gospel is and the ground on which service should be carried on by any of us. The gospel is "for obedience of faith among all the nations", and I have no doubt that the idea of command is stressed in Elijah's case to bring out this. What God can be to those who are subject! One of the greatest things in Christianity is to be subject.
R.McG. She evidently had the water and proceeded to bring it, but this other request for a morsel of bread seems to be the difficulty.
J.T. Quite so. Yes, the first thing is he asked her to do something and she proceeds to do it. We are reminded of this principle in Matthew which agrees
{122}
largely with the ministry of Elijah; in chapter 28 the angel directs the woman to go and tell the disciples to go to Galilee, but the Lord intercepts them. They were doing what they had been told to do. The Lord meets them, saying "Hail" and He sends them to His brethren. The word 'disciples' is used first then 'my brethren'. The change is to bring out the dignity of the position. So the prophet here -- @1 Kings 17: 10 -- says to the widow, "Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink"; there is the idea of a vessel. It might be said, but how could she bring water if she didn't put it in a vessel? but the Spirit of God is calling attention to the thought of a vessel. The point is to have things where they should be. The idea of a vessel ultimately develops into the person's own body -- like the woman of Samaria who left her waterpot and herself became a vessel.
Jno.G. Do you think, when it says here "Fetch me a *little* water" and "make me a *little* cake", it means that the servant as moving into these circumstances takes full knowledge of what is there and does not put too much strain on the woman's state?
J.T. Well, not too great a burden. He did not intend to, but it looked to her as if he were unreasonable and the natural mind would say he was unreasonable in asking a woman in these circumstances to bring him water in a vessel, that he might drink. And then as she went to fetch it he called to her and said "Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in they hand". The natural mind would say it was unreasonable to make such a request from a woman like that. Elijah is representative of God. He was sent to her and she is challenged and tested by the ministry as to whether she can do what is required of her, although it may seem unreasonable. What seems to be unreasonable may make us murmur. That is the
{123}
first thing in the book of Numbers -- the Israelites began to murmur. It is a question of learning obedience. The Lord Jesus learned obedience from the things which He suffered.
R.M. At the outset you spoke of the discipline of the servant. Is the discipline for Elijah here, in having to be maintained by a widow in such dire circumstances, or is it something further than that?
J.T. Well, the boy died while the prophet was in the house. The point was that he should become identified with the persons he was serving, but as we were saying as to verse 11 "And she went to fetch it, and he called to her and said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thy hand. And she said, as Jehovah thy God liveth, I have not a cake". The woman used the word 'cake' first and not the prophet. The making of the cake would involve skill. In the book of Numbers Jehovah had prescribed that the people should offer dough -- not cakes but dough: but it requires skill to make a cake, and that enters into what we are saying. You may say that is a small thing to allude to, but I think all these small things ought to be noted, so that we are able to learn what a servant has to go through in his ministry. She said to him "As Jehovah thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel and a little oil in a cruse; and behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die". That in itself seems to be an incongruity. Why should eating be connected with death. It shews the state of mind she was in. "And Elijah said to her, Fear not". When it is a question of spiritual things we should say "Fear not".
S.G. Are you suggesting that the incoming of a servant into a locality makes a demand on the brethren which at first they think they are unable to
{124}
meet; but as faced in obedience, we discover that God has made provision to meet all.
J.T. Yes, this is a crucial time for the widow, and the crucial time for Elijah will come when death takes place.
T.McC. Was it to bring out what was there that Elijah spoke thus to her?
J.T. Well, no doubt God had that in mind but we cannot say that Elijah knew all. He had to learn himself. God is over all and a servant has to understand that God is operating all the time -- He is never idle.
Ques. Do you see it in Peter and Cornelius's household? God was operating with Peter in one place and with Cornelius in another place at the same time.
J.T. Quite so. He began with Cornelius because of his piety too. He had a memorial in heaven before Peter had to do with him. It shews what God could do, even without Peter.
S.B. The prophet here seems to take account of her skill for he said "Go, do as thou hast said" -- not as *I* have said.
J.T. Quite so.
J.F.C. This woman was apparently listening to the word of Elijah, at a time when Israel was not listening at all, and at a time when God was not helping Israel at all. Would that be indicative of faith?
J.T. Just so. Evidently she had faith because God took her into His service just as He takes the ravens and the brook into His service, but she is on a higher plane.
J.F.C. She said "As Jehovah thy God liveth", showing that God had evidently been working with her.
J.T. Quite so. She is ready to say that all the
{125}
way through but does not recognise the prophet until she goes through the severe discipline of the death of her son. She finally says "Now by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth". She learned that at the end.
C.W.E. Is it suggestive that the name of this place, Zarephath, means a crucible -- a vessel in which metal is refined.
J.T. Very good. You mean that both Elijah and the woman have been refined.
R.McG. You spoke of being together for a whole year in the house. I was thinking that they would all learn during that period.
J.T. Then as to the refining process, it says "He" (the Lord) "shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver", @Malachi 3: 3. He is looking at us all the time and that makes it very serious as to what we may say.
S.G. So that in all these testing circumstances which the Lord allows His people to go through, the servant is learning also, as he goes through these circumstances with the saints.
J.T. You may be sure of that. We see that as we proceed in the chapter. The prophet had to cry to Jehovah. He is in straits himself. All this is most instructive. Elijah had said to her "Fear not" in these circumstances. We have to fear certain things but we should go forward in intelligence and in faith. The word "Make me thereof a little cake first" would suggest what brings God in, and it seems to be unreasonable, but God is testing us by it. Then it says "And afterwards make for thee and for thy son". You will notice that the prophet assumes that she has enough to do both. Now light is coming in on the position, and we may expect that light will come in. It says "Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel: The meal in the barrel shall not waste, neither shall the oil in the cruse fail, until the day that Jehovah sendeth
{126}
rain upon the face of the earth!" Now as far as the facts go the only other one in the house is the boy who died. We may only have a few in the house, but it is a house and God regards it in that light, and here the woman is called the mistress of the house. The passage says "The meal in the barrel did not waste, neither did the oil in the cruse fail, according to the word of Jehovah which he had spoken through Elijah". Now all this was said before the breath left the boy, but until he was made alive the woman did not come to it that the prophet was a man of God and that the word of Jehovah in his mouth was truth.
Ques. Was this word about the barrel of meal and the cruse of oil a fresh word for Elijah himself?
J.T. Well, it may have been. I think he would learn by it, perhaps, that the widow had it in her mind that these things should be in vessels; that is, the meal should be in a barrel and the oil should be in a cruse. It doesn't say the water was in a vessel because the water was more in abundance -- the water had come to Elijah, as it were, by gravity, but still he used the word 'vessel' -- "Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel".
H.B. Does she take up the thought in that way, by bringing in the vessels?
J.T. Well, possibly. Although it was the prophet who used the word 'vessel' first. We are now coming into the presence of God in the thing. The light of God is coming in -- the abundance there is, for there is a whole year's food supply for those three persons.
Jno.G. Would you say a word as to what may be demanded of us that would appear to be unreasonable, so that we may understand the point you have in mind?
J.T. Well, one could say a lot on that point. Suppose a servant comes to your locality unexpectedly and you have not anything in the house and someone
{127}
asks could you take this brother in; that would be testing to many a housewife -- she may not know that the servant has arrived and yet he is in the locality and needs a bed and food.
Jno.G. Do you mean material things or spiritual?
J.T. Material things -- that is where the test comes.
S.B. Perhaps the test for us is that we may think it essential to go beyond what is necessary in that regard. In the case of the wealthy woman in 2 Kings it was merely "a bed, and a table, and a seat, and a lampstand".
J.T. That is so in Elisha's case. But here the bed was upstairs in the loft. The Authorised Version puts it that way. It seems as if it was in another part of the house -- in a loft. The loft would be inferior to the house generally.
P.J. Is God free to provide as a result of obedience? The widow could easily have said, I have only enough for me and my son.
J.T. What has been said by way of illustration ought, I think, to appeal to all the sisters here and the brothers have to fall in with it. We ought to join in with our wives in these cases and sacrifice with them. If a brother comes suddenly without a sister's knowledge and she is asked to provide a bed and food, well, we all have to sacrifice, otherwise one might become like the Israelites and be marked by a spirit of complaint. The children of Israel grumbled and complained, and in Acts it is recorded that certain complained because their widows were overlooked in the daily ministration.
F.B. Do you think that our pride would hinder us from asking a brother because it might let us down?
J.T. We ought to be on our guard against that side -- not to allow our spirits to be chafed and damaged by our circumstances.
{128}
F.B. Well, sometimes as it has been suggested here, there is not much in the house, but the brother is not looking for that.
J.T. Well indeed. It is a question of obedience, that is, if I can accept the circumstances cheerfully. It may be very trying for me to maintain a right spirit.
Ques. Does Abraham rise to the occasion in @Genesis 18?
J.T. Of course he was a rich man; we have to bear that in mind too. He had plenty of means and plenty of servants, which of course we don't always find, but anyway he was ready to do the right thing.
W.G. Do you think that @Matthew 10 might help us on this line -- "The workman is worthy of his nourishment?"
J.T. Just so. But perhaps if a sister is asked she may say 'Well, some other sister will have to do it -- she has more than I have'. That is where our spirits get chafed and we may chafe our husbands too. That is what Christianity implies; this chapter is really to bring out all these things in the service.
Ques. Do these testing circumstances show us how great God's provision is?
J.T. How God can come in. And He comes in in a miracle if necessary, as it was here. And it is all to bring out that He was with His servant -- He was a real prophet. The woman had learned that and she would never forget it, I am sure.
G.H.P. In regard to what is in our house, would the word in @2 Corinthians 8 apply -- "For if the readiness be there, a man is accepted according to what he may have, not according to what he has not"?
J.T. Yes, quite so.
C.W.E. "God loveth a cheerful giver".
J.T. He does indeed.
G.F.G. Had you in mind that when the woman is
{129}
referred to as the mistress of the house it is a very dignified name for her? Does it suggest that she is really with the Lord in relation to it?
J.T. I would think so, and God would dignify her. Our wives may be made drudges and that should not be. It never dignifies anyone to be made slavish in her work. I believe all the brethren should be dignified in what they are doing. It is that which governs you that makes the thing dignified. It is love that does that.
Geo.M. In a household such as this a son of peace would be there, as in the gospel. The disciples were told "And if a son of peace be there your peace shall rest upon it" and they were to abide in that same house.
J.T. Just so. That is another lesson to learn in these cases. We are to inquire if a son of peace be there.
S.G. Would you say that servants coming along may be a great test in regard to the way they move about -- they can be very unreasonable in their attitude and requests.
J.T. Well they may be very unreasonable sometimes, and a servant is to be on his guard not to be unreasonable.
Rem. In @Luke 10, the scripture referred to, the word to the servant is "And in the same house abide, eating and drinking such things as they have".
J.T. Quite so -- "such things as *they have*".
J.W. If one who comes along seems to be unreasonable, might it not be to intensify the truth of what God can do. In these circumstances in @1 Kings 17 which seem only to provide for two persons, the addition of a third was testing.
J.T. Yes indeed. Then in verse 17 it says "And it came to pass after these things that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his
{130}
sickness was so severe that there was no breath left in him". She is called the mistress of the house, which is complimentary. It is a remarkable thing that it should be put that way. "And she said to Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come to me to call mine iniquity to remembrance, and to slay my son?" Now she is not right; she did well up to this point, although she may perhaps have been marked a little by lack of faith at the beginning, but generally she did well up to this, living the whole year, as you might say, miraculously, but she is not up to this matter. She is tested by the sickness of her son. The family is touched -- the son is touched. And she says "O thou man of God, art thou come to me to call mine iniquity to remembrance and to slay my son?" Circumstances such as these may bring out some hidden thing that needs to be exposed. She assumes that the prophet is seeking to do this on her, but he does not mean to do that at all, at least there is no evidence of it. And so he said to her "Give me thy son". What is he going to do now? He has done well so far, but what can he do now? Here is a boy who has died and he was the only son of his mother. "And he took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into the upper chamber where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed. And he cried to Jehovah and said, Jehovah, my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son?" Now you see he is missing the point and this is really a solemn matter. He is saying "Jehovah, my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son?" That is, he thought as she did, and what he thought was not right. Then it says that he stretched himself on the child three times, meaning that the servant identifies himself fully with what is in the house. "And cried to Jehovah and said, Jehovah, my God, I
{131}
pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again! And Jehovah heard the voice of Elijah, and the soul of the child came into him again, and he lived". The word "soul" here is to be noted. It is an inward thing, a thing involving deep feelings -- soul feelings. And it is most important that the minister should learn to feel with things in the household, whatever they be, and join in with the household and help in it in every way, making the matter his own because he is a minister.
J.F.C. Is that one reason why a servant should not go from house to house?
J.T. Well that is one of the reasons, because God is going to bring out what is in this house and shew if a son of peace be there. But this matter of stretching himself, of identification, should be noted. The servant has to learn to identify himself with such a position. The Lord Jesus entered into all this fully at Gethsemane and on the cross, so that we come to the real matter of Christianity and what service means in it.
W.H.T. Evidently there were not right conditions in the house of Dorcas. Peter had to put them all out. He could not identify himself with certain things there.
J.T. Quite so. And the house of Jairus too. The houses are not always right, but it was not so here. It was as much a test for Elijah as it was for the woman. He is seriously concerned that this thing should have happened while he was in the house, as if it came on him -- as if God was disciplining him while he was engaged in His service in this house. So the question comes, What is to be done? Then it goes on to say, "And Elijah took the child, and brought him down from the upper chamber into the house" -- that is what I was remarking earlier, that he was in some upper loft -- not just exactly the house; but he
{132}
was content to be there, and he takes the child up there. "And brought him down from the upper chamber into the house, and delivered him to his mother; and Elijah said, See, thy son lives". That was a triumph, and that is what the Lord is ready to vouchsafe to any servant. "And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth".
T.McC. What are we to learn from what you have been referring to; Elijah taking him up to his *own* chamber and laying him on his *own* bed?
J.T. Well, I think it is all to bring out that nature is in the way in these cases. One often feels there is too much of what is natural in families, too much family feeling and provision for that, too exclusive an attitude in family matters. I believe that is what is meant. The child is taken out of her bosom -- that is nature -- and is taken up by the prophet where there is nothing that would make much of what is natural. The prophet's chamber was a place where there was not much furniture -- a loft as it says in the Authorised version. It is separated from the house. He is not in the guest room, and he is just a prophet with them.
R.McH. She seems to have everything here -- even the upper chamber for the prophet, the man of God -- an elevated spot.
J.T. Yes, but it is not in the house. I think there is something in that to notice. It is not just the best or most desirable part of the dwelling which is often assigned to servants, but if they are wise they accept it. But here it is the position the child is brought into -- as if God would be in that as distinct from the widow's bosom.
S.B. Good circumstances in relation to a house may appeal to nature.
J.T. Well, it does very much, and often hinders
{133}
the work of God. One often feels too much nature, too much of what is natural in our circumstances, making too much of our children and the like, and perhaps not enough of the children of God. The children of God must have the greater place. John brings that in in his gospel. The Lord has given us the right to take the place of children of God.
T.McC. It seems to be that it took this incident with the widow to confirm her that this was a man of God.
J.T. Quite so. She did not know that at first. The 16th verse says "according to the word of Jehovah which he had spoken through Elijah", but now in verse 24 we have Elijah's mouth mentioned, which is a word we may look for. We have Peter's mouth referred to, also the Lord's mouth. "My mouth" Peter says. Now the woman speaks of Elijah's mouth, "that the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth". He had not such a place in her mind before, and of course it is God's mind to give His servants a greater place with those they serve, because the more love there is the better place they have.
H.M.H. Would the word in the 113th Psalm come in -- "He maketh the barren woman to keep house, as a joyful mother of sons?"
J.T. It would indeed, and we have already alluded to the widow in the 68th Psalm -- a well-known psalm.
Rem. Would Lydia's attitude be the proper one now for those who have received the light of the present position? She says "If ye have judged me to be faithful, .." We do well to keep that in our minds.
J.T. Quite so. I think she is one of the outstanding sisters of scripture. She and Phoebe, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of Jesus, Deborah and a number of others -- we do well to keep such sisters in our minds because they adorn the doctrine.
{134}
IDENTIFICATION IN TESTIMONY AND IN HEAVEN
@Acts 2: 1 - 4; @Luke 10: 17 - 20; @Hebrews 12: 23 (part) "the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven" (N.T.)
It is in mind to speak of identification, and perhaps some increase of the thought, but *identification*as here in testimony. We should be *identified* as here in testimony, and eventually, in our place in heaven, identified in our proper relative positions in heaven.
Now in the first Scripture in @Acts 2, we have the identification of each one present suggested, alluding to those in the upper room. They were identified in the upper room by their names in chapter 1, and now in chapter 2 by the numeral one -- each one. That is, each one there is sitting; it is the sitting attitude. But in chapter 1 they are identified as the eleven apostles, and several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and His brethren. These the Lord had selected in His sovereignty and also wrought in them to fit them for the great occasion -- one of the greatest occasions. That is to say, the inauguration of the assembly. It is an inaugural time. Other times had preceded it, of great importance, of course, and particularly in the Lord's remark as to the Supper, in view of instituting it, that it was *before* He suffered. Much is near His heart, I need not say, and John says more of what is in His heart than any of the other apostles. But it was before He suffered. And then in His presentation to the disciples in chapter 1, it is after He arose; as it is said, "*after* he had suffered". And following on that, the charge He gave His apostles by the Holy Spirit -- great and glorious suggestions, suggestions of power. "*By the Holy Spirit*" He charged them, indicating how the matter stands today. It is a question of the Holy Spirit here below and the
{135}
Lord Jesus above. One Advocate above, and Another here. How wonderfully well off we are, dear brethren.
And then His ascension to heaven; His ascension to heaven having in mind much, how much, who can say? The unwritten, the unspoken thoughts of God that have existed throughout all this period of time, all this dispensation, the dispensation of the Spirit. Nineteen hundred years or more. All that was ahead. The Lord, however, did not give any inkling that the time should be long or short ere it should be terminated. So that we have to weigh in our minds thoughtfully what has happened all these years, these centuries. We may read human histories; many are extant. But who can tell the history of heaven? And yet it has a history. What thoughts are there, cherished there. Unspoken, too, publicly. But still the dispensation runs on.
It says that they, the apostles, spoke to Him, asking whether He would at that time restore the kingdom to Israel. That was in their minds. Their minds were not as large as His, not as large as heaven, they did not extend to include the counsels of God. And the Lord has to say to them, "It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power". But He immediately said, "Ye shall be my witnesses". That is the point for us, dear brethren, to be His witnesses. His witnesses because we are the subject of His work. Witnesses also as qualified to bear witness to Him in word, in speaking; in preaching or in teaching, or in whatever it may be, we bear witness to the Lord.
Well, that is so far. And the Lord having said all this, He was taken up. It was the time of heaven's intervention. And what feelings must have been there, dear brethren, at that time. "The Son of man who is in heaven" even while down here, is now going up. It is said He was taken up into heaven, they
{136}
beholding Him. They are to be the ones on whom all the great responsibilities should rest for the moment "They beholding Him, and a cloud received him out of their sight". The time came when they saw nothing. They were to learn to look with other eyes, to see beyond the clouds. A cloud received Him out of their sight, but they were to have eyes to penetrate the clouds. The heavens were opened, we are told, in Stephen's case.
But I am now speaking of what is leading up to this passage. That is to say, the heavens received Him. And Peter tells us later that heaven must receive Him. "Whom heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things, of which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets since time began". @Acts 3: 21. That is the position. Whatever has been spoken by the holy prophets of God since time began, up to this very minute. All that has to wait until the final moment when the Lord Jesus will come forth, not in a private sense but in a public sense. He will come forth. That is the thing that we are to love, to look forward to, to love His appearing. Not simply His coming, but His appearing, when He appears. The heaven must receive Him until the times of restitution of all things. That is to say, what the prophetic ministry points forward to. When that arrives, great things will happen on the earth. In heaven, too, but particularly on the earth, in a physical sense. At the present time it is earth's time in a moral sense, the greatest possible sense, the presence of the Holy Spirit here below. That is now the position.
So in the passage I read in @Acts 2 it says, "When the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were
{137}
sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance". Now this is why I read the whole passage -- the identification of the persons whom the Lord had spoken to. He had assembled with them, meaning that He has the assembly in mind and would inaugurate the thought and would fill their minds with it, so that they should know how to assemble during all this wonderful period. And let us remember, dear brethren, that day still holds; that on the first day of the week it is our privilege to assemble -- not simply to come together but to *assemble* -- to break bread. It carries with it all the authority involved in the assembly here below, Christ the Head of it above.
I am now speaking of the identification of the persons. There were only a few, apparently, at the most about a hundred and twenty. Not that they are mentioned in that way here, but we assume that it was so. They were all together in one place, it says. And each one is identifiable by the means mentioned in the 3rd verse, "There appeared to them parted tongues, as of fire, and it sat upon *each one* of them". (N.T.). They are marked off in that sense. What men they were. The exact names of the persons are not given, but we cannot doubt it would include the women, the Lord's mother and the several women also. And they are all to be identified. What a thing it is, dear brethren, to be identified in this sense, that is, with cloven tongues like as of fire sitting upon each one of us! Of course I can easily understand that one might say it is not literal, it is not actual now. But the thing that happened *is* actual, carried out in actuality in the power of the Spirit. Nothing has happened that is not carried in the assembly in the power of the Spirit. Things are held, they are carried,
{138}
in the power of the Spirit, so that they are here in their moral sense. Hence the identity of each one of us, in the Spirit sitting upon each one, in the form of fire. "Cloven tongues like as of fire" -- really the allusion is to the Spirit. What that would imply as to the tongues. These are divine tongues. Think of the Lord Jesus: what a tongue, and what a mouth! As also in Peter, what a tongue, and what a mouth! Peter says in chapter 15, "... the Gentiles *by my mouth* …".
God attaches importance to our organs. And so the word comes to us as to what about our tongues, dear brethren. This is the divine idea in principle. That as they were sitting, they *saw* this, according to verse 3 of chapter 2. There appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each one of them. It is said in verse 2, "Suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting". That is another thing. The sound was *heard*. The sound filled all the house. And the sound is still to be heard, if you understand, in the application of divine truth. What the Holy Spirit conserves here, what He holds down here, using whom and what He pleases. And who is there among us who does not wish to be used in this matter? Because it continues, the Holy Spirit continues. He is the same as He was then. He is as much here now as He was then, as much available as He was then. The sound is carried down. And what a sound, too, if one may speak in detail. It was a breathing, a hard breathing. Not simply an ordinary wind, but *breathing*. Breathing is from the lungs, if you can understand that. Think of the lungs of God, if I might speak reverently. The Lord Jesus breathed on the disciples: think of the tenderness, the sympathy, the mutual feeling that entered into that! You may say that is greater than what we are speaking
{139}
of. I am speaking of the *hard breathing*. What can all the armies and navies of the world do in the face of this, this powerful breathing direct from the lungs of the blessed God! For that is what it was. Let us accept it. It is really a time of believing, dear brethren, believing what is written and realising the facts, so that it becomes real to our souls that we are in the very midst of the things.
I have already alluded in prayer to the number here. I am thankful for them. I have seen many such numbers, and I am delighted. Not because I am being listened to, but because *God* is being listened to. And there will be more, and the quality will increase. And so the ministry is a matter to be noted. All this enters into what I am pointing out, this mighty movement of breath, hard powerful breathing, the sound of it filling the house. We have often been touched at the thought of the odour of Mary's ointment, Mary of Bethany; the odour filled the house. Now it is the Spirit of God Himself; the mighty breath of God by the Spirit here on earth on the day of Pentecost filled the house.
And then it goes on to say, as I said before, "And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance". So, as I have suggested already, what about our tongues? Because they are in mind here, notice. It is not our feet or our hands. They have their place, of course; there is walking, and there is doing, working. As Paul says, "These hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me" Chapter 20, verse 34. Even those who minister are to use their hands as well as their tongues, and to do things for others because it is not the idea to be always on the platform. But then, what about our tongues?
{140}
Not that I am here to exhort at this time, but rather to unfold the truth of this wonderful matter and then to go on to something else, namely, the assembly viewed not here on earth but *in heaven*, For we have come to that, we are told in Hebrews. But we can go further, and say we are *of* that. We belong to it. Hebrews does not go so far as that. It says, "Ye have come ... to the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven". And also to refer to chapter 10 of Luke about the same thing.
Well, about our tongues. Let us see whether there is the poison of asps. That is what James depicts in his epistle, and what is so solemn. "The tongue is a little member, and boasts great things. See how little a fire, *how large a wood* it kindles!" Sometimes you see thousands and thousands of acres on fire, and a little box of matches, or one match, may have started it. The tongue has great power for good or for evil. So we are reminded how much we may set on fire by our tongues. "Which sets fire to the course of nature", James says, "and is set on fire of hell". In order to get to our chapter we have to learn to judge these things, which means, of course, much from the epistles to be understood, to apply the death of Christ to our tongues, because it is a question of the new man. The new man has a tongue, and the old man has, too, alas! But the new man is true to all of us who are Christians. And the new man would speak right things, words of peace, words of truth. It is a time of speaking peace to one another. Peace coming out of heaven to us, for that is what the Lord Jesus says three times in @John 20, "Peace unto you". I would urge all the young people to read the 3rd chapter of James tonight, to show how easily we may slip into the use of our tongues in a false and wicked way, so that we may learn to judge all that and to arrive at what it says here, "They ... began to speak with *other*
{141}
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance". And what did they speak about? The wonderful works of God. That is what they were speaking about. This matter of speaking may mean long speeches at times, if necessary. We are told that at Troas, as they assembled to break bread, Paul discoursed to them till midnight -- a long discourse. It only reminds us as to what I have been saying about our tongues. That we may learn to get *other* tongues. That is, the new man bringing forth purified thoughts, speaking right things, speaking peace and love to one another.
I am now speaking of this wonderful event, this mighty breathing, and the evidence of it in the tongues. And what opportunities there are, now there is peace on earth. It will be only a little while, dear brethren. Not that I am prophesying, but I read the Scriptures and I can see it is not for very long. "When they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them". @1 Thessalonians 5: 3. These are honest facts, and it is for us to face them, and to understand the times. What times they are. Thirty years ago the times were difficult, but not so bad as now; what can we say about thirty years hence? But this we can say, This time is ours. And God has opened up doors to us and He has given men ability to preach the gospel, to teach, and to do other things. It is a time to be *doing*. And so this book I have read from begins with this, "All things which Jesus began both to do and to teach". First doing, then teaching. Then in the 2nd chapter three thousand persons are converted, and they persevered in the teaching of the apostles. You say, How wonderful! It is no accident that the three thousand are mentioned. It is to show what God can do under given circumstances. And what can He not do under *these* circumstances which we are in? It is a question, dear brethren, of our being ready, and what is to be
{142}
done. Whatever our hands find to do, to do it. Luke says by the Spirit in @Acts 1, "All things which Jesus began both to do and to teach". So that, as I am saying, it is a great opportunity for us at this present moment. I am certain of it. It is no question of prophecy. It is something anyone can see if one has discernment. I would quote David, "Blessed be thy discernment". And of the children of Issachar, it says they had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do.
It is a question of *doing*. God has been doing great things, terrible things, but He has brought His people through. What a doing that was! Another Exodus, as it were, reminding us of when the Lord Jesus will come to take His people out of it altogether. It is simply a prelude to that. He is going to do it thoroughly and effectively. Every one of us will be caught up. In @Acts 8, a great evangelist was caught away by the Spirit. I mean Philip the evangelist. Not Philip the apostle, but Philip the evangelist. He is a different man. What a great person! He had an experience that no other evangelist had, as far as I know. No evangelist was ever raptured by the Spirit of God except Philip. He was let down to the earth again to continue his preaching; he was found at Azotus, we are told, and passing through he announced the glad tidings to all the cities till he came to Caesarea. But it was Peter who evangelised Cornelius, in Caesarea. That was Peter's work. I am only speaking of what enters into the moment. The idea of being ready in the service of God. And again, we find Peter in an ecstasy, another great event. An ecstasy is not exactly a rapture. That is to say, the Spirit caught away Philip, and he was then found at Azotus. But Peter was on the housetop; he went up on the housetop to pray. We have inklings of what enters into the service. And who of us is not in it?
{143}
It is our opportunity. And so Peter was on the housetop, getting a wonderful outlook into the field of God, into the Mediterranean. That is the sphere of Paul's labours; he says, "From Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the gospel of Christ". @Romans 15: 19. That is the idea that has come down to us, and it is intended to enlarge our hearts and to teach us to be evangelical, to seize the opportunity according to God.
Peter went up to the housetop to pray; not to get a view of the Mediterranean, I do not mean that at all. There is not much in such views. There is not much in those bags strapped over the shoulder; I do not think much of them. I am speaking now of where we are in our eyes and in our feelings, that our own sphere is above. We are away from home when we are down here. We are not in our place at all but we are in a place of testimony. We may find it difficult, but we are to be with God in doing something, accomplishing something. It is a time of work, dear brethren. So Peter was on the housetop, he had gone there to pray, and he became hungry and desired to eat. But as they were making ready an ecstasy came upon him, and he saw the heaven opened and a certain vessel descending unto him, as a great sheet knit at the four corners, and let down to earth, in which were all manner of four-footed beasts of the earth, and creeping things, and fowls of the air. It all pointed to what God can do in spite of what men think. Peter did not understand, but he came to it. If we do not come to it, we do not understand the assembly. In that sheet let down from heaven, in which were all manner of four-footed beasts of the earth, and in the three occasions, too, what history for heaven and for earth!
And now I proceed to the second passage read, as to the matter being written in heaven. It is said in
{144}
the 1st verse of @Luke 10, that the Lord appointed seventy other's also, and sent them two and two before His face into every city and place, whither He Himself would come. Seventy others were taken up as well as the twelve, and they had wonderful success. In verse 17 it says, "The seventy returned again with joy" -- an experience we all have in the Lord's service -- "saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name. And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall by any means hurt you". These are very encouraging words for those who are in the service, and all of us. "Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven". Now it is only just a word as to this, which leads up to the passage in Hebrews. That is, the Lord is dignifying us as we proceed in His service, we are mighty men in service. The demons were subject to them, they said, through His name. They did not attribute it to themselves; they attributed it to His name, which is to their credit. This is what they said to the Lord. They say, "Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name". Now the Lord says to them, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven". I do not stop to dwell on this. It is a prophetic suggestion, how the devil will be turned out of heaven, the great war. We know about the war spoken of in Revelation. I do not stop to dwell on that, but it is involved in this.
And later in Luke, chapter 19, instead of peace on earth, as was said by the angels at the Lord's birth, it is peace in heaven. "Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest". That is what Luke presents in his gospel, what we may look for, And I need not say
{145}
that that must come about before there will be peace on earth. We get "On earth peace" in chapter 2, but in chapter 19 it is "Peace in heaven". And that involves our place in heaven. Our place is up there This is not our place. Our place is up there. It is as simple as anything can be as presented in the Scriptures. And the question is, Are we getting ready for it? When you are getting to seventy or eighty you begin to see the necessity for it. Perhaps you have not seen the necessity for it yet, but I have and many others have, too. We are enjoined to "number our days, that we may acquire a wise heart". @Psalm 90: 12. Not to be foolish in old age, but just to be getting ready for heaven, for going to be with the Lord, to depart and be with Christ, which is far better.
"This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come ..." @Acts 1: 11. It is the public appearing of the Lord, which we are enjoined to love; we are to love His appearing. "This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven". The interim in all this is leading on to over nineteen centuries. And what a history in heaven we shall see presently! The whole of Paul's doctrine, the whole of Paul's work, the whole result of his work will be seen. Well, that is the position we are in, waiting for the Lord to return. "This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven". I verily believe that the Lord's Supper, in the sense of order and continuous thoughts, the order that enters into the Supper and all that follows, all are intended to bring us into conformity with the Lord's ways, His manner. "In like manner". There is to be correspondence with all that belongs to heaven in all our ways here until the Lord takes us all up into glory.
Well now, just to finish. How thoughtful the Lord
{146}
was, not discrediting what they were doing, but indicating that they had to learn how to rejoice. I wonder whether I know how to rejoice really in the sense in which the Lord spoke of it. He spoke of it in His own experience. And Paul speaks of it, "Rejoice", he says to the Philippians, "and again I say, Rejoice". It is that we may learn how to rejoice, to be buoyant; and yet working, doing the thing that is needed, and doing it well. And so the Lord recognises what they did, but He says, "Not withstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven".
Now I go on to the last passage read. We are viewed as having come to the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem; and to myriads of angels, the universal gathering; and to the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven. We are seen in that chapter, @Hebrews 12, as coming to this. What I am seeking to bring out now is that we *belong* to it. Hebrews does not take us on to that, but Ephesians does. Ephesians tells us that we are already made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus. It is anticipatively so. And that is what we want to understand, dear brethren, that we belong to heaven. It has to be said in the sense of anticipation, it is true. "God ... has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus". We may reach it in our assembly service. I would urge it again, what is involved in the service of God, what is opened up to us through the Lord's service, the manner of Christ, the ways of heaven come down here in the service of God. All intending that we should be led up.
<blockquote>And see, the Spirit's power <br>Has ope'd the heav'nly door, <br>Has brought us to that favoured hour <br>When toil shall all be o'er. (`74:5)</blockquote>
{147}
Well, the writer of that hymn knew something of what I have been saying, what it involves, the heavenly position, the heavenly place, heavenly experience. What belongs to the service of God up there, and what we belong to eternally, we are already touching. And so it is, as I said, "the assembly of the firstborn". The Authorised version does not give the sense. It is in the plural, referring to the firstborn in Egypt, but particularly to the Levites. I would direct you to the 3rd chapter of Numbers, which speaks about the family of the Levites, and the 4th chapter which speaks about the service of the Levites. The family is what we are speaking of now. The family of the Levites was taken instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel. And that is what is here, that every one in the assembly is a firstborn, which is not possible in any other family. It is the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven. I would advise you to read and understand the 23rd verse of this chapter, @Hebrews 12. Read all the items there mentioned, the whole passage, as to what we come to, and then understand that one of the things we come to is composed of ourselves, it is the assembly of the firstborn, every one is a firstborn, "the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven". We come to that. But we *are* it. Ephesians contemplates that we are already caught up to heaven and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus.
May the Lord bless the word.
{148}
THE ASSEMBLY IN HER WIFELY RELATIONS
@Exodus 18: 1 - 5; @1 Samuel 25: 1 - 3, 14 - 19, 32 - 33.
J.T. What is in mind is to speak about the assembly in her wifely relations, and it is thought that Moses should be considered first, and then David, especially as these two servants of God are engaged in great things, and the marital matter is brought in evidently in relation to these things; Moses in view of the law on Mount Sinai (or Mount Horeb), and David in view of the kingdom which he was about to receive. The assembly is viewed thus in the testimony of God as in relation to Christ in view of things happening on earth, but originating in heaven. It will be seen that the types of the assembly in a feminine, wifely, sense treat of Christ in type as engaged with great things, nothing, as it were, being in mind save that she is in evidence. What is in mind in heaven is that the saints now forming the assembly are to have part in these great things. Thus Zipporah comes in here after she had been sent back, the Exodus having taken place; she is here evidently in view of the beginning of the law, with all that might be implied typically as to the assembly's part in this.
A.J.G. What answers in our day to what you are connecting with the thought of the giving of the law?
J.T. It would be what is set out in the New Testament, the epistles to the Corinthians particularly, involving also the ministry of Paul recorded in the Acts. I think it would be seen by examination of the Acts that the book has in mind the complete position of Christianity, the complete position of the assembly down here in testimony, not only what was set out in the twelve, but in Paul's ministry; the appearings of the Lord after He rose were to impress the disciples with Himself and continued historically
{149}
until Paul arrived. The second narrative of Luke begins with an allusion to certain omissions in the first narrative, which was incomplete. It does take us to the ascension of Christ, but omits the important item of the Lord's sojourn for forty days among the brethren coming in and going out amongst them. Luke alludes to that in the second treatise, and it runs on to the transfer of the gospel to the Gentiles, the salvation of God has been sent to the Gentiles, we are told in the last chapter of the Acts, and they would receive it. What has been alluded to begins earlier, because Paul's ministry began earlier, and the assembly had a great place there, so that the introduction of the testimony of the gospel to Europe and its outgoings, was accompanied by the presence of the assembly, and it is intended to continue to the end.
A.J.G. You mean the assembly is there a kind of support to the testimony going out in that way?
J.T. Yes, and a softening influence; the feminine influence was intended to be modifying and softening, involving the gospel being applied in a more gracious and tender and sympathetic way, as we see for instance, in women like Lydia and Phoebe and the influence they exerted. Other similar references, too, are to be found in the epistle to the Philippians -- the peculiarly tender consideration for the apostle; he says that they had fellowship with him in the gospel from the beginning. The Corinthian ministry specially requires the presence of the assembly, because the assembly is there called "the Christ" in the first epistle, as if she exerted great influence in view of the continuance of the position in testimony, and much is made of woman's service, her silence stressed at the same time, and yet her influence. What is said in chapter 11 as to the headship of God, and of Christ, and of man is notable, as though that headship would greatly augment the service of sisters
{150}
in the testimony, and the rule is to be universal, ordained in all the assemblies. So that there can be no special customs or rules in the testimony; they are all to be unified, and emanate from the Head. There should be no special customs in any locality; all are to be regulated on the principle of headship, and hence in the second letter the apostle says he has espoused the saints at Corinth to Christ, to one Man. It is rather a wide scope, and one wishes to be concrete, concise and brief in setting out the truth, but what has been said I am sure is necessary to bring the subject before us. We have to learn to learn, because we are apt to listen and forget what we hear. The point is to be learners. The Lord has set the example Himself having His ear opened as a learner; the Magdalene designates Him as her Teacher. She is specifying the kind of teacher she would have, and that Christ is to be that Teacher.
W.C. Would that fit in with @Proverbs 1: 8, "My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother"?
J.T. Just so, and then the great example at the end of that book, the acrostic production of the author, making so much of it, as if it were to be written down so carefully, the alphabet brought into it. "Who can find a woman of worth?" the writer says, and then she is described -- the ideal, and Abigail answers to the ideal, and I think the women mentioned already such as Phoebe and Lydia represent the ideal.
Ques. Do you mean they typify the assembly rather than the sisterhood?
J.T. What must be in mind is the assembly; the sisterhood must merge into the assembly. The sisterhood is suggested in the relatives of Abraham, the daughters of Terah.
Rem. I was thinking of your reference to the
{151}
wifely place the assembly has and connecting it with the New Testament. You spoke of Phoebe and Lydia, and of the service of sisters. I was wondering whether you had in mind that those two sisters set forth the feminine side *assemblywise*, rather than the feminine side as we speak of it amongst the sisterhood.
J.T. That is right. Whether Phoebe or Lydia had husbands I am not prepared to say, but they certainly fit in with the sisterly qualities needed amongst us. I alluded to Terah's family because that family was to furnish the wives for the men of faith, in principle at least, and suggests the idea of kindred relations with Christ, that we are of the same kindred as Christ; the foreign element is excluded, all mixture is excluded. Zipporah is not specially honoured in the position, but she fills out what is needed in regard of the mediator, and therefore can be brought down to the idea of the opening up of the epistles to Corinth, bringing out the assembly's place, and how comely it is supposed to be, so as to give weight to the authority of the apostle. Zipporah never shone very much, but she is a wife, and Corinth did not shine either, but the wifely principle was there.
Ques. You mean Paul would hold them to it?
J.T. That is what I was thinking, and he enjoins as to the comeliness of women's hair, chapter 11, and silence imposed on them, and then the allusion later to the espousal. The thought of the assembly is there evidently intended to give weight to the instruction in the letters.
G.W.B. Does the word in chapter 6, verse 17, "he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit", bear upon what you have in mind?
J.T. I would think so. There is a certain marital allusion there. One principle in the scripture is that the abstract idea of anything is usually present, sufficiently there to be called attention to at any time.
{152}
A.J.G. Is that illustrated in Paul's saying, "We have no such custom, nor the assemblies of God". The assembly was there supporting the ministry.
J.T. Very good. The allusion is to the assembly generally, and what characterises it.
W.C. Would Zipporah here as brought back to Moses be like the second epistle to the Corinthians? Nothing is said to discredit her here?
J.T. Very good. I would go with that.
W.C. It mentions the word 'wife' though it does not in the original link, as if she had been adjusted.
J.T. That is important: she is there anyway. The idea is there enough to carry out what we are dealing with. It is a line running right through scripture from @Genesis 2 to the end of the book of Revelation.
P.H.H. Would the two sons suggest some substantial fruit out of this assembly link?
J.T. I think so. What was in Moses¬ mind in naming them is that the names of the two sons would be there in the house. The name of the one was Gershom, and the name of the other was Eliezer. They are given at length, so that the meaning attached to their names would be always usable to call attention to the truth involved. These boys, or young men, would always be available to call attention to the principles in the names.
P.H.H. Would the sojourning confirm the idea of the assembly being here a heavenly vessel, but only on sojourn, but the second son the help received in the sojourn?
J.T. Quite so, it shows the history of Moses, what he had found. It is given in chapter 2, verses  21 - 22: "And Moses was content to dwell with the man: and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter. And she bare him a son, and he called his name Gershom: for he said I have been a stranger in a strange land", this
{153}
being his experience. The other is "God is my help"; in @Genesis 15 God takes up the ground of being Abraham's shield. This is somewhat akin to Moses¬ use of "Eliezer".
C.H. If Zipporah represents the assembly in her public side, is there significance in the fact of the 'in-law' position, which seems to be stressed here? It is mentioned four times over in the first seven verses.
J.T. Quite so. It does right down the chapter. That is the relation is recognised; somewhat distant, but to be recognised. There are many today in that relation with us. They are real children of God, they are 'in-laws', we cannot disown them, but cannot go very far with them, which is important. We have an exercise about them anyway.
J.R.S. I think we would like to understand what the 'in-law' position is.
J.T. Persons somewhat at a distance from us, but we must own them in that distance. Moses went as far as he could, although other scriptures would indicate that the relation between them was not of any great importance if we regard Jethro as Hobab. He stayed in the wilderness; he would not go with the people of God all the way. There are many like that.
C.H. It is in these circumstances that Zipporah, the wife of Moses is introduced here, as though in a certain sense the legal bond with her is also stressed.
J.T. Her legal bond is of course stressed; it is going through typically.
Rem. Really there is no distance in that she is called his wife.
J.T. She is not a concubine, which implies degradation of the feminine sex. She is called his wife here.
J.P.H. Perhaps we should be helped more in everything if we unitedly and assemblywise were
{154}
thoroughly with the Lord in all that He would bring in amongst us in a regulating way. You get Zipporah with Moses in the giving of the law.
J.T. I think that is the way it is to be held. Eve and Rebekah, and other women in the book of Genesis had a wifely place without much more said of them, but still they were there. Even Joseph's wife has not much said about her, but she is there as if the abstract thought is to be there. We are to be with the Lord in all that is current in His mind as He is in heaven and we here, but there is the idea of union which has not been much touched upon among us in our service for many years, but it has to be borne in mind that union exists between Christ and the assembly.
J.J.T. Is it noticeable that in @Genesis 15 where the thought of God is my helper comes out, the question arises in regard of an heir and a son with Abraham. Abraham was concerned about a son at that moment.
J.T. You get the *word* of God brought in for the first time, which is another matter to be noted. The word of God implies that which discloses His mind in so far as it goes.
J.J.T. I wondered whether the thought of continuity was particularly in Abraham's mind, something for God on earth.
J.T. That was in his mind and carried through though there were blemishes in the effort, and that has to be taken account of, so that the seed runs through according to the word; it is a question of the word of God. "In Isaac shall thy seed be called".
A.M. How does the beginning of @Romans 7 fit in, "being to another", and then "bearing fruit to God"?
J.T. The allusion of course is to the death of Christ accepted in our souls. The "married to another" is on that ground, not on the ground of
{155}
divorce, but on the ground of the death of the first husband.
P.H.H. Would you say a little more about the mention of union? What have you in mind? Should we mention it more in assembly service as known amongst us?
J.T. Yes, the first mention is very early. It is worked out particularly in Colossians and Ephesians, but the first mention of it is in the well-known scripture in @Genesis 2, where it is said: "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and cleave to his wife; and they shall become one flesh", verse 24. That is where union is first mentioned -- one flesh. With us it is a spiritual matter between Christ and the assembly. We are united to Him by the Spirit, but we are of the same kindred. New birth and generation form our relation with God, but our relation with Christ is by union.
Ques. Would that fact underlie the right exercise of affection in the marital relations between Christ and the assembly at the Supper?
J.T. I think so; it would come in there no doubt. We are a little uncertain in our minds whether we should take the ground of *brethren* of Christ at first in our service, or whether we should begin with *union*. I think scripture shows that we should begin as brethren. @Hebrews 2 begins with the brethren, and goes on to Christ singing in the assembly, so it seems as if we ought to take on the thought of brethren first.
Ques. Would you make any distinction between brethren as presented in Matthew's gospel and in John's gospel?
J.T. I should, because John is on a higher level. He records what the Lord said to Mary, that she should not touch Him because He had not yet ascended to His Father. Then He goes on to say: "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my
{156}
Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God". The relation is there on a higher level than in Matthew I would say. In Matthew it is because we are doing the will of God we are known as His brethren, and so in Mark and Luke, but John is distinctive, the relation is heavenly. "My brethren" is a heavenly relationship.
Ques. Would that involve association with the ascending Man?
J.T. I would say that. It is a remarkable expression -- "he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one". Of one order. That precedes the idea of brethren and the idea of singing in the assembly.
P.H.H. When you say the idea of brethren should come first, are you thinking of @John 20?
J.T. Yes, the kindred -- "all of one".
A.J.G. Brethren in @Hebrews 2 are on John's level.
W.C. Would not the brethren in the synoptic gospels flow out of the basic relationship in John?
J.T. I think we should look at the facts. The first is in @Matthew 12, verses  49 - 50, "And, stretching out his hand to his disciples, he said, Behold my mother and my brethren; for whosoever shall do the will of my Father who is in the heavens, he is my brother, and sister, and mother". I think we can see that is not just the same as @John 20. It is really on moral lines there -- His brethren -- but in @John 20 it is a statement of His own as to the disciples¬ relation with His Father. He is constituting them His brethren, that the Father is His Father and their Father, that they have the same Father, He and the disciples. That is not just what we have read -- "Behold my mother and my brethren". He is in the heavens and we are down here, that is not the idea in @John 20. He is ascending, and we are His brethren as ascending. It is a moral setting in @Matthew 12.
Ques. Is that what you have in mind? At the
{157}
outset of assembly service the moral side must be there constitutionally first, or have you the thought of association with the ascending Man also there?
J.T. I would think the latter exclusively. @Matthew 12: 49 would be what marks us when we go in and sit down together before the service commences. We are just brethren, not exactly Christ's brethren, but brethren on moral lines.
If we look at @Luke 8 we see what the side is there -- "My mother and my brethren are those who hear the word of God and do it", verse 21, not the will of God, but the word -- a kindred, but a different thought.
W.C. Mark gives the will of God, not the will of My Father.
J.T. The synoptic gospels are all on one line; John is distinctive -- a distinctive line based on ascending, so that when Christ came in He came in from heaven. That is the principle. Mary was not to touch Him before that, but when He came into the company she could touch Him then; Thomas certainly did.
W.C. I wondered whether the view of the Lord's brethren in the synoptic gospels could be connected with the assembly as morally akin with Him viewed in the loaf, doing the will of God. You said when He comes in it is from heaven and we touch the thought of brethren of the ascended Man; we rise in the service.
J.T. When we are giving thanks for the loaf, we do not view Him as present, but the assembly is there. Hence the Lord's supper takes place in Jerusalem so to speak, which is said to be spiritually Sodom and Egypt.
W.C. Does this in the synoptics take account of the saints as in the wilderness, John more as in the land?
J.T. A clear way of putting it, which I hope all will take in.
{158}
P.H.H. Jonathan comes before Abigail in I Samuel. Does that fit in at all here? David speaks of Jonathan as "my brother". Does that suggest this line of brethren?
J.T. Yes; I have spoken of the love between Jonathan and David as masculine love -- "passing the love of women". When we get on to the idea of brethren and sons of God these relations lift us above the level of the synoptic gospels. It is not a question of what we are morally after the Lord comes in, but what we are as of His order, the same order as Christ, which is typically seen in Abraham's urgency as to kindred; the wife must be of the same kindred as Isaac. That is what Abraham caused the servant to swear to, which shows what an important matter it is and that principle is touched on in @Hebrews 2, in which the writer says, "Both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one". Not all *one*, but *of* one, which is a peculiar form of expression which implies they are of the same order -- a wonderful thing if we take it in. Not that we partake of Deity, but we partake in the nature of Christ as Man.
A.J.G. So that we must be brethren according to John in order to enter into union.
J.T. That is the idea exactly. Colossians and Ephesians deal with it collectively as in Paul's doctrine.
F.C.H. Do you distinguish between the thought of brethren and sons?
J.T. There is a distinction. Brethren are related to Christ and the sons to the Father, but they are the same persons and viewed together as the assembly. The feminine idea is attachable to them.
F.C.H. I notice in regard of Zipporah that the first time the wife is mentioned first and then the sons, but the second time the sons are mentioned first and then the wife.
{159}
Ques. We should like some more help in regard to the order of the service. The Lord has greatly stressed the thought of remembrance of Himself in the Supper both in connection with the cup as well as the loaf, and it seems to have given opportunity for the affections in the marital relation being released. Would not union underlie that?
J.T. I think so, where you have affection aroused.
Ques. Where would you place sonship in the service of God? Have we not thought that the marital side was what was peculiarly for the heart of Christ, but would those who form the assembly have the same relationship as Himself Godward, and would praising in the assembly involve our place in sonship?
J.T. I would say that. Therefore I venture to put the thought of *Sons* and the thought of *brethren* into one, because they are the same persons, and thus they form the assembly. She bears a feminine character from that point in the sense that she is related to Christ as the bride, or as the wife, but she also has a place with the Father, because Matthew says the king made a marriage for his son, and John the baptist says, "He that has the bride is the bridegroom", so that if we segregate the idea of brethren by itself, and then bring in the idea of sons, but think of the same persons, we can introduce the thought of the bride. At the same time if both thoughts are there and merge in the assembly, I do not see why we could not speak then to the Father of His sons, we being His sons in our relation as brethren with Christ. I am afraid there may be confusion in some minds and brethren may think there is contradiction. We were thinking, some of us, this morning of the way that Luke writes one treatise and finishes it, and ignores the forty days, meaning he is not giving so much time to the matter of the Lord's ascension as
{160}
he gives in his second treatise, because the Acts says He was forty days before He went up. The question is now as a practical example, whether the brethren ought not to be patient in these matters, not to be too quick, but let the Lord come in amongst us forty days and see how we get on.
Rem. I think the thing is becoming clearer in our minds, and in our hearts, by your linking the thought of brethren in John with sonship.
J.T. Yes, and also in the prolongation of the narrative. The first stops at @Luke 24, and the Lord is seen carried up into heaven. The next narrative runs along to Paul, and tells us that the Lord had been forty days with the disciples, and that He came in and went out during that time. Paul tells us later in Corinthians that he also had an appearing, so that the time elapsing from the first narrative by Luke until the full thought of the mystery of God has come into evidence is considerable, several years I would say before the matter was completed, and that would show there is need of care and patience so that we may arrive at the whole truth.
A.J.G. And the Lord is giving fresh touches of glory to the truth all the time.
Ques. Has that any link with the waters in Ezekiel that cannot be passed over? There seems to be a continual development in the truth as we are able to bear it.
C.W. When the Lord speaks in John of the Holy Spirit He says "He will guide you into all truth", and then, "he will show you things to come". Does that mean there are things to come? The time arrives when these are made known?
J.T. A time comes when they are current. I would not say the word of God is not completed at any time as Paul said it was completed by him, but the principle is there, that a long time elapsed for the
{161}
whole truth to come out. His ministry was the completion of the word of God.
P.H.H. What you state about the brethren and the sons would be what the saints *are*, and that encourages us as being able to enter into all these thoughts of the Lord Jesus and of the Father. That would help us in whatever there is to come.
J.T. I certainly think so, and how we all merge bearing the same characteristics, because the sons of God and the brethren of Christ are co-relative, of equal value.
C.W. In relation to the service of the assembly, the feminine thought is what the church is peculiarly to Christ Himself, but when it comes to the service of God we have Christ and the assembly moving together in relation to which Christ is leading. Is that so?
J.T. It would be wider than that. It is a question of the testimony too. There is one thing that comes out in the early part of the subject. Isaac and Rebekah become united in regard of the testimony down here. The type implies they are heavenly. Isaac did not come down after he was offered up. It does not say he came down, that means he is a heavenly man, but Rebekah comes in at the end of the 22nd chapter outstandingly in relation to Abraham's family, and now Abraham disappears from the narrative. The servant now deals with Isaac and Rebekah. Isaac is his master, and all that he relates is not to Abraham, although he must have been there; it is a question of what he relates to Isaac, meaning that the testimony is carried on by Isaac and Rebekah; Abraham is no longer treated as in it, the line is carried on in them. So the thought of Christ and the assembly is wider than the actual service of God when we are together. Christ and the assembly are caring for the testimony. The whole testimony of God is in their hands, and I
{162}
think that is important too, because it enables us to think of the place the assembly has in all that the Lord is doing in heaven; she is taken into it.
That brings us to Abigail. It is a great matter now, an important epoch. Samuel is dead, and David arose (verse 1), and then we are told about Abigail, "she was a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance". Then in verse 14 it says that one of the young men told Abigail about Nabal; she is brought into the matter. It is an important matter, because there is an attack on David, and she is brought into it. At the end of the chapter David says: "blessed be thou, which hast kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging myself with mine own hand", verse 33. That bears out what has been said already, the assembly has a modifying effect in the ministry and in the preaching of the gospel, there is a modifying effect intended in her.
A.J.G. I was wondering whether you mean her being here in faithfulness to Christ in the presence of the increasing apostasy has a modifying effect in that it delays the judgment and maintains a testimony of grace in spite of the apostasy.
J.T. I think that would be borne out by the facts scripture affords as to women characteristically. When Nehemiah approached the king for certain things at Jerusalem it is a remarkable thing he mentions his own brethren first, one of the brethren told him about the state of Jerusalem, and then we have the first mention of the queen. She does not do or say anything, but is there, as if there is a modifying power or influence there. That is important in preaching or whatever else may go in relation to the service of God, even the care meetings. I believe the brethren would do well to tell the sisters what happens, because there is always a modifying effect.
{163}
Rem. In writing the first epistle to Corinthians the apostle connects a brother with him, and addresses the saints as brethren alluding to what had been shown him by the house of Chloe.
J.T. A very important matter that. Her house comes into it. We have mentioned others already who might be mentioned here too, showing the modifying influence of the sisters. How often it happens that brothers have a hard judgment about matters, and when they come home and talk about things with the sisters there is a modifying influence for good. So here you see David refers to the same thing, "Blessed be thy discernment, and blessed be thou, who hast kept me this day from coming with bloodshed, and from avenging myself with mine own hand". She, as it were, saved the position.
Rem. You mean, she prevented David from going too far?
J.T. How often that happens.
Ques. Do you get the very opposite with Herodias in connection with John the baptist?
J.T. The king was minded to save John Baptist, but Herodias would have it otherwise.
P.H.H. Abigail comes in with some food, prepared food. Would that too bear on this?
J.T. It is really designed for the purpose we are speaking here today, that we might understand the assembly and its influence for good.
Ques. How do the sisters who are not wives come into it?
J.T. They can ask. Why not? "Ask their husbands at home", is said to the wives, but then the daughters can do the same; if they are godly they will seek it, and make it a matter of prayer.
P.H-d. One of the young men brings the matter to Abigail. What do we learn from that?
J.T. The attention of the assembly is called to
{164}
certain events. That is what he represents, I think. You can see he is an alert young man and says to his mistress, "Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to bless our master; and he has insulted them", verse 14. That is the assembly being made aware of the facts, and she takes it on, and the result is as we were reading.
J.R.S. Is there anything in the fact that God takes the matter in His own hand in regard of Nabal?
J.T. That is another matter. David regards that too. "Blessed be Jehovah, who has pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal", verse 39. Abigail had nothing to do with that, God did it.
Eu.R. Is not that the way God comes in and does things when the information about things is placed in a right assembly setting?
J.T. The brethren take occasion to look into it, and take advice. The care meeting is not an administrative or authoritative body, it is counsel. The brethren have had recourse to care meetings through the past twenty five years or so, more than they used to, and I think God has blessed the care meeting.
{165}
FOOD PROVIDED BY THE LORD
@John 21: 1 - 19
I have read this chapter because it refers to *food*, and because of other things, too, but especially because of the food question, and because of the three manifestations of the Lord spoken of in the chapter, verse 14. The first manifestation alluded to is in chapter 20, beginning at verse 19: the second is in the same chapter, beginning with verse 26, and the third is in this chapter. These manifestations are in mind in the chapter being read, because the chapter really deals with the last days, and implies that the Lord intends to show Himself in a very real way to His people in the last days. The word 'manifestation' or 'manifest' would imply that. It is not simply an ordinary coming to us, as in @John 14, but it is a wider thought, and the idea of three makes the more impression. We have the idea of three in a certain sense similar to this in the first chapter: this is in the 21st chapter, but the first chapter gives the idea of three in regard of days, really in regard of the Lord's gathering. The numeral there runs on to the second chapter, referring to the millennial period. We have to be simple, and, in order to get the true bearing of the numeral as applied to days, we have to begin with the last, that is, chapter 2, and read backwards; but we get the numeral in that way, and how it begins, and how the Spirit of God calls attention to the peculiar gatherings of the Lord at the beginning. We will all remember how the disciples of John left John and followed Jesus, and so the gathering began. The greatest born of women was there, and he had disciples, and two of them left John and followed Jesus, and so the gathering began. There is no one here on earth like John now for the saints to gather to. There are those who draw to
{166}
themselves, and make disciples for themselves; but the centre of gathering is now the Lord. So the gathering began, and the days ran on to the reference in the second chapter. The same principle applies in this chapter, chapter 21; that is, we really need to begin with the third manifestation, and read backwards, so as to get a clear view of what the Lord had in His mind as He talked with the disciples, and hence what He has in His mind now. It is a time of manifestation, not so much a time of gathering, although there is gathering, thank God. Most of us here doubtless are among the gathered -- a very precious fact, a victorious fact, too, that there should be so many in this city or near it, who are gathered among the children of God.
But, as I said, we should begin with the third manifestation, the one I read of, and then revert back to the verses I alluded to in chapter 20, into which certain persons come who are distinctive, and who are to be kept in our minds. I do not intend to pursue the subject of the 20th chapter, although it is one of the most precious in scripture, and especially because of the Lord's appearing to Mary Magdalene, and calling her "Woman", and then calling her "Mary", and then regulating her as to Him, that she was not to touch Him, because He had not yet ascended to heaven. So that we can see that we are now in the time in which ascending to heaven applies. In truth it is a time of going to heaven: it is as if the time had come, the days of going to heaven. We read in Luke of the *days* of the Lord's receiving up to heaven. Already the days had come, @Luke 9: 51.
And so it is now: the days of ascending to heaven have come; not simply of the Lord Himself, but of *our* ascending: the days have come, and what days, dear brethren! What opportunities of learning how to go to heaven! You may say, 'If we die, we shall go there';
{167}
but the point is that the time has come for going to heaven. The heavenly side of things has come, and is being stressed, and the Spirit of God is telling us that the Lord Jesus is about to descend from heaven with an assembling shout. What a day is suggested in that! And the preceding days, as I was saying, may be rightly termed the days of going to heaven.
Well now, I have said all that in the way of preface, and I do not intend to enlarge on chapter 20, but certainly what I have said should be taken note of. Probably some of us have thought as I have said, but I would suggest that the brethren should begin, if they have not already done so, with the idea of going to heaven. The Lord said to the thief on the cross: "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise". That applies to many even now. That man had not received the Spirit: Christ had not died: He had not gone to heaven: the Spirit had not come; and yet the Lord said to him, "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise". The man did not seem to have any doubt about it. There are many who have fallen asleep this very day and have gone to be with Jesus. Do not think I am fanciful or stressing the thing unduly: I am speaking of what is actually true: there are many who have fallen asleep *today*, and have gone to be with Jesus, gone to be with *Him*. He said to the man, the thief, "Today shalt thou be with *me* in paradise"; and Paul had an addition to that: "To depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better", @Philippians 1: 23. The thief did not say that, but the language of Christianity is that: "To depart, and to be with Christ; which is *far* better" -- better even than the very best thing here; and Paul had learned to say that, and has taught us to say it too. How often we do say it, and say it victoriously, at the grave's mouth; and we can continue to say it, until the Lord is pleased to take us to Himself.
{168}
But I am now speaking of going to heaven in the principle of it, of learning not only to go to heaven, but learning the Jordan, to cross the Jordan; for the word is very rightly stressed in the prophets: "How wilt thou then do in the swelling of the Jordan?" @Jeremiah 12: 5. It is a matter, dear brethren, for everyone of us to think of, and especially the older ones; for we are to be taught to number our days that we may acquire a wise heart, @Psalm 90: 12. So when the swelling of Jordan is touched, we are victorious: we are not afraid. It is the learning time in that sense. All that we get as to the passage of the Jordan is to instruct us as to this very matter: how we are to go through, and how we are to be victorious in going through. It is a question of testimony, dear brethren, of how we die. We do not say, "man goeth to his long home", @Ecclesiastes 12: 5: we say we go to heaven when the Lord comes; but rather now we go to be with Jesus. I do not know that we should be too free in designating the place we are going to, but rather the Person we are going to. We are going to be with Jesus. It is a real matter, and a real testimony to the truth.
Well now, I have touched on the manifestations, and I wish to speak about this third one, and to show that it involves food. Great importance is attached to food at the present time: it is so physically. I need not say that the food question is one of the most urgent; but now I must not be speaking of that: it is a question of food in a spiritual sense, and this third manifestation is in relation to food, but it is also in relation to seven disciples who were going astray. I say they were *going*: one says, "I *go* a fishing". He did not imply that he was going astray, but we can see that he was, for had not the Lord come in, who can say what would have happened? "I go", he says, with determination: "I go a fishing", and the others say, "We also go with thee". There were six of them
{169}
besides himself. It is a straying path, but the Shepherd is near by, and with a supply of food ready cooked -- as you might say, a hot meal. It is to illustrate the grace of Jesus in the last days. How ready He is to intervene if there is any straying, or any resolve to stray, or to do one's own will, in defiance of the will of God. 'I go a fishing'. The Lord was near by, but what was He doing? May we not say that He was cooking the dinner? Where did He get the fish? We need not go far to find out, for He could prove how He could find fish. He controls the oceans and the lakes and the rivers. So that when the time of paying taxes comes we can turn to the Lord as to that, too. The Lord can direct one fish with the taxes that may be needed. I am speaking now of very simple matters, but very practical matters, as to the place that the Lord is to have; for in all these things that we call physical and commonplace, the Lord is not too great nor too far above to come down to them; and we are in them. So the Lord enquired of Peter as to who paid taxes among the Gentiles. It looks to me as if the brethren ought not to be narrow in their education in these matters. What we have all gone through in recent times has involved that the earth has become relatively smaller -- not that it is literally so, but it has become better known, and the things in it are better known; and these things are not to be used to add to ourselves, but we are to understand that the Lord is about to come out and put His right foot on the sea and His left foot on the land, and cry like a lion roars. He is about to do that. The fact is that He may have done it in some sense in the way of testimony; but at any rate He has the right to do it, and He is about to do it, to put His right foot on the sea and His left foot on the land. We may wonder why the sea is first. I suppose it involves most. The Lord puts His foot on it first
{170}
He claims it first. All that is in the sea belongs to Him; and so if it becomes a question of taxes, or any claim on us, any righteous claim or unrighteous claim, we can turn to the Lord. He anticipated Peter, as you remember, in that memorable chapter, the 17th of Matthew. Someone in Capernaum had asked Peter, "Doth not your master pay tribute?" verse 24. Peter said, "Yes". Well, he did not know what he was saying, which is often the case with us, and we should not be ignorant about these matters, even these matters that are physical, because they concern us and they concern the Lord too. So the Lord waited till Peter came into the house before He raised the question with him; as Aquila and Priscilla were wise, before they raised a question in Apollos¬ mind as to things he said which were not just right, they took him to them, they did not make a public show of him; nor did the Lord with Peter, but waited till he came into the house. Hence our Bible readings are occasions when the Lord instructs us as to things that we do not know. There is no reason why we should be ignorant even of any of these material things; they concern us and they concern the Lord. So the Lord says, "Of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of their own children, or of strangers?" "Of strangers", says Peter at once: he knew that answer. And then the Lord says to him, "Go thou to the sea, and cast a hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up: and when thou hast opened his mouth thou shalt find a piece of money" -- you will find in it enough to pay what is due according to what you have heard. Peter had heard of the Lord possibly needing to pay taxes, and the Lord liquidates all that matter at once: there was just enough to liquidate the matter.
So the Lord had food ready: "a fire of coals there, and fish laid thereon, and bread". The Lord says,
{171}
"Come and dine". I am saying that because it is in accord with what I have said about going to heaven. I am not referring to these material things to drag us down to earth. There is plenty to do that: the rations will do that: they force us to think about what is current. I am speaking now as using the word which John records, the beloved one, the apostle: "Come and dine"; for that fish, those coals, that bread, was all there ready hot for them, and yet they were straying disciples! It is most touching! There may be some here straying, or thinking about it -- thinking about going into the world, or marrying or joining in a partnership there, or something like that. All these things are current, and they mean turning away from the truth. These seven brothers -- seven apostles (at least five of them were apostles, as far as I can see: probably all were apostles) were about to stray, and they did stray. They went off to fish, following a leader in the wrong direction, going back to his old trade when he should have been following his Lord and Master. So the dinner is all ready. It is very beautiful: the Lord of glory had made it ready. He is not reproving them, though they appear worthy of it. The Lord knows how to deal with souls. They were not far away: there are grades of sinning; and those seven disciples had just taken one step in the wrong direction, just as those of Emmaus had taken one step in the wrong direction, and the Lord followed them up, and brought them back. Here they came back, and so there they came back. It is the Lord's way. So the Lord is saying now: if there is any tendency with any of you to stray, or if we have strayed the Lord is saying, 'I do not want to be severe with you'. I want you to understand from this wonderful chapter, an appendix to the gospel of John, that He is easy with us, He is tender with us even if we are only about to make a step astray, so as
{172}
to intercept us so that we may not make it, so that we may stay in the way. He says, "Come and dine" -- not a reproof. There was a good opportunity for reproof, but the Lord knew better; instead of a reproof it is a dinner -- not simply something to eat, but something dignified. The whole matter was in His hand, and rightly there, and He tenders the invitation to *dine*. It is a dignified word. But it is a meal, too; it is food to eat; but how tender the Lord is, dear brethren, at such a time; and it is a time of straying with many, alas! Many have turned aside, and the word comes, as the Lord says, "Will *ye* also go away?" The answer was by this same Peter, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal; and *we* have believed and known that *thou* art the holy one of God", @John 6: 67 - 69. What triumph there is, as in @Matthew 16, when he was able to say the right word as to who the Son of man is.
Well now, this dinner is what I intended to come to, and what I hope will be used of the Lord to help us as to the tenderness of His solicitude for us for our recovery if we have gone astray, or are about to, or if we are thinking of going astray. How tender He is! As one said, how he longed for the "unrebuking gaze" of the Lord Jesus. Even although there may be cause for it, He knows when the rebuke may be left out, and causes the gaze to be an unrebuking one. And so here: the way of the Lord was perfect: "Come and dine", He says.
Well, I could have said considerably more about the passage, but time fails, I now want to refer to some verses lower down. The Lord had asked them to dine in verse 12, and He had said to them in verse 10, "Bring of the fish which ye have now caught". That is, He would say, 'I want you to be mutual. I want you to understand that I am mutual, and that I can act mutually with you, and that I
{173}
can help you to do things; but I want you to do them'. That is the principle, and Matthew especially is worked out on that principle. The Lord says there, "*I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age", chapter 28: 20, meaning, 'I am ready to work with you on mutual lines, but I want you to do things -- not wait on me always, or on the brethren'. The Lord is ready to help us: "I am with you", He says, not 'you with me', but "I am with you alway". So in this beautiful way He says now, 'I have got everything ready, but I want you to have part with me in that which you have contributed'. So in verse 10 He says, "Bring of the fish which ye have now caught. Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land full of great fishes, an hundred and fifty and three; and for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken". Now this is another point that I must touch on, that is the non-breaking of the net; just as we have it in @Acts 10 that the sheet was knit at the four corners, meaning that it was secured: there was no possibility of breaking. It was let down once, and twice and thrice, and drawn up into heaven again. The sheet was not broken, and so here: the net was not broken. What I would suggest, dear brethren, is that we have come to the time of the real system of Christianity coming to light and being proved. It is being proved: many of us are proving it every week and every day. Christianity is a real, abiding matter, an immutable thing; it is all going up to heaven. The sheet comes down three times and goes up three times, and goes up for ever. It is the power that is in the system that we may rely on. So the net was not broken here, and we arc told how many fishes there were.
We only have one fish in @Matthew 17: it did the work; it was all that was needed. We do not need any more. "Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof", @Matthew 6: 34; also, "Give us our needed bread for
{174}
each day", @Luke 11: 3 -- is the principle of heaven -- living by the day. I am not seeking to put anyone in bondage, but only to show what a system we have come into, and how real it is, and how this number of fishes is symbolic of what there is in the last days: there are great persons coming into fellowship, persons not yet caught, so to speak, not yet convicted or converted, but they are there, and the Lord knows where they are. "Cast the net", He says, "on the right side". That is where they are. It is a question therefore if we want to be in the system, and we should: every person coming into the system and into the blessing should be joining in *doing* things, like the woman of Samaria who left her water pot and went to the city and did something. She went to the men, and there was a result for the Lord. So here, the idea is that the system is unbreakable: there is no other system in the world like it. The system of Christianity is unbreakable because the Spirit of God is here, here to stay. He goes up with the assembly: He does not take the assembly up, you understand: the Lord does that, but the Spirit is here to stay with us. The Lord said that He would be with us always: He said of the Spirit, "He dwelleth with you, and shall be in you", and "... that he may abide with you for ever", @John 14: 17 and 16. But as regards the coming down from heaven and the administration in heaven, it is all a matter which is in the Lord's hands.
If I had more time I should like to say more about the matter of the unbreakableness of the sheet and of the net, meaning that it is the unbreakableness of the system into which we have come, in which the Spirit is, throughout the dispensation, from the moment He came down at Pentecost till now. He is actively in it, and the system is unbreakable. So we may be sure, dear brethren that all is well.
{175}
But then I come to the matter of Peter and food. I was speaking of the food question, and now Peter is to be active in the food matter, and so the Lord says: 'Before you touch the food matter, I want to touch the love matter'. That is what comes out now, this love matter; and the word comes to me: "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves", @John 13: 35. Those in fellowship, those who are genuinely in fellowship, are to be marked by love among ourselves. And so the question of the food and the sheep comes into the Lord's mind. Of course, they were always in His mind, but I speak of the order in which things are stated. The Lord says to Peter: "Lovest thou me more than these?" "These" would be, I suppose, all the apostles. The Lord would have some persons in His mind when He said that; but anyway, there was enough in His mind to challenge Peter as to whether he had more love for Christ than the others. And so I would say, dear brethren, as to the matter of administration, it is a very urgent matter -- the question of love must come up first. Who is worthy of being entrusted by the Lord with administration, and especially with His own lambs and His own sheep, meaning His own young believers and His own old believers: who is to be entrusted with them? This is a most serious matter. Of course we have our care-meetings, and we can thank God for them, because the Lord is with us in them. It is a question of caring for the saints. The word is in the letters of Paul to Timothy, *caring* for the assembly, @1 Timothy 3:5. That is the word that governs the care-meeting. It is a question of care, rightly used, and who is worthy to have to do with the matter. Well, "Lovest thou me more than these?" I would say that is a challenge to every brother who attends the care-meetings, because I believe the Lord is with us in this particular matter
{176}
of the care-meetings, which has come up of recent years rather than the thought of eldership. The word "elder" is not used in 1st or 2nd Corinthians, but the idea of care has, I believe, come in to substitute the thought of eldership -- although the latter is not, of course, given up at all -- far otherwise; but there are *very few* elders, very few fathers. Hence the young men have to be called on and have to be relied on, to come to the care-meetings, and that should be done. So the question comes up, "Lovest thou me more than these?" That is, the Lord would say, 'If you call them *care*-meetings, I admit it, I endorse it, but I want you to understand that it means that love must precede the idea of care; that it is persons who love who can be relied on to care'. So the Lord says, "Lovest thou me more than these", and it is three times repeated until Peter is distressed. It would be a wholesome matter if we were all to challenge ourselves on the eve of our care-meetings as to this matter of love -- loving the saints whether we are true Merarites -- because the Merarites were to look after the boards, meaning the saints: the saints are to be viewed as Merarites as caring for one another in our care-meetings.
So the question is of love, dear brethren, and then of food, and that brings up all of us who are ministering. I thank God for the many brothers who are coming forward now to minister to the saints in addresses and readings: God is with them and with us, because now it is not only a question of instruction, but of food -- it is the food question; and first the Lord says, "Feed my lambs" -- 'If you say you love Me, then feed My lambs'. They are the young saints, the young brothers and sisters, even the young children. The Lord Himself, dear brethren, took the infants into His arms and blessed them: it is most touching! John does not tell us that, Mark says it:
{177}
"And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed them", chapter 10: 16. What did He do that for? Surely to help them, to impress them, to teach them love from the very outset, so that in due course they should come into the assembly. Anyone who is a Christian and who is not characteristically in the assembly is doing something wrong, he is not abiding in the truth, he is not keeping the commandments of the Lord. "If ye love me keep my commandments", @John 14: 15, and the Lord intends the infants as they grow up, the boys and girls, the young men and the young women to be in the assembly. That is the only thing the Lord has in mind -- not only that they might be saved from eternal punishment, but be in the assembly now, having part in the service of God.
So it is a question of food. Peter is pre-eminently to be entrusted with the food question, but it is on the basis of love. So the Lord says, "Feed my lambs", "Shepherd my sheep", then thirdly, "Feed my sheep". Someone may say, 'Why not shepherd the lambs?' The sheep are the ones who need shepherding -- the old people. That is where error comes in; that is where schisms are created; the elder brethren getting disciples to follow after them and creating schisms among Christians. But the Lord says, "Shepherd my sheep". The onus is on each of us here to shepherd the old brothers, the old sisters -- all of us, of course; but the Lord says to Peter, "Shepherd my sheep". So Peter is well filled with employment, and what an employment! He had already been entrusted with the keys of the kingdom, as you will remember: He was designated as material for the assembly; but he also has the keys, not of the assembly, but of the kingdom of heaven. Peter is entrusted with these, and we see him opening the door to Cornelius in @Acts 10. But I am speaking now of the charge of feeding: "Feed
{178}
my lambs", "Shepherd my sheep", "Feed my sheep"; and then to die afterwards, because that is the point. That is the principle of Christianity that if we are worthy of all these, worthy of favour, worthy of honours, worthy of distinctions, worthy of blessings, then we are worthy to die -- not only that we are to suffer death, but we are *worthy* of it. The Lord grants it to us. He granted it to Peter. It was no accident that Peter suffered martyrdom: it was no question of Caesar doing it; it was a question of the Lord. He granted to Peter this great honour of being a martyr. That is open to us now. So the Lord says to Peter here, "When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest; but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not". Now another should do it. It is a question of the Lord granting the favour of martyrdom to the brother or brothers who are so honoured as indicated here. May God bless the word to all of us!
{179}
THE GOSPEL OF HEAVEN
@Hebrews 4: 1 - 16; @Numbers 13: 26 - 27
J.T. It is hoped that we shall see as we proceed that this chapter contemplates the gospel, but properly the gospel of heaven, alluding to the passage in Numbers where we have recorded the spying out of the land of Canaan by those whom Moses sent out, alluding to, not what we might call the gospel of our salvation, but the gospel of the land. The gospel of our salvation touches more on deliverance from Egypt, but this gospel we are alluding to refers to the land. Then it is thought we also might see in connection with this the word of God and the danger of not hearkening to it, and thus not entering into the rest of God; and then the priesthood of Christ, which is evidently added in @Hebrews 4 to support us as in the light of this gospel, so that we may not draw back or become hardened: as it is said in the 3rd chapter: "Today if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness; where your fathers tempted me, by proving me, and saw my works forty years", verses 7 - 9. So that it is hoped that we will reach these points to our profit, first to see that the land is in question in reference to the gospel here: chapter 4: 2.
J.A.P. Would that be in correspondence with @John 3: 16 -- "May not perish but have life eternal"?
J.T. Well, in so far as eternal life leads us into heaven in the thought of it, but I would say the land goes further as a type. It includes our heavenly position, that we are raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies, and that God has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies, @Ephesians 2: 6 and @Ephesians 1: 3. "Every spiritual blessing" goes further than eternal life.
{180}
H.E.F. Would you say in what way it goes beyond the thought of eternal life?
J.T. I would rather say eternal life does not go as far as the heavenly calling. Ephesians contemplates the heavenly calling. Romans (and of course John's gospel, but particularly Romans in the Pauline epistles), treats of eternal life as secured through the gospel, but the heavenly calling is contemplated in Ephesians: we are "blessed ... with *every* spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ" -- "every spiritual blessing".
Rem. Eternal life has an earthly setting, has it not?
J.T. Well, you would have to be careful in limiting it to earth. The Lord in @John 3, when He touches the heavenly side of the subject, says, "If I have said the earthly things to you, and ye believe not, how, if I say the heavenly things to you ...". I think that is in mind. I think eternal life is involved in that. What do you say?
Rem. Yes, quite so; I was only thinking that, in the setting of it, it was enjoyed on earth.
J.T. Well, I would like to keep it nearer to heaven than that as a subject, as a great fact, indeed. I mean, the Lord's own words alluded to in @John 3 would help in that direction. It is said in verse 12: "If I have said the earthly things to you, and ye believe not, how, if I say the heavenly things to you, will ye believe? And no one has gone up into heaven, save he who came down out of heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven"; and then He goes on to the doctrine of eternal life, saying, "And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, thus must the Son of man be lifted up, that every one who believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish,
{181}
but have life eternal", verses 12 - 16. It seems to me that the Lord's words there should be weighed as to our subject, as to the bearing of eternal life, and how near it touches heavenly things, because there is clearly a link with heavenly things in the subject of eternal life.
M.G.W. What are the "glad tidings of the unsearchable riches of the Christ", @Ephesians 3: 8 -- does that link on with the gospel of the land you have referred to?
J.T. Yes, one would think so: "To me", says the apostle, "less than the least of all saints, has this grace been given, to announce among the nations the glad tidings of the unsearchable riches of the Christ"; and it goes on to the mystery: "and to enlighten all with the knowledge of what is the administration of the mystery hidden throughout the ages in God", and so forth, @Ephesians 3: 8 - 9. So that Ephesians clearly relates to the heavenly calling which the land answers to, and the gospel of the unsearchable riches is linked up with the mystery. I mean, we do not want to evade the greatest things if we can rightly or legitimately touch them, and yet have understanding as to how the truth reaches down to earth; just as the expanse in @Genesis 1, the expanse which is specifically called "heavens", evidently reaches down to earth, because it includes the atmospheric heavens. So the link is there between the heaven and the earth, and God says, "The heavens are my throne, and the earth is my footstool", @Isaiah 66: 1, linking them together. Clearly the thought of eternal life is in relation to the millennium, as it says, "The righteous (shall go away) into life eternal", @Matthew 25: 46. Clearly that is on the earth, but then we should be careful as to linking it up with the heavenly, the whole scheme of truth, because the Spirit is here to guide us into all the truth, and that includes eternal life.
{182}
W.B.H. Could heaven be spoken of as the home of eternal life?
J.T. I should not say that. Eternal life is presented as in Christ as to position. At the present moment it is realised in the assembly, because the Spirit is here; but in the future it will be on a lower level; it will be enjoyed on the earth in relation to Israel and the nations; and in view of that we have the names of the tribes of Israel in the gates of the city.
Ques. In what sense do we have to enter into our rest, or His rest?
J.T. Well, now we come down to our chapter. I wonder whether we have got as far as that word as to eternal life. Have we got that matter settled?
Rem. I was wondering, if we were in the gain of eternal life, whether we should have entered into rest -- into the gain of it?
J.T. I should not say that, because it is what Joshua gives in the type. Here in @Hebrews 4, we have: "Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left of entering into his rest, any one of you might seem to have failed of it. For indeed we have had glad tidings presented to us, even as they also; but the word of the report did not profit *them*, not being mixed with faith in those who heard. For we enter into the rest who have believed", verses 1 - 3. Now to speak of that and in any way to limit it to eternal life would be a mistake because we have the greatest thoughts involved: it is the whole scope of the land really, and the gospel of the glory included.
Ques. Does it include what God has found His rest in?
J.T. Just so, that is what it says here.
J.I.W. Would the gospel presented to us in verse 2 of @Hebrews 4 include the epistles to the Colossians and Ephesians?
{183}
J.T. Well, I would say that, Colossians being the lesser of the two, Ephesians being the full thought of the calling, the calling of God. Colossians is on lower ground really, because I would say that the word that would cover it most accurately is "entering", not "having entered", but "entering". It is a period or a territory on which we enter first as crossing the Jordan: there it is that we touch the old corn of the land, but there it is, too, that the circumcision is applied. I think that the word "entering" would be more accurate than to say we have entered, whereas Ephesians contemplates that we have entered: we are raised up together and *made to sit down together* in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, in Ephesians; whereas Colossians is on lower ground, that we are "risen with Christ": it does not go further than that. It has heaven in view, but it is, "raised with him (Christ) through faith of the working of God who raised him", @Colossians 2: 12. So that what we are saying now is of the greatest importance to us in our subject as to the land and as to entrance, and then the full thought of having entered.
Ques. I was going to ask whether there was not in both Colossians and Hebrews a danger of falling short of the great heavenly calling?
J.T. That was the danger at Colosse: they were in danger of being turned aside by philosophy and vain deceit. But I would not connect eternal life as a subject either with Colossians or Ephesians, but rather with Romans. It stands in relation to the gospel, the gospel of our salvation, which Romans opens up to us.
F.C.H. The gospel of the land is included in @Exodus 6, is it not? and also in @Exodus 15? @Exodus 6: 6 - 8, reads: "Therefore say unto the children of Israel, I am Jehovah, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will
{184}
deliver you from their service, and I will redeem you with a stretched-out arm, and with great judgments. And I will take you to me for a people, and will be your God; and ye shall know that I, Jehovah your God, am he who bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians. And I will bring you into the land concerning which I swore to give it unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob; and I will give it you for a possession: I am Jehovah"; and @Exodus 15: 17: "Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, the place that thou, Jehovah, hast made thy dwelling, the Sanctuary, Lord, that thy hands have prepared".
J.T. That is the passage I was thinking you were going to stress, being brought in and planted in the mountain of His inheritance, the Sanctuary being established, taking us as far as David really. It is prophetic in that sense. But we ought to be ready for prophecy, and especially as to Ephesians, to get the idea of anticipation, of the truth anticipated, because it is said that we *are*, not that we should be or shall be, but that we are raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus.
F.C.H. Do you distinguish between the thoughts of being brought in and entering?
J.T. Well, I should say entering is a subjective thought, and is really more in line with Colossians where we need circumcision. They are already across the Jordan, but that was only initial. Jericho had not been taken; therefore I would say that entering is a matter on our side of the truth -- how we enter in: the being brought in is God's side. So it was at the beginning in Egypt: God says, "I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself" -- @Exodus 19: 4; that is God's side; but *they* had to cross the Red Sea, which they did. We need to keep the two things together to help us: that is,
{185}
God's side of purpose and power, and our side through the Spirit and the exercises that accompany the presence of the Holy Spirit.
Ques. Would you tell us a little about the rest into which we are to enter?
G.H.W. Does the word of Moses in Deuteronomy correspond a little with the scripture in Hebrews? It was the desire of Moses in relation to the people of God to enter into the land and enjoy the possession; it speaks of the days of heaven upon earth.
J.T. Just so: Deuteronomy is full of it. Deuteronomy is an unfolding of Moses. It was not what Moses was told to say, but what he said -- a man appreciating the land, not himself entering in, but having an apprehension of it, so that understanding Moses in that sense brings us into touch with one thoroughly in the thing, yet not entering himself because he is under the government of God. He is kept out of it, but he knows it, and was led up to the top of Pisgah to see it, God showing it to him, and not the end nor the beginning, but He showed him the whole land. That is what we should have in mind now, the whole land, because the spies saw it all; they tell us what they saw.
J.A.P. May I ask one more question in relation to eternal life? I was thinking of the epistle of John where it says (@1 John 5: 20) "He is the true God and eternal life"; and it speaks of having the Son and having life (@1 John 5: 12) -- does not that go beyond Romans?
J.T. I suppose it would. It is John's line, of course, but it is not his gospel: it is his epistle, and the epistle really deals with eternal life: "That which was from the beginning, that which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life; (and the life has been manifested, and we have seen and bear witness, and
{186}
report to you the eternal life, which was with the Father, and has been manifested to us)". That is John's epistle, and the subject really is life; but to say that it is the full position of Ephesians, of course, would not do, because it was given to Paul to open up and complete the word of God, as he tells us. So we have the whole scope of divine counsel in his ministry. That is the point today, I believe, if the brethren are ready for it. The Lord is ready to bring us in, because He is going to take us in literally soon in power, but He is seeking to take us in now. Those who have believed do enter into rest, not literally, but in the power of the Spirit. Hence we are warned against having things without faith. The things we hold are to be "mixed with faith" -- a remarkable phrase.
Ques. Was the forty days (@Acts 1: 3) an experience of eternal life?
J.T. Somewhat, but not on their side, because they had not the Spirit yet. We need the Spirit for the enjoyment of eternal life, and they did not have it yet. The life was there: Christ risen was there in their midst, but full Christianity involves the Spirit: "The Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified", @John 7: 39. He must be glorified before we get the Spirit.
W.S.S. Was it your thought that we should be set free to enter livingly at the present time into heavenly things and to distinguish the features of the land -- the hills and valleys and waterbrooks?
J.T. That is what I would say exactly, and this chapter is intended to help us because it contemplates that we have the light. He says, "Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left of entering into his rest, any one of you might seem to have failed of it. For indeed we have had glad tidings presented to us, even as they also, but the word of the report
{187}
did not profit *them*, not being mixed with faith in those who heard". So that we have the light already: God has opened up the truth to us, especially in the last hundred years or so; but the question is whether it has been mixed with faith, and we have learnt to go in for the thing. For instance, as to eternal life it says, "Lay hold of eternal life", @1 Timothy 6: 12. We are told to do it.
Ques. Does the appearance of the glory in @Numbers 14: 10 link on with the testimony of Joshua and Caleb regarding the land? I was thinking of the glory appearing as in support of the testimony of Joshua and Caleb, as if to give it a place amongst Israel.
J.T. I would say that, the glory being there. Quite so. It would be a link with Ephesians, what has just been remarked. We have had glad tidings presented to us: the question is whether the truth has been mixed with faith. Of course, we have it in our bookcases, but then faith is not there: it is a question of our souls. "The word of the report did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in those who heard".
A.M. The Lord does not mention faith or believing in @John 3, until He raises the question as to heavenly things: is that not important? Faith is emphasised from that point onwards in the chapter -- see verse 12.
J.T. That is good. Hence the importance of faith which we find more stressed in John, perhaps, than in any of the gospels. Then we have the long chapter in Hebrews dealing with faith, in which we are told that without faith it is impossible to please God, chapter 11: 6.
C.O.B. Could we link with this thought of entering into the land, the bringing many sons to glory in chapter 2?
{188}
J.T. Well, I would say so. "*Bringing* many sons to glory": it is in agreement with what has already been spoken of: I mean from @Exodus 15. Bringing many sons to glory would agree with the suggestion of being *brought* in, and being planted in the mountain of His inheritance, in the Sanctuary which His hands have established. That is what God has brought into Hebrews to encourage the Hebrew Christians, to divert from apostasy and to salvage whatever possible from the apostate tendencies of the people. That is what the epistle is written for.
Ques. Will you say a word about the rest of God?
J.T. Well, it is a beautiful expression, God entering into His rest. We have to go back to @Genesis 2, for it: it is beautifully linked up with @Exodus 31: 17: "On the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed", showing what is before us -- the blessedness of the rest of God. It has been pointed out that the idea of the sabbath with Israel would probably include about a quarter or more of their time, if the sabbaths were kept according to the instructions, showing how important the thing is in the mind of God; and it begins with @Genesis 2. God rested and was refreshed, we are told in Exodus. So here, what is in mind is the rest of God. "For we enter into the rest who have believed; as he said, As I have sworn in my wrath, If they shall enter into my rest; although the works had been completed from the foundation of the world. For he has said somewhere of the seventh day thus, And God rested on the seventh day from all his works: and in this again, If they shall enter into my rest. Seeing therefore it remains that some enter into it, and those who first received the glad tidings did not enter in on account of not hearkening to the word ..." that is the point: the refusal to hearken to the word, and hence deny ourselves the greatest blessing.
{189}
P.J.B. Who is the "he" in verse 10?
J.T. It is abstract, I should say: whoever it may be -- anyone who has entered: "He also has rested from his works, as God did from his own". It is a question of who enters, and evidently there were very few entering then.
R.S.C. Would that correspond with "his works" in verse 10?
J.T. Well, that would be ourselves: the time of labour is over. God is encouraging us in that way to enter into things. The Lord promises to Philadelphia that we should go no more out.
W.S.S. Is it a practical question for us at the present time as to how far we have entered into rest in order that we might go on to the apprehension of heavenly things?
J.T. Well, that is the object of this reading: it is a question of whether we are open to be convicted of unbelief, or whether we have the holy mixture of faith with the idea of the promises.
Ques. Would you mind saying a word as to the close connection between faith and hearkening? It comes into chapter 3, and right through this one.
J.T. It is a remarkable thing that faith comes by hearing, by the word of God: "Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God", @Romans 10: 17. That is what we are to hear. It is a question of faith and the word of God.
Rem. The danger comes about through not hearkening to the word of God.
J.T. That is right; and of course, "not hearkening to the word" (of God) -- where that is, there is no question of faith at all. So the two things are very closely allied. That is, faith is by a report, but the report by God's word. That is how it is presented in Romans. So that the whole matter here is to challenge us as to whether we have faith or not, because we
{190}
have had the things presented to us: there is plenty of truth: where is the faith?
P.J.B. Do you say that this chapter is preparatory to entering into the full blessings of Christianity?
J.T. So it is; the full blessing, which is far more than Christianity. Christianity refers to something down here, worked out down here by the Spirit, but the heavenly calling is what we are aiming at.
M.G.W. Does this matter of entering into rest coincide with our conscious enjoyment of sitting down in heavenly places?
J.T. That is what I should say, because we touch on God's rest. He has nothing less than that, and it is involved in what the Lord says to the disciples: "In my Father's house are many mansions: I go to prepare a place for you" -- that is, the saints of this dispensation -- "and if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself", @John 14: 2 - 3. That will take place when the Lord comes; but what we see here is the light involved in that, laid hold of now in the power of the Spirit: that is the faith mixture. Do we understand that commodity?
M.G.W. I would like to ask whether the glad tidings are that God has made us to sit down in heavenly places, or that He will bring us there?
J.T. Well Ephesians contemplates that He has already done it: it is a feature of Ephesians. It is already done, because that is a question of the power of God. So in Colossians we are raised by faith of the working of God, but that is not heavenly places. There is the idea first of understanding that we are raised with Christ; that is in Colossians; but in Ephesians it is that we are made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus. That is a question of anticipation; we are safe in doing it for the Spirit of God does it because of the power of God -- what God has promised He will do.
{191}
A.J.T. Do the walls of Jericho stand between Colossians and Ephesians?
J.T. I would say that, although the Colossian position is more the territory, as already remarked, covered by the word "entering". I think Jericho goes a little beyond that: it is the overthrow of the world. The idea of entering is one thing, and the overthrow of the world in our souls is another matter. That is what Jericho means. So Samson may be taken to represent the Colossian truth when his hair began to grow. He lost power when it was shaved, but when his hair began to grow that was a token that he recovered life, and then there was the overthrow of the Philistine house when 3,000 were slain. That was the overthrow of the world. Samson accomplished more in his death than in his life, and we have to do that, perhaps just now. It is a time of coming to the end and bringing down the world. That is the idea of the overthrow of the world, whether it be Jericho or the Philistine house. So Samson said to the lad who led him "Let loose of me", meaning he wanted to be wholly free to exercise the power of God. As long as we are held, even by a lad, on the world's side, we will be hindered. It is by being delivered and set free from any hindering power that the matter of the overthrow of the world is entered upon, because the world has to be overthrown in our souls; we need not expect it to be overthrown otherwise. It is a question of what has taken place in our souls. That is what we get in Colossians.
Ques. Does @Acts 19: 19 exemplify what you are speaking of, where they confessed and burnt their books?
J.T. Quite so: that is the overthrow of the world; that is the world of books -- literature -- not the world in a military idea, but the world of literature, which is a great matter, because most young people are
{192}
damaged by literature and do not go on with the truth because of it. It is not a question of military opposition, but of books.
Ques. You were speaking of Samson overthrowing the power of the Philistines by life operating in him: does not entering into rest involve life operating in the believer as well as faith?
J.T. Quite so; that is, the growth of his hair would mean that life was recovered in him.
Rem. I was seeking to get help as to the connection between faith and life in the believer.
J.T. There is a very strong connection here in what we are dealing with. It is a question of mixing with faith what you have learnt when you were converted. When God spoke to your soul you had faith or you would not get anything. Without faith you would not get anything. So the point is as you get faith and get light enough for salvation, whether you go on in that faith and get the light of the land and entering on it, and then it is life and power in your soul -- potential life -- and that is the point in Colossians.
Ques. "The just shall live by his faith", @Habakkuk 2: 4 -- is that life in connection with the land and the heavenly blessings you have been speaking of?
J.T. Just so, living by faith: that is from Habakkuk. It is one of the passages that affords the idea of faith to us. It is a question of living, not entering into the land, but living. We are now dealing with the question of entering the rest of God which is within our reach as having the Holy Spirit.
Ques. Does that connect with "*he* also who eats me shall live also on account of me", @John 6: 57? One has in mind a touching word from dear Mr. Coates just recently -- that it is a fine way of coming into eternal life to eat your way into it.
J.T. Quite so: that is living by Christ, eating the bread of God that came down from heaven.
{193}
E.B.I. Is that why in @John 3 and @John 10 the gospel of eternal life is linked with not perishing? Is it that we have to be free in regard to that before we can enter into the full heavenly portion in @John 20?
J.T. You are talking now of @John 10, linking it on with chapter 20?
E.B.I. In @John 10: 28 it says, "I give them life eternal: and they shall never perish, and no one shall seize them out of my hand" -- that is heavenly, is it not? And in both cases -- chapter 3 and chapter 10 -- eternal life is presented as if to preserve them from perishing -- something like what we have in @Hebrews 4, not entering into rest.
J.T. Well, just so, only that John is divided as to this point into two sections; chapter 10 is in the first, chapter 20 is in the second, and the second begins properly with the 13th where the Lord has in mind that we should have part with Him, and then chapter 14, and then chapter 15, and then chapter 16, and then chapter 17, where He lifts up His eyes to heaven and says, "Glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee". Now in chapter 9, the blind man had come to the knowledge of Christ as the Son of God: "Dost thou believe on the Son of God? He answered and said, And who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him? And Jesus said to him, Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he. And he said, I believe, Lord: and he did him homage", verses 35 - 38. He is the characteristic man in that section, and it runs on to the end of chapter 12, involving the Jewish side of the position. Chapter 13 begins with the heavenly side, part with Christ, and it involves what we read in chapter 14, as to His coming to us, and also that in His Father's house are many mansions. So we are led into the heavenly side in that section, ending with the Lord's prayer in chapter 17. Then we have chapter 20, which is the climax of the
{194}
matter: chapter 21 is an appendix; but chapter 20 is more than a matter of eternal life: it is a question of the breath of Christ -- fitting us for the heavenly position as about to ascend into heaven. Eternal life is not the point there; it is the breath of Christ. He breathed into them the breath of life: He said, "Receive the Holy Spirit".
Rem. I was wondering whether that corresponded somewhat to the epistle to the Ephesians.
J.T. Quite so: @John 20 corresponds with Ephesians, only it is not the collective side as in the assembly, but the persons who form it.
R.S.C. Could we have a word as to the bearing of the word of God?
J.T. I hope we have profited so far. The word of God, as we have had it already, is given to us in verse 11 of @Hebrews 4, but the confirmation of the idea, the full idea, is that it is God Himself; the word of God is God Himself: "The word of God is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. And there is not a creature unapparent before *him*" -- that is, it runs into God Himself -- it really involves God Himself -- the word of God, which is a matter of great magnitude, entering into ministry and the like. Then it says, "But all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do". Hence we are impressed with the magnitude of what is before us, that is, God Himself in His word, and the terribleness of refusing it, of having our heart hardened to refuse it. But then grace comes in in the 14th verse: "Having therefore a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast the confession. For we have not a high priest not able to sympathise with our infirmities, but tempted in all
{195}
things in like manner, sin apart. Let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace for seasonable help". This is the beautiful grace side of the whole passage -- how the Lord is ready to support us -- if indeed we are subjects at all of the work of God -- to go on into the rest. God has not changed His mind about us at all: He never does. He is ready to do the best for us. So here it is a question of grace in the High Priest.
W.S.S. Would you connect the support you are speaking of with the apprehension of the truth of ascension?
J.T. I should indeed: it is a question of going in. The High Priest over the house of God who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, touches on what we are dealing with: He has passed through the heavens.
W.S.S. I was thinking of that; linking the thought of His having passed through the heavens with the ascension aspect of the truth. It connects with what you have been saying to us at earlier meetings.
J.T. Well, it is connected with ascension, and the thought of the Lord having passed through the heavens is remarkable: it is mentioned more than once in the Hebrews: see @Hebrews 7: 26.
S.B. Would the word of God in verse 12 go further than the word preached in verse 2?
J.T. Well, it is a question of the increase of power involved in the passage, how the word of God runs into it. It is spoken of first as the actual word as it affects our souls, but then it runs into God Himself. How constantly it is brought before us! God is speaking to us: He is near us in grace in these three verses.
Ques. Does that in any way connect with @John 1: l -- "In the beginning was the Word"?
{196}
J.T. Just so: "The Word was God". It shows how the Persons of the Father and the Son are linked together.
J.A.P. Would you attach this to the ministry? How far would you say it was the word of God?
J.T. It is a question of how it strikes you, because it is God in the minister. Any time that we have a meeting like this, it is a question of the word of God. If it is not the word of God, what is it worth? The word of God is through the ministers.
R.S.C. Is it the suggestion that we need to have things clarified and divided for us?
J.T. Well, quite so: the parting asunder as we find it in the types. Here it is, "For we have not a high priest not able to sympathise with our infirmities, but tempted in all things in like manner, sin apart". So that He is near to us, and ready to break things up for us in His grace, tenderly touching us, knowing full well what is needed in each of us, so that He might support us into the position that is in His mind, namely, the rest of God.
F.C.H. The Lord brought it in Himself, did He not, when He was tempted of the devil? I was thinking of His sympathies now; He brought in the word of God, and He is able to sympathise with us.
J.T. "Every word which goes out through God's mouth", @Matthew 4: 4.
C.O.B. What is the confession here which we have to hold fast?
J.T. I think it would be Christianity -- what was confessed in the baptism of the saints, what was involved in it. It really is Christianity. Holding fast the confession is a question of what is presented in Christ for our confession -- what we believe -- what is called "the truth". It is only so as to get the practical side that I am speaking thus, because when we believe on the Lord Jesus we are to confess Jesus Christ as
{197}
Lord, but the whole matter of Christianity is involved in "the confession" as over against Judaism.
C.O.B. In chapter 3, it speaks of the "Apostle and High Priest of our confession" -- is that what we are going on to?
J.T. Just so: it is what we are in, really, what we are going on with here in testimony: it is a confession -- what we say and do, what we acknowledge in relation to the Lord; carrying on the service of God is involved in it, too.
F.C.H. Is the confession our response to the calling?
J.T. Just so. Why should we not take it all in -- the confession involved in the death of Christ, the resurrection of Christ, the ascension of Christ, the advent of the Spirit, and the whole truth? It is a question of the whole truth: that is involved in the confession.
J.I.W. What is the thought of having "passed through the heavens", verse 14?
J.T. He has gone outside of the creature realm, I would say, meaning He is God. Only a divine Person could go into that realm.
R.S.C. Why is it the throne, and no mention of any person on the throne?
J.T. You have that in Hebrews especially and in Colossians in relation to the Fulness: "In him all the fulness of the God head was pleased to dwell", @Colossians 1: 19. We are not told what the Fulness was: it is really a name, you might say.
P.J.B. We believe in the death of Christ and in the resurrection of Christ and in His ascension as having gone into heaven: but does it involve more than that -- the bearing of it upon our souls?
J.T. Well, it is confession, whatever may enter into the word: it is the confession of the truth of Christianity, involving divine Persons and the
{198}
work of Christ and the presence of the Holy Spirit here on earth as over against all other confessions, all other religions. This is Christianity and the Jewish believers were in danger of giving it up.
Ques. Do you think that the bringing of the fruit of the land is in measure the confession?
J.T. It was a testimony to the land -- what beautiful grapes the land grew: it was the subjective side.
{199}
"REVELATION OF JESUS CHRIST, WHICH GOD GAVE TO HIM"
@Revelation 1: 9 - 20
J.T. It is hoped that consideration of this scripture may lead to a better understanding in all of us of the need of the book of Revelation and the object of it; how the brotherly spirit is introduced in this part of the chapter, and how the Lord asserts Himself in speaking to John in His sovereign rights, particularly as bearing on the present time. It is hoped the brethren will be free to speak their minds as to what has been read, and particularly that we may be together in the brotherly spirit and at the same time in the sense of victory which the chapter indicates is achieved by the Lord.
Rem. I suppose it is good to take note of verse 3, "Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of the prophecy, and keep the things written in it".
J.T. You are calling attention to verse 3 because of the blessedness it speaks of I suppose. It says, "Blessed is he that reads ... for the time is near". That is, there is a premium put on the reading of the book. It is sometimes called a sealed book and so the need for looking into it carefully and getting all that is in it in order to have the premium, the blessedness. The Lord clearly chose a trustworthy one to employ in the delivering of the matter, that is John, the apostle John, but here the brother John, we may call him, and also we may say, the prophet John, and more than all, the bondman John, Christ's bondman.
Ques. We get in @Ephesians 1: 9, "Having made known to us the mystery of his will". Does Revelation outline an important part of that mystery?
J.T. Well, I would read it in the light of the remarks of the Lord Himself recorded in @Mark 13: 32,
{200}
"Of that day or of that hour no one knows, neither the angels who are in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father. Take heed, watch and pray, for ye do not know when the time is; it is as a man gone out of the country, having left his house and given to his bond-men the authority, and to each one his work, and commanded the doorkeeper that he should watch. Watch therefore, for ye do not know when the master of the house comes: evening, or midnight, or cockcrow, or morning; lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping. But what I say to you, I say to all, Watch". I should say that is a word that enters into this book. It is called "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to shew to his bondmen what must shortly take place". That is, it is a revelation. It is not the Son using His own divine knowledge but receiving a revelation, and then as it is said, "He signified it, sending by his angel, to his bondman John". That is a special one. "Who testified the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, all things that he saw". So that we are in the presence there of a revelation given to Christ Himself by the Father, by God. "Which God gave to him", and bondmen being employed, especially John, showing they are wholly subservient and available to the Lord in what is to be disclosed. So John takes the place of brother, not asserting his authority but just his brotherly relation and attitude. "I John, your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus". That is he is one of us. The Lord had already intimated in mystery that if He willed He might keep John to the end, so it is that John's testimony enters into this book peculiarly as running on to the end.
J.Ttr. Do you link authority in @Mark 13 with this testimony?
J.T. The authority given to His bondmen in
{201}
@Mark 13: 34, is a general allusion to the place the apostles had, in view of the Lord's departure.
Rem. It is interesting that the words you quoted from @Mark 13, are the last recorded words of the Lord in that gospel.
J.T. It shows the importance of them, and the Lord taking the place of not knowing, not that He did not know divinely being God, but He says no one knows of that day or that hour -- no one knows, "nor the Son, but the Father". The Lord takes that lowly place, and then the authority is given to His bondmen. If we were to read the beginning of the Acts we would take it the authority was given to His apostles, which is true, but they are called bondmen, therefore the thought applies at any time; where there are such bondmen there is authority.
J.Ttr. Is it with us today?
J.T. I think so, on moral grounds. The idea of bondmanship spiritually exists, not ecclesiastical authority under the head of bishops and so on. It is bondmen of Christ. So even the angel who is used to give the instruction says in the last chapter, verse 6, "And the Lord God of the spirits of the prophets has sent his angel to shew to his bondmen the things which must soon come to pass. And behold I come quickly. Blessed is he who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book". And then John says, "And I, John, was he who heard and saw these things. And when I heard and saw, I fell down to do homage before the feet of the angel who shewed me these things. And he says to me, See thou do it not. I am thy fellow-bondman, and the fellow-bondman of thy brethren the prophets, and of those who keep the words of this book. Do homage to God". So that the angel himself is brought into the bondmanship. The whole position therefore is on that footing. But what is in mind now is that we might see John as he
{202}
presents himself, and what is to be noted is the frequency of persons being identified, as John, and the angel, and the Lord Jesus Himself, as if we are all to be reminded of identification. The saints should be identified and identifiable. We have already noted in the book of Acts that the Spirit sat upon each of them there, @Acts 2: 3. It is seen there as the Spirit came in; therefore, we are identified spiritually.
Rem. The bondman would be in accord with the position.
J.T. That is the idea, and worked out in a man who can say he is fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience in Jesus. He is sharing everything with the saints.
Ques. We would distinguish between the ecclesiastical position and moral authority?
J.T. Quite so. The gospel of Mark is particularly on moral grounds. It begins with the Lord introduced immediately "Beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, Son of God; as it is written in Isaiah the prophet, Behold, *I* send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way. Voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. There came John baptising in the wilderness, and preaching the baptism of repentance for remission of sins", @Mark 1: 1 - 4. Then we are told how John was clothed. "And John was clothed in camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins, and ate locusts and wild honey". And then there is his preaching. So that the matter is urgent and introduced urgently and briefly, so that it should become effective, and the same would apply here. We have an introduction by John himself in verses 4 - 6 and then an ascription to the Lord, and God Himself introduced in verse 8. "I am the Alpha and the Omega, saith the Lord God, he who is, and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty", God Himself
{203}
being pleased to introduce Himself in the almightiness of Deity, and yet apparently inclusive of the Lord Jesus. Matters are clearly and plainly stated for us that we might face the situation now, and begin with a companion like John sharing in the tribulations that exist. "Fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus".
Ques. Is the brotherly spirit necessary for the carrying of the position through?
J.T. I should think so, if we are to stay in it. The three terms, tribulation and kingdom and patience, are grouped together as one thing necessary to carrying through the whole matter.
Rem. "A brother is born for adversity", @Proverbs 17: 17.
J.T. Quite so. John is that brother and his qualifications are he is loved by Jesus. He trusted His mother to him. John is the model for us as one amongst us -- a loved person, loved by the Lord and reliable accordingly, and one of us, a fellow-partaker with the saints.
Rem. Would you encourage us who are younger to take up books like these -- Revelation, Daniel etc.?
J.T. I should say so, because I hardly know of any other book with a premium attached to reading it. There are good books written to help us, and the Spirit of God is ready to help us, and the premium is attached to reading this book, the book itself.
The apostle manifests the fears and apprehensions that are common to us all. He was a great apostle and yet was afraid in these circumstances and had to be set up again. The Lord touched him. "He laid his right hand upon me, saying, Fear not". The Lord asserts His supremacy, what He is according to what He says, "*I* am the first and the last, and the living one: and I became dead, and behold, I am living to the ages of ages, and have the keys of death
{204}
and of hades". These are His acquirements and it is to be noticed that John saw Him amongst the candlesticks. It is not Christ in heaven, but amongst the candlesticks, what He is down here moving amongst them. John represents change of circumstances and in them we are apt to be distressed; what terrible experiences the saints have gone through. Even John was afraid by what he saw, but the Lord says, "Fear not". That is the first point we are to lay hold of -- how John went through this in the presence of the circumstances and found relief in the Lord's presence and touch. He presents Himself in a vision according to what He is by acquirement. It is according to what He is divinely too, for He is introduced earlier as the Alpha and the Omega; He who is and was and is to come, refers to what He is divinely, but His acquirements are in view too.
H.P.W. Is it encouraging to see "John, your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus", that character of man is the one who became in the Spirit on the Lord's Day. If we want to get spiritual manifestations, this is the way to get them.
J.T. That is a good way of presenting it. I hope we will all take it in. "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day". How many are not, especially in days when double wages are paid on the Lord's Day, and so many are ensnared by this instead of being in the Spirit.
Rem. There are three things mentioned in verse 4, and the one you have drawn attention to, verse 8, "who is, and who was, and who is to come". Does this help us to understand?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord is presented to us divinely there, but when we come to the vision, John says, "And I turned back to see the voice which spoke with me". The voice said, "What thou seest write in a book, and send to the seven assemblies".
{205}
And John turned back, "and having turned, I saw seven golden lamps". He saw certain other things too, but the position in the seven golden lamps is what we should notice particularly.
H.P.W. I was thinking that I am sure all of us greatly desire to know what it is to be in the Spirit on the Lord's Day and get spiritual manifestations, and what you draw attention to is helpful. "Your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus". I wondered whether all these things coupled together have to have a place with us all. The fact is that the brethren may have to face further tribulation, and the kingdom and patience go alongside of that to help us.
J.T. Exactly. What may come may be gathered up from the prophetic word, and this whole book tells us what is to happen, what is to happen particularly in Christendom. John is telling us he is a brother. He goes through this experience with the Lord, falling at His feet as dead, in verse 17 -- "When I saw him I fell at his feet as dead". That is he is like all of us, capable of being affected by happenings and by appearances, but in this case it is how the Lord appears. He is appearing in a new way, and that is because the circumstances had changed among the saints in the seven assemblies. It is because of this the Lord takes on a new garb; He is not seen as the Jesus of the gospel, He is seen in different garb and habiliments. The Lord comes in from time to time. He is seen here in the midst of the seven lamps, hence He visits the assemblies, and He is sure to come in in relation to conditions. John is to understand. Therefore, having fallen at His feet as dead he is like ourselves, liable to be affected. We are all liable to be affected thus. But it is a question of how the Lord is to be known here, how He meets us. "He laid his right hand upon me, saying, Fear not; I am the first
{206}
and the last, and the living one; and I became dead, and behold I am living to the ages of ages, and have the keys of death and of hades". So John is thus set up in the presence of the situation in confidence, made to live with Christ, the "living one", afresh. The idea of life is introduced in this book. It is introduced *afresh*, not as in John and the epistle to the Romans, but He is alive to the ages of ages and He is in control of all that is adverse. So we are set up to go through the position that is indicated. Then there is what each one is to do. With John it was to write what he saw -- not to teach or preach -- and the order in which he should write. God has blessed us with writings and it is important we should know their value and read them, read them accordingly in the order in which they are written. The Lord gives the order in which this book is to be written.
H.P.W. Whilst the Lord is the first and the last in the widest possible sense as He appears to John, our brother and fellow-partaker in tribulation and kingdom and patience, He says virtually 'I have started with you and will finish with you'. The Lord in any presentation to us would encourage us.
J.T. Just so. If it be discipline, He says, I am going through it with you, notwithstanding the need for discipline; not that it was discipline here. The Lord acts in the most gracious way with John. He says I have other work for you to do and I am going to tell you how to do it. In chapter 10 we have an additional thought to this. The Lord is seen there placing His right foot on the sea and His left on the earth, and He "cried with a loud voice as a lion roars". Then He has a little book in His hand, a little opened book, and John is to take this little book, according to a later verse, and eat it up. He says in verse 9, "And I went to the angel, saying to him to give me the little book. And he says to me, Take and eat it up
{207}
and it shall make thy belly bitter, but in thy mouth it shall be sweet as honey ... And it was said to me, Thou must prophesy again as to peoples and nations and tongues and many kings". Now this is additional to what you were saying. The service is to go on, but something has happened that shows it is needful to bring home to him what is involved in the ministry. The little book contained what was needed and John is to eat it up, and as eating it he is to prophesy again. The servant taken up is to continue. The Lord may have to discipline him and put him through various exercises, but the service is to go on. "Thou must prophesy again". That is most encouraging for us in the service. The Lord sees what is needed and will put us through it, but the service goes on.
Rem. The further prophesyings are richer than the first.
J.T. If we had only time to go through it we should see that what the brethren have been through in these countries has come about as illustrative of what the little book contains. It contains certain things that caused bitterness to the prophet. We can say what we have been through was needful sooner or later so that the testimony should continue.
A. M. Paul had the sentence of death in himself. He went through terrible experiences after he wrote 1 Corinthians and in the second epistle he tells us about them.
J.T. Very good. He had been down to the gates of death.
Ques. What is in mind as to the little book?
J.T. It *is* a little book. I would take it not to be a great deal. It is not like a great history, showing how God can say a great deal in a little. The history of Christendom can be said in a few words, but the judgment of God and the government of God are in what is said.
{208}
J.S.E. We may look in an objective way at the movements of the testimony, but the reality of this has to be faced and felt in one's spirit.
J.T. The Lord would help us to see that what brethren have been through especially in these countries -- I cannot say I have been through it except in sympathy -- was needed and needed not for our own sakes but for the testimony. The Lord says You must prophesy again. You have had good meetings here and they have not continued, but you will have them again.
Rem. You have told us of the bitter, can you tell us of the sweet?
J.T. It is a question of the little book thus presented, the terribleness that would be, and yet the sweetness of the word of God. This book is to be read. There is blessedness in reading it but if we love the people of God we cannot but feel the things that they must go through. Now this glorious showing of the Lord Himself and all that is involved in it is what we should take account of too, and be ready in the light of it to do what is next to be done -- to do the next thing.
Ques. Is it comely to fall at His feet as dead or is it weakness? The glory of Christ would give us to feel our human position.
J.T. Quite so. You would not like to say much, but the Lord laid His right hand on His servant. We are dealing with bondmen and it is a question of each saint being that. This shows how the Lord's servants are treated tenderly and set up again so that the work may continue, and the next thing is to write. Each is to find out what his work is to be. The Lord would touch us. We are working under orders as it were, as the Levites were under Eleazar, @Numbers 3: 32. The Lord is our Superintendent, and the Spirit too, to tell us how to do the work.
{209}
Ques. The Lord laid His hand on John and also held the stars in His hand; is there any correspondence?
J.T. Yes; He is holding them and later on He has them. But this first chapter is that we should all be at work and get our work from the Lord and do it. "Cursed be he that doeth the work of Jehovah negligently", @Jeremiah 48: 10. The Lord wants us to work according to His order. We are to be characterised by the fact that He that does the work is God, @John 14: 10.
J.Ttr. When does the Lord present Himself to us as to John?
J.T. It is a question of levitical order and enters into the book of the Acts. Peter is working according to levitical order. Levites¬ work is heavy work according to what is stated in Numbers but the apostles knew what to do. Peter begins and is preaching standing up with the eleven, not by himself, that is, recognising that all the others were in the same service. We are not working independently. We are all in it and the Lord is over it, and it is for each one to fill his own place. I do not suppose any one of us would be an acceptable servant unless we go through something like this. We have here what John went through.
Rem. In the whole of scripture great servants have to go through experiences before they proceed.
J.T. They all had to go through it and so have we.
Ques. What we are speaking of follows the Lord's appearing amongst the assemblies here. Would there be anything like it for us unless we have a judgment as to what is ecclesiastical?
J.T. John heard a voice behind him telling him what to do. "Write therefore what thou hast seen". And he is told what to do with it. "What thou seest
{210}
write in a book, and send to the seven assemblies", and their names are given. And then it says he turned to see the voice. He wanted to see the Person whose voice it was, but the voice was the first point, then he saw the Lord, a Person like the Son of man in the midst of the seven lamps, and then we are told how He was clothed. This is John's experience given so that we might understand how the Lord serves His servants and cares for them and sets them up in life. It is not John as he was in the gospels, or the time of the gospels, it is some time after. Changes have come about, and there is some writing to be done and the Lord tells him how to do it. It is to be written in a certain order. The work is done at the Lord's direction whatever it be.
J.Ttr. The Lord addresses the assemblies in various ways.
J.T. It brings out the thought of the Lord's surveillance of all that is done. It is all under His eye. He walks in the midst we are told elsewhere. The Lord is expected to come to this city according to the state of things here, or to London, or New York, and we are to be ready to face the consequences. As to what is there we are to be ready to meet it.
Ques. Why is it not the Son of God here?
J.T. All judgment is in the hand of the Son of man. The Father judges no man, we are told. The Lord takes it on, judgment is involved but the judgment is not imminent, there is prolonged care and patience of the Lord towards the saints. The Lord speaks to Thyatira as Son of God, meaning He is over the house, and Thyatira is entrenching on the rights of the Son of God in the house. Judgment is not direct but threatened. "Her children will I kill with death". But the Lord is patient and we are to be too. And when the Lord comes to Birmingham, something will happen if things are not right. The
{211}
Lord puts it on the brethren to adjust it. He says, "I know thy works". He speaks of the good first, and then He says, "But I have against thee that thou permittest the woman Jezebel". That is a serious matter. The Lord is coming to this town and if there is want of love amongst the brethren He will tell us. It may be by the ministry meeting. So those who minister ought to know the current state. The Lord is with them. He says, "Behold, *I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age", @Matthew 28: 20. He is with us so that we may say the right thing in meetings for ministry, and say it well.
A.M. In verse 16 there is a sharp two-edged sword, is that used in ministry?
J.T. I should think so. Therefore the importance of ministry meetings. Ministry in a prophetic sense has a sharp edge to it and is intended to have it, and God gives us gifts for that purpose. This is an additional thing -- the book of Revelation is additional to what is in the epistles, and the Lord is in a new attitude, an attitude of surveillance. As Samuel went round in a circuit in his day, so the Lord does now and He is armed with means of dealing with conditions, whatever they may be, so that these ministry meetings become a great weapon in the Lord's hand in dealing with conditions in the local gatherings.
Ques. Would not the prophetic word expose the whole issue of things?
J.T. Quite so. The book of Revelation is an addition. It does not nullify anything said. It meets changed conditions in the assemblies. The Lord is not abolishing the system set up in heaven. That stands and is to be used, yet there are these additional things so that the brethren may see to bring about changes to themselves, that we may use what is in the system set up. It is a great encouragement that there
{212}
is all this set up for us, so that we might continue, for a great thing has happened and we should take note of it and see why it has happened. The work should go on and be accelerated for worse things are coming, and how are we going to face them?
Rem. In referring to chapter 10, the way the Lord is presented has a bearing upon us at the present moment. Should we know Him in that connection?
J.T. Well, it is a further thought really. It is additional to what we have in chapter 1. It is another presentation of the Lord and has a political bearing, that is the earth and sea, involving the Navy and the Army, and how the Lord will deal with them. We have to wait for that, He has not taken it up yet. What we have now is not so much political but ecclesiastical, and the means He has at hand to deal with things now.
J.S.E. Is that why the symbol of the stars is used?
J.T. Quite so, they are the angels of the seven assemblies. They are a mysterious element of responsibility as obligations are put on them.
{213}
"HAVE YE UNDERSTOOD ALL THESE THINGS?"
@Matthew 11: 25 - 30; @Matthew 13: 36 - 52
J.T. These last two verses are really in mind as to what should be before us: in general it is to link up chapter 11 with chapter 13, specially bearing on the three parables beginning with verse 44 and ending with verse 50. Chapter 11 affords a foundation for what is in mind because it contemplates the Lord's rejection here and His immediate relation with His Father, the holy links of the Father and the Son, and the Son's position before the Father as saying to us, "Take my yoke upon you and learn from me" -- the thought of learning from Him referring to His position as a model for us in these circumstances, all leading up to the assembly. That is briefly what was before one so the time at our disposal as regards chapter 11 is not long. Chapter 13 is the main thought, that is, the three parables: the treasure in the field, the pearl and the net cast into the sea, culminating in the Lord's enquiry in verse 51, which it is hoped will be an appeal, a challenge to us: "Have ye understood all these things?" There has been much instruction, and it is desired that we will receive this challenge as to how much we have learned and are learning.
E.T. Have we to begin as babes?
J.T. I thought that: it is a foundational allusion, the wise and prudent being those who pretend to know religiously, but the Father taking up babes, indicating that He has been working in a fatherly or generative way so as to bring about men such as He has before Him in His thoughts and purposes. It is a question of the Father, how the Father is pleased to operate.
E.T.S. Does that lie at the root of everything we
{214}
have to understand in the later chapter -- the Father's operations?
J.T. I would say so: as the Lord said to Nicodemus, "Thou art the teacher of Israel and knowest not these things?" How is it you do not know certain things that relate to the new birth? Men may know much but know nothing about the new birth and the Father's operations and mind in view of having a man according to His own thought.
Ques. What would be the indications that we are learning?
J.T. I suppose the answer here, "Yea, Lord", would indicate that if the Lord looked into their countenances He would discern there was intelligence there. What you see in the countenances of the brethren would indicate whether they have learned. So in writing to the Corinthians in regard of the Lord's supper the apostle says, "I speak as to intelligent persons". Intelligence should be in our countenances if we are learning.
Ques. Would that apply in the case of Stephen? It says his face shone.
J.T. There was an angelic appearance in it; it might go a little further than what we are speaking of. Of course you would love to think of the brethren as having angelic faces, but I think the idea of intelligence in our countenances should be with us.
W.L. Would that include what we are in our spirits too?
J.T. I should think so. The countenance would represent what is in our mind. A man is composed of body, soul and spirit and the spirit seemingly is that in which we are nearest to God, so it should reflect our relations with God and our formation from God.
Ques. Was David's countenance a reflex of what he was as a man after God's own heart?
J.T. The ruddiness of his countenance would
{215}
indicate life, I should think, and life according to God should carry with it intelligence. Hence Abigail, who is, you might say, the counterpart of David femininely, was a woman of a beautiful countenance, and she was a woman of intelligent discernment.
J.T.S. You spoke of the Lord as model in chapter 11, to contemplate, but in chapter 13 they approach Him inquiringly: "Expound to us". He had said in chapter 11, "Learn from me".
J.T. That is what I had in mind. It is a Man in the presence of the Father, because the Jewish side is abandoned as rejecting Him; the Lord is accepting the rejection and in accepting it He is showing what He is in Manhood, not simply as in Judaism. In Manhood He is a Son, so He speaks to His Father in that relation. One might say there is an unseen voice which the Lord answers -- "Jesus *answering* said, I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes. Yea, Father, for thus has it been well-pleasing in thy sight. All things have been delivered to me by my Father, and no one knows the Son but the Father, nor does anyone know the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son may be pleased to reveal him". This is instruction, whereas verses 25 and 26 refer to His relation and speech to His Father. Then comes His appeal: "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and *I* will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me; for I am meek and lowly in heart". The Lord Jesus is rejected by the Jews; He turns to His Father in the consciousness of His Sonship and His knowledge of the Father and addresses all who labour and are heavy laden to come to Him. As Man before the Father He is as the Model for us, both as to our inward state and enjoyment and for our instruction. I think the line of
{216}
instruction is running through these chapters, and it finishes up in the Lord's inquiry as to whether they understood these things. Hence the point in mind is the challenge as to whether we do understand. There is much teaching and learning, but have we understood these things and followed them up?
E.T.S. It is a wonderful way to learn -- "Learn from Me". We should learn if we are before Him and in His presence more.
J.T. To learn from Him as a model is a wonderful thing. If there is discouragement, well, He is the Model for us.
A.M. Is there a difference between the Father revealing and the Son revealing?
J.T. I would think so. You will notice the Lord says, "All things have been delivered to me by my Father, and no one knows the Son but the Father, nor does anyone know the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son may be pleased to reveal him". The Son is not said to be revealed, but the Father is said to be revealed by the Son; no one knows the Son but the Father.
A.M. I was thinking of the Father revealing to babes and then also the Father revealing to Peter in chapter 16, and whether that was different from the Son revealing.
J.T. The revelation to Peter was not the revelation of the Son to him; it was the revelation of a Man, the Person as He was who stood before Peter. Hence Peter's answer, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God" -- that is, Christ as He was down here in Manhood.
W.B. A great feature in the present economy is the knowledge of the Father and the Son. What is the bearing of @Proverbs 30: 2 - 4. "... I have not a man's intelligence. I have neither learned wisdom, nor have I the knowledge of the Holy. Who hath ascended up
{217}
into the heavens, and descended? ... What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou knowest?"
J.T. The Son as such is not said to be revealed, the Son is inscrutable. The revelation here is of the Father, by the Son.
W.G.C. The Lord's question in chapter 16 was, "Who do men say that I, the Son of man, am?"
J.T. The answer of Peter is, not simply, "Thou art the Son", but "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God". It is to bring out the combination of features in the Lord's Person here below in testimony. There is the idea of revelation in that chapter, and in Ephesians it is the Lord's Manhood to which we grow.
A.B. Would "the Son" imply a divine Person here in Manhood?
J.T. Yes, If it is taken in that way, as the Son in Manhood, He is the Model for us.
The word "know" in verse 27 implies full knowledge, not a mere objective acquaintance. The Father and Son know each other in perfection according to what they are for each other. As to the Son Himself, He is inscrutable.
Rem. It means to us that the Father only knows Him.
J.T. That is the idea: "No one knows the Son but the Father, nor does any one know the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son may be pleased to reveal Him". The Father is the object of revelation here. It is in order to get that basis that we have touched on the eleventh chapter. There is a Model set before us in Man, nevertheless a divine Person. The line of instruction runs through, and in chapter 13 the Lord is pleased to take up the kingdom, and speak of the mysteries of it.
After having unfolded certain parables He went into the house and they inquired about the parable of the tares, which He unfolded to them. He then
{218}
likened the kingdom of the heavens to the treasure hid in the field, then the pearl, and then the net of fishes. These are mysteries which apply particularly to our own times and refer to the assembly.
Ques. Do mysteries refer to the way the kingdom is understood now, before it is set up in manifestation?
J.T. That is the idea. Christianity is a mystery, it is not what anyone can understand; it can only be understood by those who are born again, as were the disciples. The Lord calls attention to this in speaking to them (verses 10 to 18). "Hear *ye, therefore*, the parable of the sower". It is that they were able to understand, indicating that they were the work of God. "Blessed are *your* eyes". The appeal is to us, having eyes to make the most of what is available to us: hence we can answer in the affirmative the Lord's question in verse 51. It is a challenge, and I thought the Lord may use this suggestion to lead to a better understanding of the truth, because the answer brings out a further thought. "For this reason every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old". He singles out a scribe and a householder. He is aiming at setting up among themselves the idea of a model, one to be observed and followed, as the Lord Himself is.
J.H. Is this the thought of manhood going forward?
J.T. I would think so; that is what is in mind -- the reproduction of Himself in measure, and if we have such men then we have some guide and leadership. What is always needed is leadership in the things of God; a scribe is supposed to be an accurate man; he is, moreover, a householder and can display things.
J.H.T. So the babes in Thessalonica, the assembly "in God the Father" had an advantage in having
{219}
Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus: "Ye know what manner of men we were among you for your sake".
J.T. "What manner of men", that is good. You have the same at Corinth: "The Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, even by me and Silvanus and Timotheus" -- you have men whom you can follow. It is a most important thing for us at the present time because the tendency is to introduce novelties in what is said.
E.T.S. Would they have all these three parables very much before them?
J.T. I think so. Ask one of these men about the treasure hid in a field, what would he say about that! The two parables are very much alike, but they are not the same. One is a treasure hid in a field, and the other is a pearl, so that a man discipled into the kingdom of the heaven would be able to find something that would illuminate you.
W.L. Has he found the hidden treasure?
J.T. I think so. The treasure, however, is just mentioned as such. We do not know whether it is gold, silver, or precious stones; it is just treasure and it is in a field, which may be designated "that field", or it may be the whole world. It looks however, as if it is a particular field that the treasure is in.
W.L. You have the assembly in mind in speaking of the treasure?
J.T. Quite so. There are two things mentioned, the historical purchase and then the present purchase or acquirement. "Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a merchant seeking beautiful pearls; and having found one pearl of great value, he went and sold all whatever he had and bought it". It is a historical transaction that is alluded to. I do not know if that has any meaning to you?
W.L. I was going back to your suggestion. What
{220}
would this man say? He might say, I have found the treasure, I know something about the assembly.
J.T. I believe that it is a man that preaches that is in mind, a man who goes out into the field and secures material for the assembly. He knows what the treasure is in the Lord's mind, and I believe it is to be opened up because it is a present thing. Verse 44 is in the present tense: "the kingdom of the heavens is like a treasure hid in the field, which a man having found has hid, and for the joy of it goes and sells whatever he has, and buys that field". "Whatever he *has*", not whatever he had, "and buys *that* field". It seems to be a particular field, not the whole world, I would say, but where you could get material such as is suitable for the Lord's present operations.
Ques. Would the word to Sardis fit in -- "thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their garments"? I was thinking of Sardis as that from whence the Lord is bringing out material.
J.T. That is good, and I think it would also cover any preacher that might attempt to be a missionary, who is thinking of going to China for instance. He would learn that "that field" is not China. Someone who came from the east told me lately that there is only one meeting in the whole of Asia. "The field" is evidently not there.
Rem. The Holy Spirit forbad the apostle to go in a certain field, and the Spirit of Jesus suffered him not to go to another; apparently it was the Philippian field that was in mind.
J.T. If there are only a few brothers in fellowship in the whole of Asia we may be sure that is not the field where the treasure is.
Ques. Should our eyes be on the "field that is being reaped"?
J.T. That is a suggestion; Ruth was not to go outside of it. It is a question of what is in mind in
{221}
"the field". A scribe instructed in the kingdom of the heavens would know, and it is important we should know where the treasure is. If therefore the whole of Asia has only one meeting and has had very little to show for the whole of the dispensation except at the beginning, we may conclude that we have to look somewhere else for the field where the treasure is.
E.T.S. Would you think the brethren who went out one hundred years ago had this before them?
J.T. Some went from Dublin to Baghdad in the beginning of the present revival, but they, did not get anything. In India there have been a few meetings, but largely from European sources; current missionary ideas therefore are not according to what the Lord has in mind here.
W.L. Looking for the treasure is a more spiritual matter than the fishing.
J.T. Quite so, but when the Lord says to Peter, Go to the sea and cast a hook, and you will find a stater in the first fish that comes up, the Lord's sovereignty is in the matter; He knows where the treasure is and how to get it.
Note the tense in the 44th verse: "The kingdom of the heavens is like a treasure hid in the field, which a man having found has hid, and for the joy of it *goes* and *sells* all whatever he has, and *buys* that field". He throws in all that He has now. Hence I would say the Lord is spending all these centuries in this sense, working out the great matter of the assembly where the material is.
J.T.S. The woman of worth considers a field and buys it.
J.T. Very well; she herself would be a great find. There was not such a one until the Lord came, and had the assembly in mind.
Rem. Some areas on the Continent are not favoured as regards gospel testimony.
{222}
J.T. Take Germany for instance; there was a great field three hundred years ago, it is not yielding much now. So we have to consider what comes about now -- what sort of a yield and where the treasure is. What has become of Turkey and the whole of the Mohammedan world? You may make up your mind that if you go there to evangelise, you will not obtain much. The governmental element is current at the present time and we have to find where the field is.
J.H.T. Is Paul in the field in Corinth, where the Lord says, "I have much people in this city", and then at Ephesus where was "the assembly of God which he has purchased with the blood of his own"?
J.T. That is good: hence He had His workmen at Corinth, and He said, "Fear not ... no one shall set upon thee to injure thee". I was also thinking of His spending all that He has -- what, for instance, was expended after the Corinthians were converted, to perfect them; the whole matter rests on Him.
Ques. Would you link what has been said with the word in Corinthians: "I will pray with the spirit, but I will pray also with the understanding"?
J.T. Quite so, hence if you have exercises about going to a field for the Lord, go to Australia and other places around where are fields that are yielding. If you take any Roman Catholic field you will find very little. In a field controlled by Modernism such as Germany, or any of such countries on the Continent, you will not get much. You have to deal with facts: the Lord knows the good treasure hid in the field, and for the joy of it He sells all whatever He has and buys "that field". It is remarkable that the joy is not occasioned by the pearl, it is in the treasure and no one knows where the treasure is but the Lord, because He has hidden it. Therefore I would say it is of the Lord if it is now in the Colonies and the field is
{223}
extending far in the world. The Lord has had joy in it all these centuries, and has His own time for bringing out these things.
Rem. It says of Cornelius that his prayers and his alms had gone up as a memorial before God.
J.T. The memorial had already been set up in heaven before he received the Spirit. There was a great amount of expenditure on him. Three men were sent to Joppa to fetch Peter, and Peter himself was directed by the Spirit to go to Cornelius. The Lord knew what Cornelius was and he was already building up something in heaven before he received the Spirit. Then when he had the Spirit he would be much greater, much more fruitful.
Ques. Would this material be the result of the Father's working?
J.T. I would think so; what the Lord says of the Father would indicate that.
E.T.S. Some of us would not be able to get to Australia, would you encourage us to look nearer home?
J.T. You do not have to go to a place to be assured of what is there; I would take things on testimony, that is what they did at the beginning. Paul had it in mind to go to Spain, but you never read of his going there. So we can learn things on testimony and in that way find out where the treasure is likely to be at the present time.
Ques. Have we before us now two great facts: firstly, what is to be put into it on our side (he sells whatever he has), and secondly to find out where the field is?
J.T. I think the Lord would indicate where the field is. The government of God would help; it is used for that very purpose. For instance, Aquila and Priscilla were in Rome, and they had to leave it because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to leave
{224}
Rome. The apostle found them at Corinth and they were great helpers in the work there.
J.H.T. "The report concerning them reached the ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem, and they sent out Barnabas to ... Antioch: who, having arrived and seeing the grace of God, rejoiced". Was Antioch a fruitful field?
J.T. That is another feature, they had ears: it is a point as to testimony. There is such an idea as church ears, and the assembly at Jerusalem had such. They learned from information available of what had happened at Antioch, and they sent out Barnabas. I think that is the way things work out. If anyone wants to go out on a field in service you can depend on the testimony of the brethren as to it. The Lord has His servants here, and He has already been at a considerable cost with regard to them and has made Himself responsible for still more "whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee". He would say to us at times, 'It is your duty to do, I have paid considerably already'. We ought to learn to work for nothing if necessary, because the overhead is very great. There is the idea of servants being apprentices who do not expect wages; the general principle of an apprentice is that he does not get any, and the Lord would tell us that there are things we ought to be doing without any wages. He spends all -- all that He has; the Lord is putting everything into it so as to get everything out of it, and His servants ought to be on that line. Paul says he did not use what he had a right to so as to make the glad tidings costless to others.
W.G.C. Spending and being spent would be the idea.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Would this be worked out in Philip? He went by the direction of the angel into a desert.
{225}
J.T. He was sent and he found the eunuch, but he was not sent to Samaria so far as we know. That is another point that comes up as regards evangelisation service: the young brethren have to win their spurs, as it were. So Philip *went* down to Samaria, it does not say he was sent. "There was great joy in that city" but no Holy Spirit was given to them. The gift of the Holy Spirit is heaven's matter, not that of the servant, the Lord has to provide that. That is a most important side. He went up to heaven to beg the Father about the Spirit, and He sent Him forth. Philip was not honoured in that connection; through Paul the Spirit was given, through Peter the Spirit was given, but not through Philip. That is one thing to exercise those who are seeking to be labourers. In @Luke 11, 13 it says, "... how much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him?" We cannot afford to be without the Holy Spirit.
A.B. When the question was raised in @Acts 2, "What shall we do, brethren?" Peter said, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, ... for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit".
J.T. If we are working in the field we should be very concerned about the persons whom we seek to serve, that they have the Holy Spirit. The field is only worked in view of that; there is no other thought in the gospel than that the person should get the Holy Spirit.
Ques. How would you discern that a person has the Spirit?
J.T. By his affections and his desires after Christ. The next word relates to the pearl: "Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a merchant seeking beautiful pearls; and having found one pearl of great value, he went and sold all whatever he had and bought it". That would be a matter more of purpose,
{226}
a settled matter. The value of the pearl is already known by persons who can judge, and it is "of great value". So the Lord sold everything that He had, which I believe would be a historic matter, a fixed matter.
Rem. The one who has profited by these things and understands is likened to a householder with treasure.
J.T. The word is used in a typical sense, and we want to speak in anti-typical language. The Levite, for instance, is one that works hard; and therefore as understanding these things in that sense, we ought to be, as the Lord says here: "Every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old".
J.T.S. Would the teaching of verses 45 and 46 leave the sense upon our spirits that the assembly is Christ's and of its great value to Him?
J.T. I am sure that is so. It is a fixed matter, and a finished matter; the overhead is all settled historically. The Lord was looking for pearls, but apparently He never found anything like this, which He speaks of as of great value. It would be the assembly as apprehended by the Lord as from God. As a historical matter the transaction has already taken place, the pearl is secured, but the 44th verse is a matter that has gone on for years. The Lord is constantly spending, and is spending on the material so as to get the treasure. He is going to great expense to bring about conditions in a certain part of the earth that would afford material such as He would have pleasure in, and this has been going on these nineteen hundred years. Whatever He has He expends on it: He will not stop at anything. But the pearl is a known thing; it is a matter of a merchant, a person with a knowledge of the commodity, and he secures it by purchase.
{227}
Ques. Are you suggesting that there are possibly different kinds of material in the treasure?
J.T. Whatever it is. The Lord does not say what it is; we have to take His word for it and in working it out we shall see what it is. The early evangelists soon found out what it was, what joy there was in it. I can understand what joy the apostles had in the result of the first address by Peter.
Ques. "To him be glory in the assembly" -- would that be in line?
J.T. Well, yes. It is a question of what the Lord found and hid. Then what joy the workers, the apostles, the evangelists and teachers had! It was not doleful work: the Lord had joy and they shared it. The Jewish ideal did not come up to the Lord's ideal in this hidden treasure; He kept it quiet, there was joy in it.
Rem. "Who for the joy that was set before him…"
J.T. Here it is the joy *of* it. It is the same idea of course, but I would seek to work it out that way -- the joy of it. What joys the apostles must have had in their work!
J.T.S. "Ye are our glory and joy" -- and the apostle John says, "I have no greater joy ..."
J.T. As regards the pearl, He went and sold all whatever He had and bought it. We read such a thing as, "I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee". There were things in the counsels of God that belonged to the Lord as Man: all that was put into the matter, it is a settled thing in the Lord's death. This other matter, this present matter, however, in connection with which the Lord has been working all these centuries, is to be noted -- the joy of finding every saint. Heaven is full of joy, there is replenishment of joy in heaven all the time, over every sinner that repenteth -- it is not a doleful but a joyous matter.
{228}
Rem. The Lord prays to the Father for those who should believe on Him through their word.
J.T. The Lord had them in His heart when He prayed, and He had joy in them. What joy the Lord had in the apostles -- if we only start there! Wherever the truth comes out you will find this joy in some sense -- when, for instance, the Lord went up into heaven. He was carried up in Luke; Paul says He was received up *in glory*; the Israelitish mother is not in mind, the securing of the earth is not in mind, but we may be sure the Lord is not doleful but joyful. The Lord finds joy in every convert, as do those who are workers with Him. The scriptures abound in testimony as to what the early servants found in the Lord -- joy.
Colossians indicates incompleteness in things: to present every man perfect is in view in Colossians, therefore completeness is needed, but what will be the completeness, the finished product as the Lord comes down from heaven! The assembling shout has to be understood in that connection. This is the great thing He has had in mind all these centuries.
Ques. Would Paul's word to Timothy help: "Think of what I say, for the Lord, will give thee understanding in all things"? You referred to the disciples saying, "Yea, Lord".
J.T. You may be sure the Lord accepted what they said. He accepts them as ready for the work; each one of them had a treasure out of which to bring things new and old. What He is speaking about to the disciples now involves joy as well.
Ques. Could we have a word on the net?
J.T. That is a side where things are good and bad -- a cause of sorrow as well as of joy -- verses 47 - 48. We are at the end of the age now, gathering out the good from the bad. It is somewhat sorrowful to have to throw away, but there is good, and it is a
{229}
question now of getting the good. We want to get all the brethren at the present time in view of the coming of the Lord, to get them all in. In John's ministry there comes up the idea of great fish -- whether the Lord would encourage us by bringing some great ones in for the replenishment of the meetings, so that the testimony goes on in power.
Rem. So there is still great abundance in the sea.
J.T. That is the way to look at it. Sometimes we get a great fish; John brings in the idea of that element.
J.H.T. The house of Justus at Corinth and the school of Tyrannus would represent the sorting principle. Treasure is discovered, then the subsequent ministry relates to the pearl.
J.T. The brethren who are in service do not, perhaps, have so much to do with sorrowful cases. I was thinking when Paul and Barnabas finished their first missionary journey they returned to Antioch and remained with the brethren certain days, apparently a considerable period of time, and then they had to do with conflict, not joyous things. They had to go to Jerusalem and deal with certain injurious elements. The question is whether those who are engaged in getting the fish spend much time in the care meetings?
J.H.T. I do not miss many!
Rem. You want us to be challenged as to whether we have understood these things.
J.T. Mr. T. has said that he does not miss many of the care meetings, and the question is whether we are prepared to miss some of the fishing so as to be at the care meeting and the local gospel meeting.
"Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". They are to be engaged in working out the local assembly position, where the Lord has peculiar joy. The Lord is saying in @Matthew 18: 20 (it is peculiar to Matthew), 'I will help the two or three'. Whatever problem there is to
{230}
be dealt with, they do it, but He is there to help them. The Lord has great joy in the work of assembly persons -- "two of you".
Rem. It says they sat down to cast the worthless out.
J.T. It is a judicial thought; you are doing the thing rightly, according to the principles that govern the position.
{231}
"WALKING TOGETHER"
@1 Thessalonians 4: 1; @Galatians 5: 16; @Numbers 2: 1 - 3
I have in mind to speak about the walk suitable to Christians. Much is made of walk in the scriptures. It is said to Abraham "walk before me and be thou perfect", and he did -- he walked before God. And so Israel, the seed of Abraham, was called upon to walk through the wilderness, and it is said that Jehovah "taught Ephraim to walk", meaning that Ephraim was the leading tribe (though not at the beginning but in later days, for the birthright was Joseph's), but in Hosea, in the days of the prophets, it is said that Jehovah "taught Ephraim to walk" -- chapter 11: 3, and this is in view in Numbers, as I hope to show. Israel was not simply told to go into Canaan, he was led, taken up in leadership, and taught to walk. There was no way in the wilderness, and yet Israel had to go through, but as going through, taught to walk, and obviously according to Numbers, taught to walk together. We read that their shoes did not grow old on their feet, and their clothes did not grow old. There was no need of shops on the way, nor of shoemakers or tailors. They started out with one suit of clothes and shoes and they lasted; they are spoken of at the end of forty years as still in existence, and therefore they have become types for us. We are to learn too that our shoes and our clothes and the like may last longer, in the goodness of God, as they are hard to get, for God takes account of circumstances to prove to us what He can be to us. So He proves to Israel that they could get along with one suit of clothes in forty years, and one pair of shoes. I am not speaking thus just to be odd, but it is a fact of great importance. We may not look for miracles exactly in the times we are in, times of great need, and dearth of everything, but we know there
{232}
was a dearth in those days, wilderness days, and God caused manna to come down from heaven. One meal of manna did not last for forty years, there was plenty of it every day, fresh from God. These are important facts, dear brethren, that I am seeking to bring forward and apply to our times; times of dearth and shortness of everything, and yet we find we have usually enough -- at least in these lands. At the same time we are to learn that even if dearth and shortness continue God is God, and *He* continues. Christ also continues, "the same yesterday, and today, and for ever". There is no change in God and in Christ even as these things are happening, and above all we may reckon on increase in the knowledge of God. I believe we are learning God as we never did before, at least that is what I observe, and experience too. So that Israel proved what God was -- what the God that they had found. Hosea spoke of Ephraim being taught to walk by Jehovah, and I want to come to that presently, and to show how it comes out in Numbers; but before coming to that I touch on the New Testament, as I believe that we should begin with the New Testament. Not that we should always do so, because the scriptures are the scriptures, Genesis as much as Ephesians and Romans, but nevertheless Genesis is not Ephesians, nor Romans. The Old Testament scriptures do not teach Christianity; Christianity was taught by the Lord, it began to be spoken by the Lord, we are told. "God who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son", @Hebrews 1: 1 - 2. That is the last word, as it were. The last word has come to us, and 'in toto', for Paul says he finished, or completed the word of God. So that we are on a sure footing in beginning in the New Testament, as the first converts did. We not only should think of the first preachers,
{233}
but of the first converts. Something is to be learned from the first converts to Christianity, and how they acted. We have not their names of course, there were three thousand of them, but they were very much alike and soon became closely associated, and they were all of one mind apparently.
What I am speaking of now is what belongs to Christianity, and that which has the first place -- 'priority' to use a well-known word. Priority belongs to the writings of the New Testament, and particularly to what the apostles taught and did. We are not told much of the writings at the beginning, it was a matter of what they were saying, and we are told that the converts adhered to what they said. "They persevered", we are told, "in the teaching… of the apostles". There was no priority given to the Old Testament in the early days; it was recognised, of course, for you soon find it as you read the book of Acts, but the early disciples began with and accorded priority to the apostles -- "they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles". They persevered in these things, and so I begin with the New Testament, and in speaking of the apostles I would say that Paul has apostolic priority, and I read from his epistle to the Thessalonians -- a very touching letter, full of freshness. He visited Thessalonica, according to @Acts 17, and preached there three sabbath days. Apparently preaching through the week was not available or convenient, for he was in heathen territory, but he preached at least three sabbaths one after the other, "opening and laying down", that is to say, presenting things in the sense of opening them up and laying them down, making them authoritative, and worth listening to and adhering to, so the assembly at Thessalonica was formed. Afterwards this epistle was written to it, and this verse is in it. "Furthermore then we beseech
{234}
you, brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God, so ye would abound more and more". The apostle is unstinted in his commendation of this assembly. It is called, as you will have noticed, "the church of the Thessalonians", that is to say their local setting and identity is mentioned, showing how the testimony proceeds on geographical lines. Although geography may be regarded as belonging to the world, yet it is not really so, because God has ordained the nations and empires and given certain of them to rule from time to time, and the Romans were then ruling in Thessalonica. God regards rule, He has appointed it. Not only the sun and the moon and the stars, but He has appointed nations to rule, and we are enjoined as Christians to recognise the rulers, that they are God's ministers and not simply people of the world. They are people of the world, of course, who go to theatres and other things of that kind, as well as rule, but while they are ruling they are God's ministers and we are called upon to obey them, but within certain limits of course. We do not go to them for instruction as to assembly matters or as to gospel matters, but we do recognise them as appointed by God to rule in the world, and to keep things in order, and we are to pray for them. Some speak of them as if they were only of the world, but it is not so, they are God's ministers, waiting daily on these matters, and we thank God for them. We should not be here tonight if it were not for them. I am speaking simply, but I am calling attention to facts that are important, and which should tend to make us restful. These Christians are called Thessalonians. I do not care much about brethren calling themselves Englishmen, Scotsmen, or Frenchmen -- not that it is not so -- but it is better to hold to our own country whenever we can, for our citizenship is in heaven.
{235}
Citizenship refers to politics and our politics are in heaven. We have politics but they are in heaven. We belong to heaven. These Christians are called Thessalonians and they are said to be "in God the Father". That is a most precious fact. Whilst they *are* Thessalonians they are in God the Father! God the Father had priority in every respect. He has the priority of a Father; He is our Father, for "to us there is one God, the Father" and He is everything to us. So the Apostle intended to encourage these young Christians. I do not mean they were all young people literally, but they were all young Christians. I should say they were a few months old at the time this epistle was written, and they are held in the apostle's heart in a precious way, as "in God the Father". Not simply born of God, but "*in* God the Father". He is concerned about many things, as we know, including their walk, and he exhorts them "as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God, so ye would abound more and more". There is apparently no limit in his mind to the increase that may be made on the line of walk. We may walk in heaven, for the writer of the hymn we have just sung spoke about walking in heaven, and I think it is a precious thought too. We talk with the Lord there too. In the case of Elijah and Elisha, "they went on and talked". Two men by the Jordan who could be seen from heaven going on in the will of God, "they two went on". So the apostle has this in mind that the Thessalonians should go on -- should walk. The word, of course, implies not only the use of one's feet and limbs, but general deportment and conduct, and the apostle had in mind that the Thessalonians to whom he is writing should continue to walk. They were to walk together, and not only so, but as he says "as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God". That is to say he was a model for them
{236}
in the matter of walking. The word "walking" has a peculiar place here, showing how the walk of the Thessalonians, who were young Christians, became pleasing to God. I do not remember a time when the term 'young Christians' had more force, and was more important than it is now. They are greatly increasing in numbers and the burden of the testimony is coming on them, and it is most urgent that they should abound more and more, instead of slackening, and that the walk in these young Christians, as "in God the Father", should reflect the Father. Paul was a model, and he was a model father. He said to the Corinthians, "yet have ye not many fathers", though they had many instructors, and I would say, dear brethren, we have far more preachers and teachers (and I rejoice in them) than we have fathers. We have very few fathers, and we are in great need of fathers, that is persons who know God, and who are eye-witnesses of what God was in years past. They can tell us what God was, teaching us from what they have learned. Paul was a father, and he speaks of himself most touchingly. He had regarded them and cared for them as a nurse her own children. He had the skill and tenderness of a nurse, and the affections of a mother and a father, so that they were held in peculiar regard in heaven and in the ministry. So he would exhort them, "that ye would abound still more".
Then the verse in @Galatians 5 came to my mind in looking through the scriptures, and in thinking of what should be spoken of. We should think beforehand of what we intend to say. Not verbatim, but the principal thoughts should be in our minds. We are so constituted as to need such preparation for it is very important to have something to say and to be sure of it. This verse then came into my mind as following the verse in Thessalonians, "This I say then,
{237}
walk in the Spirit". This is a great principle, this matter of walking in the Spirit. We are taught, of course, how to walk, as I have been saying, but it is to be "in the Spirit". It seems to me that the Spirit must come into it. We cannot afford to lapse as to the Spirit at all. Even if we are considering prophecy, we cannot get very far without the Spirit. The holy men of God, that is the prophets, spoke as they were moved by the Holy Spirit; and in the creation too, God viewed creationally operated by the Spirit. You may ask me why I should say that? You cannot say the rivers and the mountains and the seas were made by the Spirit. Neither can we, but we can say "By his Spirit he hath garnished the heavens", @Job 26: 13. God did that, and moreover we can say that the Spirit was brooding over the face of the deep, a most touching matter. The Spirit is God, of course, God Himself, He must be so regarded, and we are reminded I think in the second verse of the Bible how God felt the terrible catastrophe that had come about, the devil acting against God and in a big way. The way the devil acted against God must have affected the whole physical universe, and God felt that, and so it is said the Spirit preceded what God did. That is a principle, if a person is to be born anew the Spirit precedes what God does. Whatever the superstructure is to be the work must be begun basically with the action of the Spirit. So it is that these scriptures I have read speak of the Spirit, as if the Spirit would say to us that He is here and actively here and on our account. Not on account of the first creation now, He is here in regard of the new creation. He is the Operator in it too, and so in this matter of walking or deportment or whatever it be, as Paul says "my ways as they are in Christ". His ways would be included. The Corinthians had to learn Paul's ways as they are in Christ, and the
{238}
Thessalonians too had to learn Paul's ways; they had to learn how to walk in the way he taught them.
And now we touch Galatians, another of Paul's products, who were causing him great agony, for the Spirit of God was affecting him profoundly because of the retrogression of the Galatian assemblies, and because of the truth being affected adversely. The devil had damaged the universe, and he began to damage the assembly even in Paul's days, and he is damaging it now. I am speaking soberly now, as I am speaking of the big things men have been handling lately in the war. Satan would make much of them, and of what he can do, and move and control, and there is always the danger of the devil finding a way to stir up sedition on the earth against God, which he directs against the assembly and against the scriptures, for that is his fine work. These big matters are rough ones. He does not avoid the big things, but he is concerned, dear brethren, about our little selves, a few of us in this town or that town. I do not think we should ever begin to count up our numbers at all. We can number the assemblies, but not the persons. Keep the number out of sight, because it is a day of small things, but a day of quality. And so the devil would spoil us, our little selves as I was saying, in these little meetings. These meetings are nothing at all in the eyes of the big men of this world, but they are everything in the eyes of heaven just now. I say everything because heaven is engaged with these meetings. They are the very centre of the divine operations. I do not hesitate to say that at all, and it is in order to stimulate us that we might be thoroughly in them, never avoiding them and always understanding that we should make the most of them and to give priority to these meetings because they work out the purpose of God. The defeat of the devil is a great matter which is now in view, and our
{239}
coming together is to this end. We need to prepare to come together, too, so that we should be together intelligently as persons who know how to walk and how to comport ourselves; how to speak, and how to live with one another; how to love, and so to live, because to love according to God is to live.
"This I say then, walk in the Spirit". I would extend the idea of walking to what I have said, and you will readily see that it implies how we get on together. It involves the way we meet and come together, because it is important to meet each other, and to greet each other, as the apostle says, "greet one another with a holy kiss". Holy, affectionate greetings, that is the idea. Then we are to sit down together and deal with the things of God in the solemnity and decorum that becomes us, with due consideration for one another, loving one another, and above all learning to be subject one to another. The most efficient or able of us must learn how to be subject. I may say one's age ought to give me priority; so it should, but at the same time it does not preclude that an old brother should be subject. Subjection enters into what this passage speaks of, "This I say then, walk in the Spirit". The Spirit is the greatest governing principle of all walk and ways, the sure guarantee for everything that God requires of us, so that we are pleasing to God. If the Spirit is recognised and we do not grieve the Spirit, we please God. If we grieve the Spirit we do not please God. If we quarrel with one another we do not please God. If we wrangle over things we do not please God, and this would extend to our business affairs, our household affairs, and our family affairs. The Spirit is here ready to serve us, dear brethren, in all these matters, so as to bring about a heavenly condition here on earth, and in spite of the contrariety there is much that pleases God.
{240}
I go on to Numbers just for a moment to show how these things work out in the type, and the passage I read serves the purpose. It is a chapter that deals with the encampments of the people because they moved in groups divinely arranged. Divine arrangement marks the whole position, just as it does the physical universe. Arrangement marks it all, it would go to pieces if it did not, and so the moral system is in arrangement; indeed, the allusion to the tabernacle is that it was a pattern of heavenly things. It was a figure, suggestive of the universe, and of what the universe was to God, even His house -- the allusion being to "He that built all things is God". Arrangement marks the universe, and so when Israel was in encampment arrangement marked it and when they decamped and started to move arrangement governed everything, so that heaven is pleased with every move. Six hundred thousand men or more, besides women and children -- possibly two million people -- arranged in this way, and that in a wilderness where there was no way. God had made the arrangement Himself, and their wisdom and salvation lay in following it. It was the divine way, the way through, and Numbers is to show the encampments and how many there were. It would be interesting to go through and see how many. Chapter 33 speaks of the encampments of Israel. Much history entered into all these encampments in the forty years, and there was much for God, and God's patience entered into every moment. Now to come to the point that is in the first chapter -- which precedes what I am saying -- for the first chapter presents the natural order, governed by the order of birth beginning with the firstborn of Israel. There is the firstborn child of the house, and the second-born and we go by this order. The family bible recognises these things, as it were, but then we have to stop sometimes
{241}
and take account of the sovereign action of God amongst the children. We say 'This one is going to be a doctor, and the other is going to be so and so', but then God is showing that He has something to say about these matters. Nature might dictate certain things, but God has something to say, and it is our salvation to see that God has the right to say things in regard of our children, and of what we are going to make of them. So it was in Israel. The first chapter recognises the natural, but the second chapter does not. We have to stop at some time and pass by the natural for the spiritual, otherwise we shall never come into the assembly. The children will never come into the assembly if we go on the line of the natural. The natural man does not understand the things of God, or the Spirit of God, and we have to begin with the Spirit sooner or later if our children are to be safe and if they are to have a place in the assembly, and of course they should, for the children of a christian household are in view of the assembly. Paul would say that, he would tell us constantly that our children are in view of the assembly. That is what he would say and that is what scripture says. So here the second chapter is the spiritual. There were twelve tribes and they were divided into four sets, three each, that is the universal idea. God is saying to us that our children and whatever else, our business, our meetings, whether in Southport or Liverpool or New York, they belong to the moral universe, we are all of one. It is all one matter really with God, and it is going to be that when we get up to heaven, but He is working things out in detail and showing how His love can work them out and how His love can enter into our relations with one another. So He says, Judah is to be first, and you can see how nature would rebel and how the Reubenites would quarrel with that, every Reubenite would quarrel with it. Why should Judah
{242}
be first? But *God* says Judah is to be first; he is to lead the first encampment, and every Israelite that quarrels with that will come to grief. God must have his own way amongst us, and so it is here, "Every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard… And on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they of the standard of the camp of Judah pitch". That is the best position. There were four positions, but this is the best, the most favourable, and so it says "on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they of the standard of the camp of Judah pitch throughout their armies". They are to "pitch" now, then in verse 5 "and those that do pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of Issachar"; Then in verse 9 "These shall first set forth". That is Judah's three tribes were the first to move, and to take the journey whatever it might be. God's choice is to lead, and they had the most favourable position. Then we have Reuben and Ephraim and then Dan, each one in his place, each one representing something, but above all representing the divine order of walk or march. Judah sets out first and anyone attempting to take his place is running across the will of God. We have to learn, dear brethren, in this way to walk together in all matters; recognising one another and each taking the lead, as we are told, in paying honour to the other. Not taking the lead in being first, but in paying honour to the other, so that we are at peace, and free from quarrel. We grow by the true knowledge of God, as we enjoy His presence and as observing His commandments and His order. This is a lovely setting out of things under the eyes of heaven, for the angels are looking on. Even the devil must see it -- and hates it -- but it is God's ordering. It is the testimony of God at the present time, and we are to learn to do these things. Think of all we have been through, of all the sorrows and the suffering that
{243}
we might learn to love one another, and to care for each other, to salute each other rightly. All is to be done in love and in order according to the order that God has prescribed. So that it is Peter and John, not John and Peter. Peter is first, that is the divine order. There is wisdom in that. There is good reason for it, and if there is good reason then we find out what the good reason is and make the most of the divine arrangement, so that love may prevail.
{244}
URGENCY
@Mark 1: 1 - 35
J.T. This chapter is properly considered in relation to the opening chapters of the other gospels, not for comparison, but to see the peculiar character of Mark as marked by urgency. The facts as they come before us will lead to this, "Beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, Son of God", with no allusion to His birth or to the other facts in the other gospels. Urgency marks this gospel, as at the present time. John the baptist is immediately introduced to prepare the way. "The way" comes in at once, the Lord's way; and then John's ministry presented briefly, and the character of his clothing, reminding us of our own circumstances also, rough clothing, no effort at human finery; and then the Lord immediately being baptised is seen as the object of heaven in verses 10 and 11, "And straightway going up from the water, he saw the heavens parting asunder, and the Spirit, as a dove, descending upon him. And there came a voice out of the heavens: *Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight". He is immediately the object of heaven. Then we read, "And immediately the Spirit drives him out into the wilderness. And he was in the wilderness forty days tempted by Satan, and was with the wild beasts; and the angels ministered to him". It shows the roughness of the testimony at the present time. The testimony will go on, however rough or inconvenient this may be, but it is a question of the testimony, and this must go on, even in spite of the opposition and the wild beasts. So that in the light of such a scripture we can face what the testimony will be, and see how successful it is -- verses 32 - 34; and then, "rising in the morning long before day, he went out and went away into a desert place, and there prayed". I think this passage
{245}
would help us to face our present circumstances, that the testimony may continue and prosper.
Ques. Why do you refer to the present circumstances?
J.T. They are extraordinary, as all are aware, though not surprising; deprived of many things, reduction in many things, and not much relief in sight; and we must take up the attitude of faith, and dependence. The wilderness history of the children of Israel gives an example of our circumstances; they had the want or need of clothes, yet God supplied them, and the need of shoes too, so that we get along with less than we used to need; the circumstances shut us up to God, in spite of ourselves.
Ques. Are we to recognize God's hand in it all?
J.T. Yes, it is a question of God and what He can be to us.
Ques. John requires the minimum for sustenance in verse 6; and does verse 12 indicate the urgency in the Lord's service?
J.T. Very good. Let me read the verses: "And John was clothed in camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins, and ate locusts and wild honey", verse 6. "And immediately the Spirit drives him out into the wilderness", verse 12.
Rem. The bare necessities are needed for the messenger.
J.T. There is no evidence that he complained or was hindered by the severity of the situation. "There came John baptising in the wilderness, and preaching the baptism of repentance for remission of sins", verse 4. That is, the ministry is not only unhindered but the service was highly effective in the whole area, producing important results, so "there went out to him all the district of Judaea and all they of Jerusalem", those in whom God had or was expected
{246}
to have wrought. We are in Christendom; He has been working here a long time.
Ques. Is this how "the way of the Lord" is prepared?
J.T. I think so. The quotation is from the prophet, "Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way. Voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight". He is not complaining of his circumstances but thinking of his commission; and it is a question whether we are doing this. One sees that we are not too definite in what is before us.
Ques. Is this like Elijah's ministry, and his experience at the brook?
J.T. Undoubtedly he was in mind; the Lord likened John to Elijah, and the likeness in the clothing is noticeable. We need to be reminded of Elijah, a man that can be impersonated, and also that someone in the future is likened to him, @Malachi 4: 5.
Ques. Are all these references to the prophet Isaiah?
J.T. Yes; he was ready, like John; and the confession of sins, Isaiah had to go through the moral side, involving God's rights, @Isaiah 6: 1 - 7. How much is acknowledged in the way of sinfulness!
Rem. Paul served under adverse conditions.
J.T. One marvels at the way he speaks to the Corinthians, of his experiences, journeys, and sufferings. One sees in him a man not governed by mere nature. John the baptist had to surrender everything to be in the wilderness.
Ques. Do we learn the compassions of God in the external pressure, as Paul refers to it in @2 Corinthians 1:3?
J.T. Yes, that comes out too.
Rem. So Paul speaks of the adversity of his circumstances being made to serve.
{247}
J.T. God can turn things in our favour; we can count on that too. He has done so already and will yet do so, for these things are in the Father's hands. He can use those in public service of the authorities to help.
Rem. I think that was what you had in mind as to coming under the power of circumstances, that we should rather be lifted above them.
J.T. Angels not only minister to Him, but to us "who shall inherit salvation", @Hebrews 1: 14. So in the severe circumstances of @Mark 1: 12 and 13 they ministered to the Lord there; so that we can count on them too.
Ques. What do the wild beasts signify?
J.T. Some have now disappeared, but some are still here, and some are yet to come up, as in Revelation.
Ques. Has the Lord the right of way with us, before He gets it in the millennium?
J.T. Yes, that is pending. We are not there yet.
Rem. I meant that the Lord is on His way to acquire a right of way in the assembly now, before He gets it in the kingdom in display.
J.T. Very good. All is in our favour, the governmental dealings of God, and the fruitful yielding of the earth, so that in everything we can thus give thanks.
Ques. Is baptism in view of the wilderness?
J.T. As here it is in the Jordan, in an appointed place, not any kind of baptism, a matter that we should observe.
Ques. What is in your mind as to things being settled publicly?
J.T. Things among the nations should come into our prayers, in a moral way, and in our subjection, before we have to do with them in a later day. We have a great lead given to us to self-denial; we have
{248}
seen it in our parents, and it is here in this chapter, so that we might as well follow the lead.
Ques. Does the Lord come before us as a model in verses 9 to 11 as pleasing God in accepting circumstances?
J.T. Yes. That is the right way to look at it. "And it came to pass in those days that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptised by John at the Jordan", a humble lowly man, outwardly just an Israelite; He was doing right, as others, and heaven honours Him. The young men amongst us are giving us a lead, as we see them denied their comforts. Nazarites of God are thus produced and fitted for the conflict. "And straightway going up from the water, he saw the heavens parting asunder, and the Spirit, as a dove, descending upon him". There is something to be counted on, as to the measure in which we are in His way.
Rem. Your reference to the Nazarite would enter especially on this line.
J.T. Yes, it would fulfil the features of the type in @Numbers 6. God has His Nazarites now.
Rem. How God honours Him here!
J.T. The point is how this chapter applies to us in this time of pressure and crises. I have referred to the young men; they are learning and progressing in them, but there are those who are not in such circumstances, and the lesson is for us to come into the appropriation of the Spirit seen "as a dove, descending on him". He is the only one yet for the Spirit to come upon, and then the voice, "*Thou* art my beloved Son, *in thee* I have found my delight".
Ques. Would there be a link between this occasion and Paul's reference to "a spirit of adoption" in @Romans 8: 15?
J.T. We have all come into it now, what is involved in the gift of the Spirit, but in Mark it is
{249}
presented as if it is particularly for Him; it is the time of prophecy, and coming in for heaven's approval. The point here is that it is for *Him*, the dove, the voice and the word spoken.
Ques. Would the counterpart for us be in @1 Peter 4: 14: "the Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you"?
J.T. Very good. The Spirit is here now, and in all who truly believe, "and the Holy Spirit also, which God has given to those that obey him", @Acts 5: 32, so that the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon them, especially in suffering.
Ques. Would Mark himself have been adjusted by seeing this in the Lord personally?
J.T. Yes, he was thoroughly restored, I would say, and hence his voice to us who are in any way serving.
Ques. In Matthew it speaks of the Lord being carried up into the wilderness, in Luke He was led by the Spirit there, but here in Mark it says "the Spirit *drives* him out into the wilderness". What is the difference?
J.T. I am glad you mentioned that. "Drives him", we wonder at that. At the beginning we see that He recoiled from it. We should always be like that.
Ques. Would it be right to say that verse 9 is the Lord's own voluntary movement in recognition of John, and that in verse 12 is involuntary?
J.T. Though His own service was so distinguished, He was ever ready to be served. He is recognizing John's service, giving him full recognition, yet ostensibly He is coming to John to be baptised, and maybe some of us have to learn that. It is said of the Lord, "Christ Jesus; who ... having been found in figure as a man, humbled himself", @Philippians 2: 5 - 8. He was doing right, as they were.
{250}
Ques. What are we to learn from the experiences after the driving out by the Spirit? -- verse 13.
J.T. There is a lot more in it than we have said. He shrank from it, from any touch with the devil, unless the testimony required it. He did nothing to make Himself extraordinary. He accepted what there was in this case. It would be seen who He was. We have to wait for distinction; the time for special distinctions is not yet.
Rem. It says in @Isaiah 53: 2, "He hath no form nor lordliness, and when we see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him". He was content just to appear ordinary.
J.T. Yes, especially those who work in business; we accept things as they are, and go on waiting on God, and in due time He will have His way. Then we have in verse 10, "And straightway going up from the water, he saw the heavens parting asunder, and the Spirit, as a dove, descending upon him"; no one had that heavenly treasure, no one else was like that before. Heaven must have the *last* word, as well as the first word.
Ques. What do we learn from the personal character of the salutation?
J.T. It was necessary in view of the testimony, as when Peter so frequently speaks of Jesus of Nazareth in Acts.
Ques. To secure such persons is heaven's approval necessary?
J.T. I think so; the Lord had it, and valued it, that He at the Jordan should be baptised by John; it is very important. He came from Nazareth, and as going up from the water, heaven acknowledged what He had done, the humiliation of it; He saw the Spirit descending, and the voice came, showing that in time we may expect distinction.
Ques. Does "the heavens parting asunder" imply urgency?
{251}
J.T. That is very remarkable, and links with the 'book of the opened heavens', the Acts, and especially Stephen's testimony.
Ques. You are suggesting these features as necessary to the preaching of the kingdom?
J.T. Yes; having seen all these things, verse 14 comes in as a principle, that the Lord does not enter into His service till John is delivered up, which is a levitical touch. So now He comes "into Galilee preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom of God", and we are now entering the part where *time* enters into it, "The time is fulfilled and the kingdom of God has drawn nigh".
Rem. So Paul in writing to Timothy (@2 Timothy 4:17) stresses his deliverance from the lion's mouth, like the wild beasts here, and exhorts him not to be timid, to preach the word, and so on.
J.T. Very good. I have noticed that lately. Some of us have spoken of the gospel in its varied features, but the word is, "Preach the *word*"; this has a peculiar sharpness to professing Christians; the gospel is for the heathen; it is a well-worn term amongst Christians; and while it is the gospel, it is the *word of God* we need.
Ques. Could you differentiate a little more between the two?
J.T. The word of the gospel is the glad tidings; it carries with it grace, telling people, who are sinners, of God's grace, not even imputing trespasses; it is preached, not demanded; all the terms involved in the glad tidings are not to prejudice in any way that forgiveness of sins is preached. The word of God is necessary for *teaching* things that we are now in, in which, maybe the gospel testimony has failed, and been done despite to. So we turn to the *word of God* which "is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword ... and a discerner of the thoughts and
{252}
intents of the heart", @Hebrews 4: 12. It is God's last word ere the apostasy sets in.
Ques. May it become a form, without the power?
J.T. We are not in any way to prejudice the gospel, because God is still God; but how are we to cope with the wickedness abroad without the two-edged sword?
Ques. Does the word of God bring in a prophetic touch?
J.T. Quite; in Hebrews it is the word of God in a severe, uncompromising way, "all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do". It is contemplating the apostasy, a time when there can be no forgiveness.
Ques. Would the bringing in of the word of God enhance the quality of the gospel preaching?
J.T. The terms of the gospel may be used, but I question whether the idea of the *word of God* is understood.
Ques. What is implied in the reference to the Lord's teaching "having authority", verse 22?
J.T. We have there the power of the Lord over demons, which is another thing to be reckoned with, that He has such power. But I am not exactly thinking of the scripture in Mark for the moment but of the passage in @Hebrews 4, and @2 Timothy 4: 2 says, "*proclaim the word*". Hebrews gives the account of the word of God, the last testimony.
Rem. In @Luke 3: 1 and 2 we have a number of authorities mentioned, and then it says, "the word of God came upon John".
J.T. Very good; just exactly what it was, for it was a Jewish position there.
Rem. In @Judges 3: 20 Ehud says, "I have a word from God unto thee".
J.T. Yes, it was a message from God. I think it worth while to weigh over what is said in @Hebrews 4.
{253}
Israel had refused the gospel of heaven, the testimony of the heavenly land; that is what the gospel conveys in the description in @Hebrews 4; and then we have the priesthood of Christ, another provision for men. These are the elements needed at the present time.
Ques. May we limit the blessing in the gospel to forgiveness of sins?
J.T. We have to be armed with the right kind of testimony. Paul preached to the Gentiles as well as the Jews, but he tells Timothy to proclaim *the word*. We cannot depend on the public side much, the hiring of halls, and so on, but on God's word, and its power.
Ques. What about "I will make you become fishers of men" -- @Mark 1: 17.
J.T. This was the beginning of things (read verses 14 to 20). This verse 15 is to be noted, especially the formula the Lord uses, "repent and believe in the glad tidings"; it is an excellent passage for us at the present time, not just attention paid to the glad tidings, but to believe *in* them. It means "look into them", that is in detail, not taking them in toto. If we get the ears of people in the preaching, we will get them to look into them.
Rem. They will then be able to say, God is for us, as in @Romans 8: 31.
J.T. Yes, as if something is handed to them in bulk, and this is to be in mind now.
Rem. Do we learn definiteness in the preaching of Paul at Antioch in @Acts 13: 16 - 41; he is asked if he has any word of exhortation, but he preaches the word of God to them, there is distinctiveness about what he says.
J.T. Yes.
Rem. It is not the question of any preaching to just fill the hour, but of one who has a secret history with God.
{254}
J.T. So it is important not only to appeal to people, but better still to get them to look into the thing as a whole.
Rem. Every element of the truth makes for blessing.
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. At the end of this gospel it says (@Mark 16: 20), "the Lord working with them, and confirming the word by the signs following upon it".
J.T. Yes, we may not see the signs as it was then, but we often see something going on. So the Lord has taken up a deliberate position there, "sat at the right hand of God". So we are to believe *in* the glad tidings, to look into the thing. Mark has that in mind. It is of the last importance to look around and understand the times; if it is the gospel, believe *in* it, but for real conviction, preach the word of God.
Now for verse 33, "and the whole city was gathered together at the door". So we look for some little help or interest above the ordinary, a feature of Mark. Chapter 2 says the Lord was "at home" (verse 1, footnote), "and straightway many were gathered together, so that there was no longer any room, not even at the door; and he spoke the word to them". That is it was His own house, but now that is the assembly. In verse 35 of chapter 1, it says, "And rising in the morning long before day, he went out and went away into a desert place, *and* there prayed". And so with prayer, the interest will come.
{255}
THE EXERCISES OF THE PLAIN PRECEDING ELEVATION
@Luke 1: 39 - 47; @Luke 10: 17 - 24
These scriptures are read with a view to speaking of Luke from the standpoint of elevation, but since coming here this afternoon the thought came to me, not at once to speak of elevation, but of the plain, the moral plain first, so I will read chapter 3, verse 10, "And the crowds asked him saying, What should we do then? And he answering says to them, He that has two body-coats, let him give to him that has none; and he that has food, let him do likewise. And tax-gatherers came also to be baptised, and they said to him, Teacher, what should we do? And he said to them, Take no more money than what is appointed to you. And persons engaged in military service also asked him saying, And we, what should we do? And he said to them, Oppress no one, nor accuse falsely, and be satisfied with your pay". This came to me with peculiar force as entering into what had already occupied us; but characteristically Luke avoids creating trouble, and shews us how the saints can serve on the level of the plain, in that sense, that is, on the level of ordinary conduct, for the government of God enters into it. I feel that attention should be called to it, to see how they can explain these words of John, because of the external circumstances around today; so much being asked, leading to legislation by rulers; and then other things are mentioned, tax-gatherers, soldiers, and the like. The enquiries all make up or tend to the burden of the legislation. And the question arises how the government of God may not be involved by the brethren by their avoidance of what is correct, and the brethren fail in unselfishness, "He that has two body-coats, let him give to him that has none". I say that as a preface, as to
{256}
unselfishness, pending the coming of the Lord. We are to hold the ground in a moral way as presented by John the baptist, not the Lord here. The gospel of Luke contemplates everything being avoided that will hinder the gospel. Luke contemplates the Lord going to heaven at once, because of the gospel. In the meantime the position is to be held in the government of God (not the assembly at the moment) and unselfishness is to mark us, to impart to those who have nothing, a very remarkable thing. We have dealt here today with current conditions, hence the tax-gatherers are told what to do, also the soldiers are to maintain God's government here, day in and day out, to make way for the gospel, *then* the assembly the product of the gospel. These are the great priorities in heaven, and we want to see how we can exemplify in a godly way *His* character (for "piety is profitable for everything", @1 Timothy 4: 8.). Then we have the soldiers of today as we have already been speaking of them, and their testimony, as to their being 'Nazarites of God', for God is supporting those who do their part among the brethren. We want to make way for the prime thought of God, what is elevated, but I have been speaking of the necessity of the exercises of the plain, of the dead level.
I now want to view the ornamental side, set out in chapter 1 and secondly in chapter 10. In the first we have two women, and in the second, seventy men. These two women who were ornamental to the truth suggest what should be; as we see the heavens garnished; in the heavens from the outset of the creation we have ornamentation; the Spirit of God is seen hovering over the face of the waters, involving the terribleness of what had happened, and pointing to what was coming in, the operation that begins with God; so firstly we see His Spirit hovering over the waters, then His great works of ornamentation. But
{257}
we cannot deal with that now. We know God in His operations, and light came in first, followed by life, so that what we have now is the great operational sphere where God is carrying out His great thoughts into effect.
Beautification is in mind in this passage, a most remarkable one that immediately introduces the thought of elevation. I wish to impress this on our minds to begin with, why does it say Mary went with haste? I do not question it. It is scriptural. A great event had happened, the incarnation, not in its fulness, but in principle. Mary had had a conversation with Gabriel; how she drank in his words! No questioning at all with her; let all sisters take that in, for they are apt to question what is right. The Spirit of God is with the sisters to check these questionings; hence here the word is, "Behold the bondmaid of the Lord; be it to me according to thy word. And the angel departed from her". He leaves her for a moment; so we are just left to test us out, to bring out what is of God, who knows what He has planted in our hearts. All these sorrows of the past five or six years are to bring out what was in these years of interest and teaching by the Holy Spirit, and the fruit of it is there and God knows that it is the normal and evident enhancement of the work of God. God has in measure relieved us of the pressure; He has heard our prayers. Jehovah says to Solomon (@1 Kings 9: 3), "I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication which thou hast made before me"; let the brethren take it to heart; things are not over, worse is to come; but we are to take account of the things which are. So Mary is left, the angel departs, there is no evidence of loneliness; she had her husband, but she had *God*, or rather, His angel, and now he had departed from her. Now we come to the passage I read, beginning with verse 39. It is a question of what we are going to do
{258}
next. This nation is occupied with measures of legislation, but there is nothing as to that here; we have a saint before us, a great saint, and there are such here; what John calls "great fishes" -- @John 21: 11, that is great saints, and I speak of Mary as such, for she had had a wonderful interview with the great priestly angel. Angels are "sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation". One is military, Michael, but Gabriel is priestly; these two are named, but there are myriads of them sent out as ministers to the saints, as heirs of salvation; Mary was one of those heirs! I do not go back on their wonderful conversation; it was the incarnation of the Word becoming flesh, a divine Person Himself. One of the greatest events had thus been the theme of conversation between Mary and Gabriel, for he is named here. Now, as I said, what will she do next? A moment of peculiar study for those who think of sainthood, what saints do, those to whom angels are ministers, sent out for that purpose. Much is said of Mary, and how she is seen in the upper room, when the era of great distinction began; the Peters, the Johns, and all the apostles were also in that upper room, but now she is here by herself and she had just said, "Behold the bondmaid of the Lord; be it to me according to thy word", it was *thy* word, God's word, it was the word of the Lord to her. What is her next move? It says, "And Mary, rising up in those days, went into the hill country with haste, to a city of Judah", note the words "*with haste*" in the scripture; and why? Not because she wanted to go to a certain city of Judah, but it was to the hill country, a point of moral elevation; not to relate or parade the great news, not as yet, but to this hill country, as much as to say, a high level is required, not to just talk lightly of such great things, not casting "your pearls before swine", but to take them where they belong, to the
{259}
hill country. Then we have too the persons, the kind of society that belongs to such things, in verse 40, so she "entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted Elizabeth". Not a word about Zacharias, or how many acquaintances Mary had, but she went to the house of Zacharias, and salutes Elizabeth; she was worthy, she was about to be the mother of the next greatest person; she did not know it before, but she understood it now, the unborn babe understood, he leaped with joy; what a remarkable fact and what a suggestion as to these high and holy matters, things between the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, *Their* secrets. Do *we* know anything of them? @John 17 tells us what is available. John the baptist is brought into this worshipful company in the hill-country; though he is not born yet, he leaps with joy. I am endeavouring to cover with holy thoughts, the most holy things, and I appeal to the priests, who alone can deal with such matters. Two things are said in this verse 41, "the babe leaped in her womb", and she "was filled with the Holy Spirit". She then shews that she is a priest worthy of these holy things, she "cried out with a loud voice and said, Blessed art thou amongst women", she is a priest and can name the most holy woman without any sense of rivalry, which would be utterly out of place, so that we should see that we cherish holy things in a holy setting. "Whence is this to me?" she says. She had not noticed it before, it was a body matter. She discerns what came from Mary's voice, and it affected Elizabeth and brought in a third, the unborn babe, a potential priest. Elizabeth discerns that he was joyful, "For behold, as the voice of thy salutation sounded in my ears, the babe leaped with joy in my womb", verse 44. I commend all this to you dear brethren. I hesitate to speak of these holy things, having spoken of chapter 3, but we need both, as is
{260}
implied in @Ephesians 2: 5 and 6, "ye are saved by grace, and has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together", for "together" marks this also. And so, as I said, John the baptist is brought into it. A most remarkable thing that two holy persons with a peculiar maternal link are seen, with a third, John the baptist. It was a moment of supreme joy, the greatest in all history, and John understands, the babe understands what is proceeding, "the babe leaped with joy"; Elizabeth said it, she was most affected by it, next to John himself. It was not conveyed by a voice, but by the power of God operating in our organs, in view of affecting our voices, and Elizabeth is affected by it. Now I go on to bring out a word as to Mary herself; we are not left only with things said *about* her; there is what *she* said, and she said more than Elizabeth. Mary can discern between soul and spirit, another precious matter; so that we can see the faculties involved in worship. Can we discern between the Father's voice, the Son's voice, and the Spirit's voice? We get the latter in Acts. All can be distinguished. The worshippers are to be discerning, to know their faculties, and what is effected, whether by soul or spirit; we cannot yet say "body" (though we must have it to worship with), but the day is coming when we shall have glorified bodies, then all will be accurate. So Paul says, "your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ", @1 Thessalonians 5: 23. God would extol the greatness of our persons, what He has made us, "Beloved, now are we children of God, and what we shall be has not yet been manifested; we know that if it is manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is", @1 John 3: 2. That should be enough for the Christian; it is all we have to serve and to own Him in. How they are needed; we pray for them to be kept. "*He* is Saviour of the
{261}
body" (@Ephesians 5: 23) in whatever state. God can keep us going in need, or rationing, or whatever thing He sees fit to allow. God can keep us as He did Israel in the wilderness. I only say this to draw attention to the spirit, soul and body of the believer; so that Mary says here, "My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour", verse 47, and this holy contribution which Mary gives goes on to verse 55. I only touch on what comes from her soul and her spirit. So that, dear brethren, I think I am justified in calling attention to this scripture referring to the hill-country, to what reaches up to heaven itself. In Genesis I "God called the expanse Heavens"; it was the atmospheric heaven, but the hill-country is moral elevation, where we can reach up to where God is. I want all here to take in what this society means, the only society on earth at the moment where they could have holy communications and worship God. What a season they had as bound up together, involving the holy feelings of believers, that belong properly to every one of us; not on the level of the plain, where the tax-gatherers and the soldiers are complaining, but where the greatest things, the things of the assembly, are spoken of; these holy things belong to us, for we are constituted priests.
In the next passage in chapter 10, we have now seventy men, servants of Christ, directly commissioned by the Lord. He had instructed them in verses 1 to 16, then it says, "And the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the demons are subject to us through thy name". But He says (verse 18), "I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven ... *but* rejoice that your names are written in the heavens", in the highest place above, like the hill-country of Judah. It is like @Ephesians 1: 3, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed
{262}
us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ", in the Person, in whom we are given status up there. Then we have this further word in verse 21, "In the same hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit and said", how He is lifting them up, but how *He* rejoices Himself, "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth", the secrets between the Father and the Son, these we are called up into. He lifts us out of all the service and says, Do not rejoice in this, but in something greater, between the Father and Myself. So He says, "rejoice that your names are written in the heavens", not only having a place, but a fixed position, and status, and title, as having our names there. So our conversation is to be there, our politics are to be there, where our names are; those of the assembly have the first-born's place, like the Levites in Israel, "the assembly of the first-born who are registered in heaven" -- @Hebrews 12: 23, which is a reference to the levitical family, and everyone there can lift up his head, because of this inscription in heaven, and because of the word in verse 23, "And having turned to the disciples privately he said, Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see". I put all these thoughts before you to shew what a position we have as to conversation, and as to status, themes to enter into our affections with one another, for the Lord said them *privately* to them, it is a private matter. The assembly of the first-born is a plural word, and these private words of the Lord are to search us, as to our eyes, that they may be kept in a holy way in order to be used in His service.
{263}
THE SPIRIT CHARACTERISING THE DISPENSATION
@Romans 8: 1 - 17; @1 Thessalonians 4: 13 - 18; @Ephesians 2: 1 - 6
J.T. These passages have been read to bring out what stands related to the Spirit in regard to us, and how His work leads us up to the final translation, which is the work of the Lord; and to shew how His power works in us on that plane or level, in view of righteousness, and how the upward move towards translation is connected with the Father and with Christ. It is particularly in mind to see how the Spirit marks the dispensation, like the type of Elijah and Elisha, that the believer should have a double portion of his spirit, and as he said, "if thou see me when I am taken from thee", if he saw him as he went up, that elevation or translation into heaven is in mind in the ministry, and the question of responsibility has to be met, and the Spirit is the means, even to quickening our mortal bodies according to @Romans 8: 11. In Thessalonians the Lord takes us up, but in Ephesians the Father is in view of taking us up now for the service of God.
Ques. Could you say a little more as to the teaching of Elijah and Elisha?
J.T. Elijah knew he was going up and made preparation for what was coming, and the double portion of the Spirit was to be granted; the type runs on to the present moment.
Ques. Can we have help as to Elisha's service in 2 Kings and its present bearing?
J.T. Yes, it brings out in chapter 4 a type of the Spirit in the case of the widow needing help, she had to borrow vessels, and these are to be filled with the oil she had. This was to be enough for her to sell and pay her debt, and she and her sons were to live
{264}
on the rest; it is a good example of what we have. The oil, that is the Spirit's power, is acquired thus, and then she is to live too, and that is the teaching of Romans, to live in the Spirit, to "live ... on the rest". The Spirit is mentioned many times in @Romans 8, even to His service in quickening our mortal bodies in verse 11.
Ques. Is the thought of life in a scene of adverse conditions seen in this dispensation?
J.T. Quite so, when gathered in assembly we are not then in our responsible conditions; it is then "And see! the Spirit's power has ope'd the heavenly door", so that we may get there before we are actually raised.
Ques. Is that not a unique title of the Lord in verse 3, "His own Son"?
J.T. "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh, in order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit" -- verses 3 and 4. It is a very touching thought, "his *own* Son"; we have a further reminder in the later part of the chapter -- verse 32, "He who, yea, has not spared his own Son"; a like statement, but of equal force; and it occurs in @Acts 20: 28, in a similar way, "the assembly of God, which he has purchased with the blood of *his own*", that is Christ. The first reference, in verse 3, bears on what we have in mind, that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us; they are not legal requirements, they may be thus in the Old Testament, and may be types, but nevertheless are legal, but "righteous requirement" is Deuteronomy.
Ques. Is it a necessary feature for translation?
J.T. Yes, in Deuteronomy more than Numbers,
{265}
where we have what is on the level, before man, before we get to heaven, and the Spirit is the power.
Rem. The Lord quotes from Deuteronomy when He answers the devil in @Luke 4.
J.T. Yes, so as the Lord was meeting the enemy after He had been baptised it was a question of righteousness. I suppose the Lord would meet Deuteronomy righteousness as seen at the end of the wilderness in view of ascension.
Rem. In Luke He "was led by the Spirit in the wilderness". Is that like Deuteronomy?
J .T. That confirms what we are saying.
Ques. We get the references to "Jeshurun" in @Deuteronomy 32 and 33; are "the upright people" ready thus for the land?
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. "Moses commanded us a law, the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob, and he was king in Jeshurun" (@Deuteronomy 33: 4).
J.T. So it is "commanded *us* a law"; it is for us.
Rem. As to the righteous requirement of the law, the Lord says to the baptist, "for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness", @Matthew 3: 15.
J.T. Yes, it is a question of righteousness in view of the assembly, not in view of ascension; we do not get that in Matthew; but Romans is Pauline, yet it also has the assembly in mind, for Paul always had it in mind. So it is necessary that our walk should be fully meticulous, that we should walk in the Spirit; to live in the Spirit is necessary, as due to God, before we attempt ascension.
Ques. Does "his own Son" appeal to our affections, rather than a mere doctrinal statement?
J.T. I think Paul would enlarge on the thought of the Son being revealed in him, "that I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations",
{266}
@Galatians 1: 16. Peter only refers to this once; with Paul it was inward, but with Peter outward.
Rem. So Paul says, "but in that I now live in flesh, I live by faith, the faith of the Son of God", @Galatians 2: 20; the sense of His love works out in practical righteousness.
J.T. He is stressing what we *are*.
Ques. Is the "mind of the Spirit" fully sympathetic?
J.T. It always has Christ in view.
Rem. God is thus vindicated in His own people.
J.T. Yes; the New Testament is the beginning of this for us; we should always begin there, and verify things in the Old Testament. The book of the Acts begins historically with their perseverance "in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles", not Moses, yet the Lord places Moses¬ writings on the same level as His own words.
Ques. Would the double portion of the Spirit be like the first-born's portion?
J.T. I think that. The Spirit of God knew what was in mind; it is really the portion that Christ has, and "God gives not the Spirit by measure" to the assembly. The person of the Holy Spirit is here in the assembly.
Ques. "Thou hast asked a hard thing", would that be a link with "his own Son"?
J.T. Elijah would tell us not to think lightly of the Spirit. He can do the hard thing; it is moral, and it required the death of God's Son.
Ques. Would "My father, my father", correspond with "we cry, Abba, Father"?
J.T. It is a remarkable expression; the king of Israel said the same; he carried the thought down; it was right that it should be carried down; so it enters into our chapter as "we are children of God", and therefore "we cry, Abba, Father" verses 15 and 16. -- It is precious truth in the Old Testament, but precious
{267}
now to us because we have the authority of the New Testament.
Ques. Is "the mind of the Spirit" to affect *our* minds?
J.T. I will read from verse 3, "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh, in order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit. For they that are according to flesh mind the things of the flesh; and they that are according to Spirit, the things of the Spirit. For the mind of the flesh is death; but the mind of the Spirit life and peace. Because the mind of the flesh is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the law of God; for neither indeed can it be: and they that are in flesh cannot please God. But *ye* are not in flesh but in Spirit, if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you; but if anyone has not the Spirit of Christ *he* is not of him: but if Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness". It is not merely the possession of the Spirit, but the mind of it; it means we take character from Him. His sympathy is there, and we learn how He detests the flesh.
Ques. The trend of the flesh is death; would 'trend' be a good word?
J.T. Well, it does not describe "the mind" absolutely; the thought is that the Spirit permeates the Christian, He becomes more potential as ingrained in us. We learn it as He dwells in us, "But *ye* are not in flesh but in Spirit, if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you", verse 9. It is the character of the thing; it means the Spirit characterises us.
Rem. John in Patmos "became in the Spirit on the Lord's day", @Revelation 1: 10.
{268}
J.T. That is more than we have here. This is the bearing of the Spirit in the believer without obstruction; He can deal with sin and righteousness.
Ques. Is it a characteristic setting?
J.T. Yes. If we compare John in @Revelation 1 with this, he was "in the Spirit on the Lord's day"; he was on a very high level, but he heard a voice behind him, calling him back to a lower level, what we have here. "In the Spirit" is an upper trend, as in @Ephesians 2 and 3. But this is the wilderness, where the presence of the Spirit should characterise us.
Ques. Would it be seen in @Philippians 2?
J.T. That is a higher level too; the mind of Christ as becoming incarnate. This is dealing with the Holy Spirit here.
Rem. His service is marked by righteousness, life and peace.
J.T. That is the point in this section.
Rem. It is normal Christianity.
J.T. It is to bring out what Christianity really is; Romans is a fundamental epistle; heaven is not stressed in Romans, only to say "there is revealed wrath of God from heaven", @Romans 1: 18. It is righteousness in the wilderness.
Rem. The law of God is not the ten commandments.
J.T. It is more than that, @Romans 7: 25 is "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law"; that is more than the ten commandments.
Rem. So we learn to love His law.
J.T. Romans is the law of God. It is "for obedience of faith", @Romans 1: 5. The word "kingdom" is added to it, chapter 14: 17.
Ques. Does it correspond to the type where Balaam sees the saints set up by God, "What hath God wrought!" @Numbers 23: 23?
J.T. It comes in in the type after Sinai where the
{269}
law was given; Horeb was more grace. But Deuteronomy must be consulted on the ten commandments, for there are touches there that are nowhere else; it is really the *reasonable* requirement of the law. We spoke yesterday of what John the baptist laid down when they said to him "What should we do then?" @Luke 3: 10. John laid down what each should do; it was reasonable in each case, and so here the Lord lays down what is most reasonable for us as Christians, that we should have them laid down now; it is fulfilled responsibility, and should be seen in the Christian.
Rem. Reasonableness arrived at in @Romans 7, but there is no power till chapter 8.
J.T. Exactly. The "*I, myself*" emphasises the mind of the speaker. Chapter 7 is about himself; he is resolving something, to serve God's law; it is very reasonable and very righteous and the only permissible thing for him.
Ques. Does it involve love; Jesus loved righteousness and hated lawlessness?
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. There is a need for a greater sense of responsibility as to these things.
J.T. I suggested it for that. As we said yesterday, we are confronted with continuance, and Christendom is failing, matters of the tax-gatherers and soldiers remain unsolved (for they are current problems); the devil will turn them into an excuse for socialism or Bolshevism or Nazism as the only means of meeting man's need; his proposal led to the events of six or seven years ago, and the results are plain to all of us. Whereas we are responsible as Christians to represent God in unselfishness, and without greed and love of money, which take away what other people have.
Rem. It is like @Romans 12: 1, "present your bodies".
{270}
J.T. "Which is your intelligent service". The great point here is the Spirit. The Lord begs the Father for Him, @John 14: 16, and in @Acts 2: 33, He receives from the Father "the promise of the Holy Spirit", which He sheds forth; in that lies the solution of everything.
Rem. It is the only way to fulfil righteousness.
J.T. Yes. So the word is, "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which ye behold and hear".
Rem. The Spirit is forming in us divine love.
J.T. Yes, it is in mind here; Romans is the divine answer to all the divine proposals for testimony here on God's part.
Rem. So that "if Christ be in you" is testimony.
J.T. That is good. "The mind of the Spirit life and peace", there is no need of Bolshevism or Socialism or Labour setting itself up; the "law of God" will adjust all these things if we are subject to it in the obedience of faith; nothing is possible without faith. "For the mind of the flesh is death; but the mind of the Spirit life and peace", the mind of the flesh is enmity against God, that is very plain; but the Spirit maintains God's rights in the Christian. So in verse 9 it is a question of the Spirit, "But *ye* are not in flesh but in Spirit, if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you; but if any one has not the Spirit of Christ *he* is not of him". "*Ye* are not in flesh but in Spirit", and then as to those who have not the Spirit of Christ, how solemn that is. Then verse 10, "but if Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness"; the body dead, a corpse, that is how it is held, therefore there is nothing to fear from it.
Ques. What is the difference in @Colossians 1: 27, "Christ in you"?
{271}
J.T. It is similar; the Corinthians were "in Christ Jesus" -- @1 Corinthians 1: 30, but the statement in @Colossians 1 is basic. Colossians works out both positions.
Ques. Are the righteous requirements being fulfilled coming into evidence in the saints?
J.T. That is why I read the passage in 2 Kings as to Elijah's ascension, but the double portion of the Spirit is here.
Ques. Is the "little power" referred to in the address to Philadelphia the Spirit?
J.T. I suppose so; as coming in there in Revelation, it is collective, it is the Spirit in the assembly. In Philadelphia we come to the real thing, the whole assembly having a little strength; it is not the state of an individual believer, but of the assembly.
Rem. The Spirit is amply capable to see us through to the end.
J.T. Very good. So it says in @Galatians 5: 16, "But I say, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall in no way fulfil flesh's lust", ye *shall* not, not ye ought not to.
Ques. Would "*these* are Sons of God" be the saints in the testimony?
J.T. Just so.
Rem. So verse 2 involves the preciousness of the work of God in the saints.
J.T. Yes. We come now to the thought of translation according to Thessalonians. The spiritual power is alluded to in Thessalonians in connection with the Lord's action in view of quickening, which links with the Spirit's action in @Romans 8. It does not say as in @Ephesians 2 the Father quickens. Those fallen asleep are raised, not quickened. "*We*, the living who remain, shall be caught up", the Lord meets us on the way. The Spirit operates on the earth, and He changes us; on account of the Spirit
{272}
we are quickened; we then stand on the earth, and the Lord comes down to take us on; He meets us on the way; we are already on the ascending line. The Spirit is unhampered in us; His activities quicken us and cause us to join in with all the saints.
Rem. It is a great triumph over the enemy.
J.T. The enemy is defeated by resurrection; the Lord raises the dead; the Spirit quickens the living; according to @Romans 8: 11, the Spirit does it and the Lord joins in.
Rem. Like Rebecca who says, "Who is the man that is walking in the fields to meet us"?
J.T. Good. We are quickened because of the Spirit dwelling in us; a remarkable tribute to the Spirit as dwelling in us.
Ques. Does it involve our bodies being changed?
J.T. It is attributed to the Spirit to lead us up to the very point of translation.
Ques. Is it the climax of the Spirit's activities?
J.T. Yes, it seems so.
Ques. Is Enoch a type of our translation?
J.T. The Lord will do it, "for the Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven"; it is an assembly matter.
Ques. Does the Lord's power catch us up?
J.T. The Lord says He will do it Himself; the Spirit makes us ready. The meeting in the air is all the Lord's matter.
Ques. Do the Spirit's activities lie behind @Colossians 1: 13, but translating "us into the kingdom of the Son of his love" is the Father's act?
J.T. That fits in with Ephesians where we are now. In Colossians quickening is seen running on from the power of resurrection. In @Ephesians 2: 4 and 5 it is because of God's great love that He "has quickened us with the Christ", and then the parenthesis,
{273}
"ye are saved by grace", so that quickening is included in the idea of saving. I understand that this refers to what is current at the present time; what the Father does. We are not to be behind in the privilege of going into heaven in our minds now.
Ques. Is it a collective matter?
J.T. It is to fit us for the enjoyment of love's realm; we do not want to go up there alone, but we are to go "together".
Rem. Conditions here are suited to translation.
J.T. Yes, it is here now in the service of God, in the power of the Spirit, the Father's Spirit.
Ques. Why are we quickened first, and then "raised us up together"?
J.T. This is not resurrection, but elevation; each one is raised separately.
Ques. Does "made us sit down together" imply a restful state?
J.T. Yes, it is proper to the service of God, as in @Acts 2: 2, there is dignity in it.
Ques. We are quickened and raised with Christ in Colossians, but here in @Ephesians 2 we are quickened in view of this service?
J.T. Colossians is faith really; we have got the power in us; but Ephesians is connected with the Father and His quickening power.
Ques. Is it to give us capacity?
J.T. The spirit of Ephesians is not to leave the brethren out, the word is "together", it is the Father's work, it is "with Christ".
Ques. Does "together" refer to Jew and Gentile united, or to the position of the saints in Christ Jesus?
J.T. The saints are in mind.
Ques. Is it in contrast to "*you*, being dead in your offences and sins" -- verse 1?
J.T. Yes, and then as to love, "And you, being dead in your offences and sins ... and were children,
{274}
by nature, of wrath, even as the rest: but God, being rich in mercy, because of His great love wherewith he loved us"; I refer to the trend of Ephesians, love is behind it all. It means that what He set out at the beginning is now reached in the unity of the saints; because of that "great love" we have the brethren with us.
Rem. 'Nor we alone, Thy loved ones all complete'.
{275}
CALAMITY
@1 Chronicles 7: 20 - 27; @Mark 9: 16 - 29
The brethren will have observed that I called attention to the better translation in the first scripture read, and that calamity in the house of Ephraim is mentioned, evil is calamity, and vice versa, but the word 'evil' has a moral meaning, whereas 'calamity' may not be blameworthy, especially in the household alluded to. I have read of calamitous conditions in these two houses. In @Mark 9 it is a matter of lunacy (though not called it in Mark, but in Matthew, but I need not comment on it), a most sorrowful matter for any house. But I proceed now, and as I have read, the first is death by murder; not an uncommon thing alas just now for human life is so cheap; it is nothing more in some peoples¬ eyes than that of an animal; but it was not so in Ephraim's house. He is one of the sons of Joseph, who was favoured as being beloved by his father, Israel, @Genesis 37: 3. So we have to look for much in the history of Joseph of instruction and interest; it is a love matter, and as most know the history implies sovereignty, peculiar sovereignty on the part of God. So it is that when Joseph came to Jacob he brought in his two sons Manasseh and Ephraim; they were born in Egypt, but Jacob claimed them as his sons, meaning that they were to be elevated to full tribal status. Scripture always provides its reasons and explanations for what is done, so when Joseph came to his father, it is because he heard that his father was sick; and when a man of distinction is sick, like Elisha in @2 Kings 13, it is serious; sick men in the service of God may die; therefore God has His own reasons. Jacob went down to Egypt and stayed there seventeen years; then he becomes sick in view of death, and Joseph is told of it. He was a great man in Egypt now, but he was not
{276}
greater than his father; he could not be, Jacob was greater than Joseph in every way. So he is determined to elevate Ephraim above Manasseh, and we must learn not to quarrel with the sovereign rights of God, which are always, and must be, right. The whole universe depends on this; and so Joseph had to learn it. He thought his word was everything in Egypt, and even challenged his father's word. Fancy challenging the word of such a great man as that! It says, "it was evil in his eyes", @Genesis 48: 17. I mention this to warn us as to the rights of God in our service, or whatever it be, and the rights of our fellow-men, and the rights of our brethren too, for God has given us all rights; not that we are to assert our rights; Paul never asserted his rights; he could have done, but he refrained. He said it was ordered of the Lord that the one who preached the gospel should live of the gospel, "but I have used none of these things", @1 Corinthians 9: 15. He preferred to be free, and not to stand on his rights. It may be that someone here is not in fellowship, and you are now washing your robes; you have a right to the fellowship. There is no such thing as to be received into fellowship; it is a right; you may say you are not fit, but if you wash your robes, you have the great celestial privilege; you "have right to the tree of life", and to go in by the gates into the city, @Revelation 22: 14.
As I was saying of Joseph and Ephraim, the man had an open divergence of opinion with his father, even to saying, "Not so, my father", but Jacob says, "I know, my son, I know". He is the elder, says Joseph, "this is the firstborn"; but his father says, "I know", and it is so, the older ones know more; and if they are at all sincere the older ones are safer than the younger. Esau says to Isaac, "Hast thou then but one blessing, my father?" -- @Genesis 27: 38, but God the Father, and Christ, and the Spirit have more
{277}
than one. See where we are, and what we have, dear brethren!
Years had gone by, and Jacob had died, and Joseph had died, and Ephraim had his sons born, and they had stolen cattle, the cause of all the calamity, and the young men were murdered for it. They may possibly have wronged them. So Ephraim mourns for his sons, as every Christian father should over the loss of sons. How much need there has been of late of feeling fathers and mothers, and brothers and sisters, in connection with the calamities that have taken place. Maybe some may have calamitous conditions in their houses, even lunacy, a terrible disease, which Matthew alludes to, the assembly gospel. Many here can speak feelingly of it, and how we need to be comforted and prayed for; "The fervent supplication of the righteous man has much power" -- @James 5: 16. "Brethren, pray for us" says Paul, @1 Thessalonians 5: 25; he knew what their prayers would effect. Keep on praying when calamity exists. There is much of it, and much that is unspoken; the calamities of the saints; what there may have been, and what yet remains; for it is a feeling time, and it behoves us to be prayerful that God may come in, that He may bring about conditions, either faith or fruitfulness, in the households of the brethren. And so we have other children born to Ephraim; it is God's way, for He has the power of life. Life is to be seen in our households now, if moral death once existed there. Physical death of course God alone can replace in that way. John, the beloved disciple, fell at the Lord's feet as dead. He had never seen the Lord in judicial garments before; he "turned back to see the voice" -- @Revelation 1: 12, as if it were personified, and so it may be; and he saw "one like the Son of man, clothed with a garment reaching to the feet", in the midst of the assemblies, in the role of
{278}
a judge, and he fell at His feet as dead. The Lord felt it, as He saw His beloved disciple thus; but, as I said before, it is a means of recovery or replacement; and if calamity comes the remedy is in the hands of the Lord, and He says, "Fear not". If there is any household where there is calamity, let us learn not to fear; He says, "I am the first and the last, and the living one", I know all about the matter of death; "and be not afraid of those who kill the body", however cruel they may be; we have seen it; so Satan is called in @Revelation 20: 2, "the dragon, the ancient serpent who is the devil and Satan" which means he is the destroyer; but the Lord is the Author or "originator of life", as Peter calls Him in @Acts 3: 15, Him they slew, and put Him in a grave, but they could do no more; so it is a question of what can happen in resurrection, and He says, "*I* am the first and the last, and the living one: and I became dead, and behold, I am living to the ages of ages", He is supreme; it is only a question of what He wishes; He may allow things to go on in suffering, as with Paul to "fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the assembly", @Colossians 1: 24; the sufferings must be complete, and so it will be.
One more word as to @1 Chronicles 7; Ephraim's wife bore him a son, "and he called his name Beriah, for he was born when calamity was in his house"; his name means "calamity"; it is prophetic; "Beriah" would always remind him of the sorrow that had come into his house; as he grew up, and as he looked at him, he would never forget it; and shall we ever forget our Beriahs over these last six years. God may change the calamity, for He can do it; and so it was, he not only had this son, but he also had a daughter, Sheerah, a builder, like Ruth and like Rachel and Leah, the builders of the house of Israel -- @Ruth 4: 11.
{279}
And is it not so? Building is going on, and if it be sisters, let them build the assembly; it is the great time for this, the gospel and the assembly; Christ and the assembly, it is all a question of building. Then, as I remarked, we have the sons, ending up with Nun the father of Joshua. Think of the possibility of a Joshua in the time of calamity, in the times of Israel; his name pointed on to the Lord Jesus, and at a time of calamity, all pointing on to Christ; every calamity is answered in Christ.
I now turn to the New Testament to show how this situation arose after a time of great blessing, of greatness and glory. Just for a moment think of what God can do. The Lord Jesus came down from the mount of Transfiguration to die. And "Elias with Moses, and they were talking with Jesus", they conversed with Him about His death; it was calamity, in a certain sense, it was His exodus really out of the world; "that through death he might annul him who has the might of death, that is, the devil", @Hebrews 2: 14. Let it never be forgotten!
So we have in our scripture (verse 16), "And he asked them, What do ye question with them about? And one of the crowd answered him, Teacher, I brought to thee my son, who has a dumb spirit; and wheresoever it seizes him it tears him, and he foams and gnashes his teeth, and he is withering away. And I spoke to thy disciples, that they might cast him out, and they could not". Now listen to the Lord's answer (verse 19), "O unbelieving generation! how long shall I be with you? how long shall I bear with you? bring him to me". Now I have already spoken of this terrible malady, lunacy; it was "mine only child", according to Luke's account (@Luke 9: 38), born in his house; how real it was, and hence the deep feelings expressed by the poor father at this calamitous thing in the house. The father says again,
{280}
"From childhood; and often it has cast him both into fire and into waters that it might destroy him: but if thou couldst do anything, be moved with pity on us, and help us" -- verse 22; and now, dear brethren, we are faced with something we cannot overcome, that we had better accept. No one, no doctors, can do anything; we must bow to the fact, that is the beginning of things, to *bow* to the Lord, and say it is the will of God; we can do nothing, *He* can do everything. That is what Paul had to learn in @Romans 7; he says there -- verse 18 -- "I know"; and if anyone has calamity that is the point; we are all helpless in these calamities. "O unbelieving generation"! what a word! Are there any here without faith? It says "without faith it is impossible to please him", @Hebrews 11: 6. So they bring him to Him, and notice, dear brethren, the word, "O unbelieving *generation*", is in answer "to *them*", it is not fixed on one person, it spreads around. "Bring him to me", heaven and earth are before us now; we are dealing with great facts, for God is God, and the assembly is the assembly, and Christ is Christ, and the Spirit is the Spirit; but "bring him to *me*" is the word. Let us see what happens. The devil does his worst -- verse 20; that is the devil's way, to scare us, and banish faith from us; but it is the time of faith; the time of getting things done by heaven. Then the Lord says to the father (he is the one to get at, the one primarily affected), "How long a time is it that it has been like this with him? And he said, From childhood; and often it has cast him both into fire and into waters that it might destroy him", verses 21 and 22. The devil is the destroyer (his name means that according to @Revelation 9: 11), and Peter says, "Your adversary the devil as a roaring lion walks about seeking whom he may devour" -- @1 Peter 5: 8. The father says -- verse 22, "but if thou couldst do anything, be moved
{281}
with pity on us, and help us". He uses the plural, and no doubt includes his wife; and the local brethren too, whoever it may be. You cannot use too large an "us" if it is God helping souls; "if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart and knows all things" -- @l @John 3: 20. "Help us", is the plea, and the New Translation is more accurate, for it is a faith time, and the Lord is putting it to *us* that "all things are possible to him that believes". The father then cries out, "I believe, help mine unbelief". Will the Lord ever turn a deaf ear to such an appeal? No "cure", however renowned, will do for this, it is for *faith* only, "all things are possible to him that believes". And Jesus sees the people running together, and crowds always interfere, and He intervenes. So James says, "and the prayer of faith shall heal the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he be one who has committed sins, it shall be forgiven him" -- @James 5: 15. So here, the Lord says, "thou dumb and deaf spirit, *I* command thee, come out of him, and enter no more into him"; He *names* it. And again the demon rends him, but the victory is won; he looks like dead, but no! like Jairus little daughter, and Eutychus in @Acts 20, "his life is in him". So Jesus took "him by the hand, lifted him up, and he arose". The Lord is not rebuking, but the truth, the plain facts have to be faced; and *faith*, let us have recourse to it then. May God bless the word.
{282}
THE LORD'S SUPPER FOR REMEMBRANCE OF HIM
@Genesis 40: 14, 15, 23; @Genesis 41: 9 - 13; @Ecclesiastes 9: 13 - 16; @1 Corinthians 11: 23 - 26
J.T. The number of scriptures read may seem superfluous, but it is hard to avoid in order to get the subject before us, that is the Lord's supper. In @Genesis 40 and 41 we have typical teaching on the point; the cupbearer of Pharaoh is one who benefited greatly by Joseph's wisdom, yet who failed to remember him, though he had an urgent request to do this, verse 14; then in verse 23 he "did not remember Joseph, and forgot him"; the negative is thus strengthened. Then as a result of his forgetting, a time arises when he had to call to mind his sins. If we fail to remember the Lord, to keep Him in mind, we shall be forced to remember our offences. @Ecclesiastes 9 is another type, "a poor wise man, who by his wisdom delivered the city; but no man remembered that poor man". I thought these scriptures would help in this city to understand the Lord's message to Paul in view of His supper. We have little said as to the Lord's supper until Paul. He had the truth of the mystery, and then this added to it, involving the truth of the assembly, "we being assembled to break bread" -- @Acts 20: 7, they came together for that. And so here we have in @1 Corinthians 11 from verse 23 the details given to Paul by the Lord. It will tend to elucidate the whole subject by reading these Old Testament scriptures before we take up Paul.
W.S.S. We understand the Old Testament scripture by Paul's help.
J.T. Yes, indeed; and the same could be said of every scripture.
Ques. What would be the bearing of wisdom here?
{283}
J.T. The bearing of wisdom in Ecclesiastes and in Corinthians is that it has a great place in the teaching here, and enters into the Lord's supper. "But of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption", @1 Corinthians 1: 30; the wisdom works out in the assembly, "the all-various wisdom of God", @Ephesians 3: 10; and the first place in that is given to the Lord's supper. So we have in @1 Corinthians 10: 15, "I speak as to intelligent persons", that is to wise persons, and he is approaching the truth of the Lord's supper in that connection, so that the thought of wisdom is prominent in 1 Corinthians.
Ques. Could you give us the sense in which it delivers the city?
J.T. I think the fellowship is seen in that relation; the thought is communion, or joint -participators, in the Lord's supper; and hence the conduct of the saints is involved in the truth of the Lord's supper.
Ques. Does individual faithfulness enter into it, as in the Genesis scripture?
J.T. Yes, it does; our loyalty to Christ is part of the Lord's supper. Hence it speaks of our obligation in @1 Corinthians 10 to the Lord, and to each other, as having part in the Lord's supper.
Ques. Have you anything in mind as to the thought of remembrance?
J.T. Yes; the communication to Paul was as to remembrance; it involves the mind, the calling to mind, "For *I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in the night in which He was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you: this do in remembrance of me". Then the note helps, "The word translated 'remembrance' has an active signification of 'recalling', or 'calling to mind', as a memorial. 'For the calling
{284}
me to mind' only occurs here and verse 25; @Luke 22: 19; @Hebrews 10: 3". Great prominence is given to remembrance in this chapter and it enters into the celebration of the Lord's supper, the same point that Joseph made to the cupbearer, as we see in verse 14 of @Genesis 40; how *we* bear a remembrance of the Lord with us, not a mere thought of calling a certain event to mind, but "bear a remembrance with thee of *me* when it goes well with thee", he says; only the cup-bearer forgot Joseph, but later had to remember his offences.
Ques. Would he have to be brought back to the cross, the place of a skull?
J.T. I thought that, but we have to *do*; as the Lord did in @Acts 1: 1, "Jesus began both to do and to teach"; *doing* takes account of the institution of the Supper, and in @Luke 22 it is carefully separated from the passover; so it is in 1 Corinthians, the passover is in chapter 5, and the Lord's supper is in chapter 11. The "remembrance of me" is the doing; the teaching comes out elsewhere in the epistle, what the Lord taught them through the apostle Paul.
Rem. "When it goes well with thee" reminds us of the "cup of blessing".
J.T. Quite so; so we eulogize the cup; it is what is good for us.
Rem. We are to have a peculiar sense of indebtedness to the Lord Jesus.
J.T. That is all involved in the cup.
W.S.S. Joseph's exaltation out of the dungeon was the result of his being remembered.
J.T. Very good. "Make mention of me to Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house; for indeed I was stolen out of the land of the Hebrews, and here also have I done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon", but the cup-bearer did not help him till he recalled his offences. Maybe this applies to
{285}
some here who never remember the Lord Jesus; but if you do, it leads to His exaltation.
W.S.S. I thought it was his dungeon experiences that he thought of, as he mentions them in verses 10 to 13 of chapter 41.
J.T. It is very solemn not to recall Him; as He is the Saviour, now exalted, we shall one day have to remember our offences, if we forget Him.
Rem. That is a fine word, "bring me out of this house", a suggestion of power.
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Would you lay emphasis on the commandment of the Lord, "This do"?
J.T. The Supper is not all instruction or teaching, but it is doing; we may not learn by the teaching; and we have to come back to what He did; that is the side of the memorial.
Rem. The memorial is linked also with the cup in Corinthians.
J.T. That is very important; it is the only place where it is mentioned as to the cup.
Rem. Nothing sets aside the authority of @1 Corinthians 11, neither Luke's account or any other.
J.T. That is right; it was added in the Lord's commandment to Paul. Something was left out, and this is added.
Rem. You are stressing 1 Corinthians as the last word?
J.T. Certainly; it was given from the glory.
W.S.S. Some say that what is given in the gospels governs the position.
J.T. 1 Corinthians is the completion of the word of God. The accounts in the gospels are individual, and are probably teaching for the Jews in a later day, especially as to the New Covenant teaching. We shall never understand till we see the Lord's supper in 1 Corinthians is the completion of the word of God.
{286}
Luke learnt from Paul, and his second treatise takes up the matter of the Lord's supper. We have it first mentioned in @Luke 22; secondly in @Acts 2: 46, "breaking bread in the house", that is not in the temple; so it was separated from the current order of things. The idea of separation was included additionally to the teaching of the apostles in verse 42. Then in @Acts 20: 7 we have the Supper in a Pauline setting, and Luke says, "And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread" (note that he calls it "the first day of the week", not "the Lord's Day"); then Paul discoursed to them before the Supper was partaken of; it must have been because the Lord's supper was not properly understood; and I believe it has a prophetic meaning; it had lost its meaning till after the Reformation; only in modern times has the truth of it been revived; and that is why Paul's discourse was prolonged; even now people say 'we remember Him in His death'; it is not scriptural, for we remember Him.
Ques. So that we are only now seeing Eutychus revived?
J.T. Just so. He is called "the boy" (verse 12); he is not fully grown; he is a type of the present revival from something stunted to a full-grown man; Paul says "his *life*" (not his intelligence) "is in him". But he says to the Corinthians, "I speak as to intelligent persons", @1 Corinthians 10: 15.
Ques. Why is it "the first day of the week" here and not the Lord's Day?
J.T. Remarkable love runs through the whole chapter; it is commensurate with this day; a new order of things entirely begins with the first day.
Rem. @John 20: 19 speaks of "the first day of the week".
J.T. Yes, it stresses there the *first* day.
{287}
Ques. Do not the loaf and the cup speak of the Lord's death?
J.T. What does it mean to you?
Rem. Joseph is not in the dungeon now.
J.T. It is not the memory of Christ's death that brings Him to us; it is not 'the remembrance of Me in My death', but "in remembrance of *me*".
A.P.A. Do we build up substance through the experience of the supper individually, so that we gain in actual spiritual substance?
J.T. A good word to use; that involves the eating side of the supper, not the memorial; the breaking of the bread was what *He* did; He did not eat of the supper. That He actually died is right. "This do", as a memorial, means that it is a *mind* matter, more than a *heart* matter. Christ is rejected here; every city in the world is really "where also their Lord was crucified" -- @Revelation 11: 8.
Ques. Was the cup-bearer like it?
J.T. You can put it that way. I prefer the authority in 1 Corinthians. Joseph does say, "Only bear a remembrance with thee of *me*".
W.S.S. Is it a question of the point of view from which we look at the supper, for we "announce the *death* of the Lord, until he come"?
J.T. That is public testimony; the Lord had in mind the memorial.
Ques. What feature does the cup speak of in 1 Corinthians?
J.T. The idea of remembrance is added also in the cup; it is in keeping with Joseph's thought. In Paul's speaking we have the very last word, and that addition is in it. It shews how remembrance is in it, and should affect our hearts.
Ques. Is there the thought of bringing Christ into presence?
J.T. Yes, that is a good word to use; it shows our
{288}
minds have something to do with it. We call Him to mind actively, the note to verse 24, as already said, helps us. Something has happened and has to be recalled; it is an action of our minds. F.E.R. used that expression, and it alludes to the action of the mind, that the Lord is ready to act on our minds; this affects Him, and He is ready to come; the memorial is to recall Christ to us. In the Church of England it is a mere sacrament, and in the religious world they say, "this Moses ... we know not what has happened to him!" He has gone from their minds.
Ques. Is it normal for the Lord's presence to be realized then?
J.T. Yes, it is the state of our minds; we concentrate upon it.
Ques. Do we come together as in fellowship with His death?
J.T. We do; "For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come", verse 26. Chapter 10 is fellowship in the cup and in the bread; but the memorial side is in chapter 11. So when we come together, we have it in mind to break bread; it is a question of the memorial.
Ques. You mean it is Himself that we come for?
J.T. Yes. The fellowship is in His death; that is in chapter 10; there is no stressing of what he received from the Lord or of the memorial in chapter 10.
Ques. Is the thought in fellowship a public one?
J.T. The eating and drinking is seen and is public.
Ques. Is it a question of the doors being shut?
J.T. Just so; that is @John 20.
Rem. There is nothing as to the blood *being shed* in 1 Corinthians.
J.T. It is to reduce the commandment to Paul, and intensify it as to the memorial; not that the
{289}
shedding of the blood is not important, as it is; but as being with His people, it is not so important, but it is "Himself" that is so important.
Ques. Would there be less stress on the New Covenant here?
J.T. Yes, in 1 Corinthians "in my blood", is not the blood of redemption; that is not the point; it is as if the Lord were reducing the law governing it, to intensify it.
Ques. Is this in keeping with the thought of the assembly as the wife?
J.T. Yes, and brevity is important. Somewhere lately we were saying as to the law of the passover, in @Exodus 12, it is 20 verses, but only 6 or 7 used by Moses in transferring it to the people; he reduces it; and the analogous position here is when the Lord reduces what is said in the gospels in what He says to Paul, as Moses did in Exodus; things are added and things subtracted so as to make them clear, to simplify them, so that the mind can better take it in.
Rem. Does the New Covenant give us God's best thoughts?
J.T. Yes; He is entitled to make them known, and we gladly recognise it.
Ques. Does 1 Corinthians take account of the Lord's death as in @John 19?
J.T. The actual death of the Lord in John describes the blood and water, the testimony to death; that is not for the Lord's supper; it is the New Covenant in His blood.
Rem. Hence all reference to the blood is not omitted in 1 Corinthians.
J.T. Quite, for the blood is in view.
W.S.S. Would the sprinkling of Aaron and his sons with the blood associated with the oil in @Exodus 29 be connected with this?
J.T. Maybe. "*My* blood", the Lord says; a
{290}
wholly new matter, stressing the memorial of the Lord, the calling Him to mind. John enlarges on this side of things, as in "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you", @John 14: 18.
Rem. We have simplicity with brevity.
J.T. Yes, we had it this morning, as appealing to our pure, our right minds; a calling of *Me* to mind; the mind is a faculty under control; we are to be able to use it for Him. In @John 20, subsequent to the doors being shut, the Lord could therefore say what He wishes. In Luke they had to be adjusted, but in @John 20 all was ready.
Ques. Would what Paul says in @1 Corinthians 14: 20 apply, "in your minds be grown men"?
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Is the setting the same in @Acts 1 and Luke?
J.T. I ventured to read that passage to shew what the Lord did, "all things which Jesus began both to *do* and to *teach*". So we have been engaged with the doing.
Ques. So was this in the writer's mind?
J.T. It was in the Holy Spirit's mind anyway. What He did involves the Supper; that was all I had in mind, and in addition, He is said to present Himself living; and also another feature, He "being assembled with them". I had this in mind this morning, and this grows out of it, as making way for the Lord.
Rem. It would save us from having our own thoughts.
J.T. The development of the truth of the Lord's supper has mainly engaged the last thirty years, especially the calling of Him to mind, making way for Him.
Ques. Is the supper in the wilderness?
J.T. Yes, not in the land; we come into that in the course of our service.
{291}
Rem. So it is the basis for what follows.
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Is "this do" the public side?
J.T. It is for the minds of the saints, not for the public. But later on we have, "For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come" -- verse 26 that is for others.
{292}
THE CROWN OF LIFE
@Revelation 2: 10; @Judges 13: 24 - 25; @Judges 16: 22 - 31
J.T. It is hoped the Lord will help us to see something in the history of Samson that will help us to understand the "crown of life" given to Smyrna -- @Revelation 2: 10. "Tribulation ten days" means ten series of persecutions or tribulations for the truth. Samson, although he had an extraordinary history, and there was much that could be condemned, was a man of faith, he judged Israel twenty years; that is said of him twice; a very considerable time. Jehovah gave him a great victory at the end, which came after the growth of his hair; it should never have been cut, for he was a Nazarite. It seems to me that the growth of hair in this connection is an evidence of life; it always is, but especially so when it has been cut off; it would also refer to the crown of life, which would be Samson's. There are other crowns, the crown of righteousness, suffering for the truth, and so on. But Samson was brought in miraculously; an angel from heaven coming in to announce his birth, and much is done by him, that is the angel. All this bears on the service of God. And then after his birth, he is seen as moved by the Spirit of Jehovah at the camp of Dan, Chapter 13: 25. The Spirit of God has to do with him early, and also at the end of his life, in his great victory. As we bow to the claims of the service of God in humility we become victorious. It seems to me a matter of considerable importance at the present time, when Philistine conditions prevail, and other such conditions, to accept the failure, so that we may come in for the crown of life.
H.P.W. The crown is an emblem of victory?
J.T. I thought that; to Philadelphia it is said, "that no one take thy crown", whatever that should be, each one of us should know what it is in our case.
{293}
"*The* crown of life" is referred to here, as if it is a special one; it belongs to all victories of this kind.
H.P.W. To Philadelphia the Lord says "hold fast what thou *hast*, that no one take thy crown", as if it would mean that the Lord had given us something.
J.T. That is the truth; we have much said of what is given us in ministry, the truth of the Lord's supper, for instance, first verbally, then in writing, we may say; what have we that we have not received!
H.P.W. You said the crown in *our* case, which would be the truth.
J.T. Yes, that is good.
H.P.W. So the truth affects us, giving us a personality.
J.T. A good word. Sometimes mere names, such as "John the evangelist" are kept out of sight; but "I *John*" @Revelation 1: 9, much is made of that name; it means that personality enters into the service and would give us a sense from time to time as to what our crown would be.
Ques. Would it involve spiritual experience, as compared with what I am born with?
J.T. Yes, it is distinction in the testimony.
H.S.H. Would "the crown of life" referred to in @James 1: 12 be the same?
J.T. A helpful suggestion; love comes into it.
Ques. Crowns in Revelation are ordered or given; would this one be for faithfulness?
J.T. Yes, the Lord says after death there is no more the murderers can do, so it is suffering to the end, the full thought of it.
Ques. Is the thought with Samson for our encouragement?
J.T. He was faithful unto death, and he was delivered too; so that even if we have failed, and Christendom has failed, there may be recovery. Revelation contemplates this, and hence these
{294}
letters, particularly this one to Smyrna. The failure began at Ephesus, the one that had received the most. The apostle Paul sends for the elders and tells them what had marked his ministry there for about three years, shewing that they had received more than any.
H.P.W. John retires, you said, but the Lord knows His own sheep by name, and that name is characteristic, and God will bring us to this.
J.T. Yes, that is the truth. So we have in @Acts 1 "the crowd of names", though the Holy Spirit had not come yet, and we have such persons as Mary of Magdala; she is called "Woman" first, then "Mary". It means 'suffering', and will be undoubtedly attributed to her throughout, and will be in the assembly, where the array of names will come down in the radiancy of glory in the characteristics of their personalities.
H.P.W. Great stress on personality links us with the Lord, so that we may function accordingly.
J.T. It is remarkable how many names we have applied to persons in the New Testament, the Marys, the Simons, the James's, all to be accurately determined, each is distinctive.
Rem. We have Samson's name in @Hebrews 11: 32, the chapter of faith.
J.T. Yes, we get Barak, but not Deborah, for it is the masculine side that is stressed, as fitted to bear things, that is what is meant, I would say. Deborah should be mentioned from one point of view and not Barak, because she shone; but we must go by what God says.
Rem. Samson began to serve in the time of the Philistines, and in @Hebrews 11 he is amongst the overcomers.
J.T. "For the time would fail me telling of Gideon, and Barak, and Samson" but it will not in
{295}
eternity, however large or small the number of names.
Ques. What is the "new name" in @Revelation 2: 17? Is it a secret with the Lord?
J.T. It is a peculiar word said by the Lord, no one knows it. The overcomer in Pergamos will be given a stone, and on it a name written, "which no one knows but he that receives it"; as J.N.D.¬s hymn says, "Called by that secret name of undisclosed delight" (`79:4); that is the best way you could put it.
Ques. In connection with that, what about putting surnames to James and John?
J.T. They were distinguished, like a knighthood in this country; in America they have no such thing, but men always find a way to distinguish each other.
Rem. It implies conferred dignity.
J.T. Yes, by those above us.
Ques. Is it seen in Sardis? "A few names" even in such a place.
J.T. They are persons of distinction; we might say Luther was one, but their names are not given; the nations have rolls of honour, thousands of names of distinction destroyed, a terrible thing; so that we should not aspire after distinction in this world.
Ques. What is the reason for Simon Peter being called "Cephas" in @John 1: 42?
J.T. It was to convey that the Lord meant "a stone", the same as "Peter" in another language. In @Matthew 16: 18 it means the material, but in @John 1 it is distinction in the name given.
Ques. Can we compare the thought of names with the development of something in Samson?
J.T. I intended to speak of that; hence he is introduced by name from the outset.
H.P.W. At the beginning we have "And the Spirit of Jehovah began to move him at Mahaneh-Dan,
{296}
between Zoreah and Eshtaol", and he was buried in the same place "in the sepulchre of Manoah his father".
J.T. Local responsibility and local dignity attaches to it. Local responsibility is very important in the New Testament as well as in the Old; both birth and birthplace as given in the Old Testament, and also the place of death, would have a moral significance; if anyone die in a locality, it is distinguished.
M.P.W. It is remarkable that the Spirit began to work in one so young, and it is in the same locality he is buried. What a victory!
J.T. He began in the camp of Dan, and did not end there by accident; it was his own deliberate act.
H.P.W. "Strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once".
J.T. It is very touching. "So the dead that he slew at his death were more than those whom he had slain in his life", that is the comment of the Spirit of God; and another thing to notice is verse 22, "But the hair of his head began to grow after he was shaved", and then we have the call for the prisoner, "that he may make us sport. And they called for Samson out of the prison-house". What a sad spectacle, for this great man to make sport for the world; it shews what his failure meant. The world, in one sense, has made sport of the assembly. Then in verse 26 he "said to the lad that held him by the hand, Let loose of me, and suffer me to feel the pillars upon which the house stands, that I may lean upon them". He did not want to lean upon the lad, but to be free for his greatest exploit, even if he were thereby exposed to the jeers of the Philistines.
H.P.W. A very suggestive word.
J.T. The world has provided me for itself, and has rejoiced to have me, but now I want to be free.
{297}
Ques. Would this enter into the thought of "the power which works in us", @Ephesians 3: 20?
J.T. Yes, he is about to do his greatest exploit and glory; to be free for God; it is the liberty in which "Christ has set us free", @Galatians 5: 1.
Ques. Does the gift of the crown of life depend on the final moments of our history?
J.T. Oh no, it goes over all his path, for "he had judged Israel twenty years". God raised up Samson, and in spite of failure, he was carried through. But the point we need to notice is when his hair began to grow.
Ques. Did death come into Samson's spirit when the Philistines laid hold of him?
J.T. He was raised up to save Israel from the Philistines, and he begins this service in chapter 14, a service connected with Christ and the assembly. Samson's parents "did not know that it was of Jehovah, that he was seeking an occasion against the Philistines"; it was to be a suffering time, this marital matter; a time of conflict too. So the crown of life does not depend on his last act, but on all his service, for he was a great judge. I think it brings out how fair God is in giving such credit to a man like that at the end.
Ques. What does his place between the two pillars signify?
J.T. He asked for it. "And it came to pass when their hearts were merry, that they said, Call for Samson, that he may make us sport. And they called for Samson out of the prison-house, and he played before them; and they set him between the pillars. And Samson said to the lad that held him by the hand, Let loose of me, and suffer me to feel the pillars upon which the house stands, that I may lean upon them. Now the house was full of men and women; and all the lords of the Philistines were
{298}
there; and upon the roof there were about three thousand men and women, who looked on while Samson made sport. And Samson called to Jehovah, and said, Lord Jehovah, remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God, that I may take one vengeance upon the Philistines for my two eyes". He called to Jehovah, notice that, it was the secret of victory. "Remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God". See how deliberate he was in the conflict, "And he bowed himself with might; and the house fell on the lords, and on all the people that were therein", so that the world is brought down in type; the person used knows what he is doing; though blind, he selected the two pillars; he understood how the world is supported. The type means for us that the Lord brought the world down at the cross, the place of a skull, at Calvary, meaning the end of human intelligence.
Rem. "God has judged your judgment upon her", @Revelation 18: 20.
J.T. Good. I wanted to see what is current at the present time, marked by the hair beginning to grow. Since the Reformation there has been much in the assembly formed by the Spirit, the growth of hair, as it were, in the testimony, and the world is brought down morally. That is our testimony now, and it should be kept before us, that the world is actually coming down.
Rem. The apostolic testimony turned the world upside down.
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. Samson's history was a chequered one, but he was an overcomer.
J.T. Yes, and his brethren are brought into it at his burial.
Rem. It is the language of John, "this is the
{299}
victory which has gotten the victory over the world, our faith", @1 John 5: 4.
J.T. Quite so, very good; it is "he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God", he that believes in *that*. In John's gospel too, that is how we get the crown of life, "that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life *in his name*".
Rem. There is no reference to the Philistines at the end, in verse 31.
J.T. No, but there is in chapter 15: 20, "And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years". The mention of the Philistines there is important, and that he judged Israel. The idea in that is ruling in right principles, not condemnation. So Paul says God "has set a day in which he is going to judge the habitable earth in righteousness, by the man whom he has appointed", @Acts 17: 31. He gave "the proof of it to all in having raised him from among the dead"; that is the greatest thing, life out of death; the ruling of the saints involves the destruction of the Philistines.
Ques. May judgment be punitive?
J.T. It is the thought of a circuit court, to exercise right, and to maintain it.
Rem. The Lord is called "the judge of Israel" in @Micah 5: 1, is He not?
J.T. Judgment operates in two ways, externally in discrimination, and internally in the process of refining. Refining is referred to in Revelation and Malachi as to Israel and brings to light what is precious.
Rem. Discrimination would retain what is good.
J.T. Yes, and the department of justice is a great matter in any realm, especially God's.
H.P.W. Does it involve the maintenance of the principles of the kingdom in a practical way?
{300}
J.T. Yes.
Rem. The Philistine is thereby removed morally from us?
J.T. Yes, the world is brought down; its final overthrow awaited David's day.
Rem. Samson says, "Lord Jehovah, remember me".
J.T. Yes, the memorial is in heaven. What he went through! It says, "And he bowed himself with might", the power was there innate, yet with God.
Ques. Does Rahab shew the power of God working inwardly over against the world, in Jericho?
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Is the overthrow of the world seen morally in @Acts 17 (the Greek world), and in chapter 18 at Corinth, and in chapter 19 at Ephesus?
J.T. That is the idea; it is overthrown by testimony presented in power, the great success of the apostle Paul in bringing down the world by testimony; it is that the saints may be released from any form of the world.
Ques. Would the two pillars be seen in @1 Corinthians 1: 22, "Jews indeed ask for signs, and Greeks seek wisdom"?
Ques. And would the thought be intensified in the seven pillars of wisdom's house, @Proverbs 9: 1?
J.T. That is a very full and complete thought in Proverbs, "she hath *hewn* out her seven pillars"; so that we can stand out and preach the gospel, and the world is thus brought down.
Rem. Through the testimony of the saints.
J.T. I would say that this refers to the testimony in general rendered by the apostles, twelve men, as they stood in Jerusalem, and then to witness universally; their testimony brought the world down in every element, in the sense that the saints were freed from it, and it was robbed of its power.
{301}
Rem. That is, in the hearts of those affected.
J.T. Yes, the cross was at the place of a skull; it is the wisdom of God making foolish the wisdom of the world; that is the point.
Ques. Does the victory at Jericho in @Joshua 6 shew the power of the testimony in that the city was encircled seven times?
J.T. The power was in the shout; it was living.
Rem. If we were in the good of @Romans 10: 15, "How beautiful the feet of them that announce glad tidings of peace, of them that announce glad tidings of good things!", we should all be preaching all our lives.
J.T. Yes, the woman in @Luke 7 anointed the Lord's *feet*, appreciating what he carried to her, and later on in Matthew and Mark, a woman anoints His *head*; *she* understood what was there, where grace had brought her, that He was to have the first place; but this is more "the all-various wisdom of God" being made known through the assembly, and that is brought out by the Spirit.
{302}
THE GROUND OF OUR GATHERING
@2 Timothy 2: 19 - 22; @Matthew 18: 19 - 20
A.H. The suggestion before us in care was in view of the generation following, hoping that it would prove helpful and profitable to consider the ground of our gathering. These scriptures were suggested to provide what was necessary; if you can suggest any other, please do so.
J.T. This will suffice at the moment; other scriptures can be turned to later. Certainly this is a good epistle to begin with and particularly as it treats of "the firm foundation of God stands". All will recall @Job 38: 4 - 7, where it says, "Where wast thou when I founded the earth? ... When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" when God began thus in His creational ways, and what is in creation often reflects what He does in the assembly; so that the foundation is of the utmost importance; it is also spoken of in @Matthew 16: 18 where Christ Himself is the foundation as confessed by Peter; but then in view of the great departure in the Christian profession, it is necessary to come back to Matthew to see how it is reconstructed with what the second epistle to Timothy presents. So Peter is brought in as well as Paul; Peter being especially in mind in connection with the foundation in @Matthew 16.
A.H. Do you think therefore that the firm foundation of God links with what we have in @Matthew 16?
J.T. I do. Paul enlarges the idea, but Peter had a revelation. It is said that the Lord had enquired who men said that He was, and Peter inspired by the Father said, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God"; and the Lord said, "I say unto thee that *thou* art Peter, and on this rock I will build my
{303}
assembly", so the foundation is clearly there and Peter is the material for the building.
A.H. Paul asserts it in @1 Corinthians 3: 11, "For other foundation can no man lay besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ".
A.M. Is the "firm foundation of God" in contrast to overthrowing the faith of some, verse 18?
J.T. Yes, to assure the believer, in such an attack, that the firm foundation still stands; there is no need for the word "firm" unless to confirm faith.
Rem. It is firm because it is God's work, involving the revelation of the Father by the Son.
J.T. Yes, it is the revelation of God; it is God's way of assuring us when any question arises.
F.I. We are gathered to something that cannot be moved. So is @Matthew 18: 20 "gathered together unto my name", connected with the foundation in chapter 16?
J.T. "Gathered together" is significant; we are not told who gathers them, the Spirit does and the Lord does; we are to discern that those mentioned are contemplated as "gathered" by some action, and "unto my name", the Lord says, meaning they are gathered by motive; the motive being the name of the Lord.
Rem. "The name of Jehovah is a strong tower: the righteous runneth into it, and is safe".
J.T. Quite so.
F.I. Would you help us as to gathering to the *name* of the Lord, rather than to Himself personally?
J.T. During the faith period we are in, the Lord personally is absent. His name takes His place, and so becomes a strong tower; but here it is "unto" His name.
E.S.H. Would it involve all His interests here, as treasured by the Spirit?
J.T. I would say it could be put in there; the
{304}
only thing is whether it is not a local position and the name of the Lord the object, the Lord being there Himself locally not generally. I mean to say Matthew contemplates the church, that is the assembly, and if we link on with Paul, it is especially as in 1 Corinthians, the idea of the local position that is in mind; that is the assembly has taken on the plural form, that is the term "assemblies", because at first the metropolitan thought prevailed, as we see in @Acts 2: 47, though the actual word assembly is perhaps not in the original. The word is "added" that is "added daily those that were to be saved"; it is the metropolitan idea there not two assemblies; the plural word is not found till @Acts 9: 31, and even there it is questionable. However the sub-divisional situation was inaugurated and the assemblies are viewed as in the plural after Paul was converted, they were "increased through the comfort of the Holy Spirit". Later Paul and Barnabas went out in ministry, as in chapter 13, and formed assemblies in chapter 14, though we are not told how many; there was also the setting up of elders and deacons, shewing that the plural idea prevailed. The plural thought therefore continues till the assembly is gathered by the Lord. As to government, we have care-meetings tonight in many parts to remind us of government, that the assembly might stand as gathered.
P.P. Why so few as "two or three", @Matthew 18: 20?
J.T. To shew the idea, so essential, that two or three can maintain the principle as much as a hundred; a great advantage, they come in for as much privilege and support, the Lord Himself being there.
A.H. Was the Lord thinking of 2 Timothy days in the scripture in Matthew?
J.T. Yes, you mean in @Matthew 18: 18, there is the possibility of a brother being refractory, and refusing to obey the assembly, and he is regarded as
{305}
unfit for it, so it is said (verse 17), "But if he will not listen to them, tell it to the assembly; and if also he will not listen to the assembly, let him be to thee as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer", and then (verse 18), "Verily I say to you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on the earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on the earth shall be loosed in heaven", He is giving authority to the assembly; and then in verse 19 there is another gracious thought, to bring it to a minimum, that it should be maintained if possible, even in two or three, and indicates what we have in 2 Timothy; a suggestion of reduction in numbers, of very great reduction in size and number of the assemblies. "Again I say to you, that if two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens"; and then, "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". The Father answers the prayers of the minimum, the "two of you", which means two of the assembly. It shews that the two secure the Father's assent for whatever they want. Then in verse 20, we have the presence of Christ in the reduced company even with two, yet the mention of "or three" means that more are needed; this too is important; "in the midst of them" -- the two or three. It brings the thought down to a very concrete application, a very real thing, that He will be in the midst of them; He intimates that what the two or three do, He will support, and so throughout Matthew we have it, even in the last chapter, "*I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age". He is not said to ascend in Matthew, though of course He actually did; had He not done so the Holy Spirit would not have come. "Every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching", so if one scripture or one
{306}
gospel may not say it, another will; we must think over this carefully and prayerfully. It means the presence here of the Holy Spirit, and that is sufficient, and the assembly is here to represent Him too.
A.H. The absence of the truth of the ascension in Matthew establishes the truth that God has put His foot on the earth, in the assembly.
J.T. Yes, but Luke speaks of the ascension as early as chapter 9.
F.I. In the thought of the gathering together of two as the minimum, the thought of adding to make three involves exercise in them in view of increase.
J.T. Yes, I think so. The allusion is to the personnel of the assembly as of prime importance; the Father will do it to them.
E.S.H. Is @John 16: 23 wider and more universal?
J.T. Here perhaps it is more local, where they are; @John 16 is more general.
Ques. How would this link on with @1 Corinthians 1: 2, "with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ"?
J.T. I am glad you brought that up. It is just the point what does the term "place" mean; it has come up lately as to a place being a community, especially in London, Sydney and so on. The word is calling "on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, *both theirs and ours*".
Ques. Does @Matthew 18 stand in relation to the principle of government in the assembly?
J.T. I think things may widen out from that; but "unto my name" must be local.
Ques. Would they be brothers or might there be a sister as well?
J.T. They might be two sisters if you like!
Ques. Is there the thought of *meeting* together?
J.T. It is unscriptural. In this scripture it is "gathered".
{307}
Ques. Would the thought of "every place" be seen in @Luke 10: 1?
J.T. A very good scripture to bring up, let us read it, "Now after these things the Lord appointed seventy others also, and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place where he himself was about to come". So in Corinthians as we were saying, there has been exercise for the past twenty-five years or so as to what subdivisions may be required in places like London, how they are to be regarded, and how the truth of @Matthew 18 is to be applied to them.
Ques. In Matthew we have the nations gathered. Would there be any significance in the thought of gathering in relation to governmental separation of the sheep and the goats; it is the Lord's matter there, but is there a principle in it? "all the nations shall be gathered before him; and he shall separate them from one another, as the shepherd separates the sheep from the goats", @Matthew 25: 32.
J.T. I suppose we should have to distinguish in our minds as to the word "gather" there, especially as to the government of nations, but in this we are dealing with a smallish city or place.
Ques. Is it significant that in @Acts 9: 32 it is Peter who establishes it?
J.T. Yes, good, we are nearing the time of Paul's advent there; divine thoughts cast their shadows before. Peter is coming into what Paul was about to bring in, the moving away from the metropolitan thought, though the metropolitan thought is not bad unless it is extended too far. Peter was getting the idea of the assemblies here. But Paul brings in, in connection with the establishment of assemblies, the matter of eldership, setting up the local government in localities, not setting up metropolitanism. So in @Acts 20, he called "the elders of the assembly" at Ephesus to him, a local matter; the idea as set up by
{308}
Paul would involve the whole place in which they lived however many subdivisions there were (and they were called assemblies too); but eldership as brought in by Paul is to teach and to guide in every way, so as to maintain the local position.
E.S.H. In @Acts 9: 32 Peter is said to be "passing through all quarters".
J.T. Very good; and Aeneas is told to make his couch for himself, that is those in the local assembly should make their own beds! They are not to write far afield for advice too much but to get their instruction from heaven.
J.S.E. The Lord's promise to be with them would be carried into @2 Timothy 2 as encouragement as to the ground of gathering, to be where Christ is present, and help us to hold on to things.
J.T. And to keep ourselves free from what is around us in the sphere of profession.
J.S.E. So that the Matthew scripture is a lever in the soul, that the Lord will be in the midst, even in such conditions.
J.T. He is there with the twos and threes to deliver the brethren from the authorities in the town and the ecclesiastical dignitaries. The Lord would support them in their meetings and they would be conscious that the Lord was thus helping them.
J.S.E. Yes, He prescribes for the smallest unit in the midst of what is so pretentious.
J.T. "My name" means power to them.
J.S.E. The power of the world is in contrast to the name of the Lord.
P.P. In seeking a right church position I must find those who are faithful to the Lord.
J.T. The "two of you" carries through the thought of status in heaven; it is of the utmost importance; they are maintained in righteousness and dignity. He will not say what He will do.
{309}
Ques. How do we come into this power?
J.T. It is "unto my name"; it is in the Name.
Ques. Do you mean that it is His power that is available, or is it power in us like "because thou hast a little power", @Revelation 3: 8?
J.T. Yes, indeed; it is status in heaven, because Matthew is dealing with the heavens brought down to earth, so that the persons have distinction, not only because Christ is there "in the midst of them", but there is something in them.
J.S.E. Heaven ratifies what they do on earth.
J.T. I thought so. So in @John 20: 23, where it is more spiritual and personal.
Ques. Are we to see the unjealous interest of the angels in the administration of the assembly, @Ephesians 3: 10?
J.T. Yes, indeed.
Ques. Is heavenly status involved in "from my Father who is in the heavens"?
J.T. Yes, the whole gospel of Matthew depends on that, for instance in chapter 5: 48, the Lord says, "Be *ye* therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect". Perfection is status up there; the Lord is thinking to augment what they can do; if all is well, He will praise them, He is there to help and encourage them.
Rem. We are to do things, He will help us.
J.T. Yes, He loves us to do things. In @Genesis 2: 19 and 20 the animals are brought to Adam; it was delightful to God as He heard His creature name the animals, and how much more now, for Matthew speaks of the greatest things in the universe. How much pleasure heaven has in hearing what is related by a brother or a sister, like Abigail, who is indeed a type of the assembly. The statement of scripture says it is so, the Lord says "that every matter may stand upon the word of two witnesses or of three" -- @Matthew 18: 16,
{310}
and the Lord says, "Now I praise you" (@1 Corinthians 11: 2) even though He says it through Paul. But John speaks of the time of failure; he is a witness here of the Lord in judicial garments. He is in the Spirit on the Lord's Day, rightfully occupied; he is "your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus", and he says, "I heard behind me a great voice as of a trumpet"; the great voice is here in Matthew. When John looked round to see the voice, he saw "seven golden lamps", which means the assembly divided into seven, and things are not too right, but he sees "one like the Son of man" in the midst of the seven lamps, just what we are speaking of; He is in other habiliments not as in @Matthew 17, where He has garments "white as the light", here He is "clothed with a garment reaching to the feet, and girt about at the breasts with a golden girdle". Then John says, "And when I saw him I fell at his feet as dead". We have now a situation where the Lord is inquiring into things; there is the wardrobe He has, and what garments He may have to put on if He appears to us. We may be having a wonderful time, but what garments has He on? Judicial or wedding garments, and we should have the same; like Josiah, in @2 Chronicles 34: 19, we may have to rend our garments.
A.H. He wears what is necessary.
Rem. John was on the side of privilege, and he has to turn back; yet he is told not to fear.
J.T. The Son of man really has to do with judgment, not privilege.
E.S.H. Is it possible at the Supper that the Lord would wear judicial garments if things were not suitable.
J.T. So Paul did in 1 Corinthians.
A.M. He said to them, "I do not praise", @1 Corinthians 11:17.
{311}
J.T. Yes, their behaviour was disgraceful; the Lord would have to wear His judicial garments.
F.I. Does 2 Timothy help us in facing the question whether we are fit for privilege and to have the Lord in the midst unless we have the moral conditions for it?
J.T. He might be there; and as Paul says, "What will ye? that I come to you with a rod; or in love, and in a spirit of meekness?" Also in @2 Timothy 2: 15 he says, "Strive diligently to present thyself approved to God, a workman that has not to be ashamed, cutting in a straight line the word of truth". So he shews resentment at the state of things; if necessary he will put on other garments, for there is great wickedness going on in Christendom, but the truth is not overthrown, and "the firm foundation of God stands". Every Christian is known by the Lord, and though some may not be quite right, He will get them right, as Revelation shews Him dealing with what is wrong, whatever it is. We have to withdraw from iniquity, and from wooden and earthen vessels, vessels to dishonour, and be vessels "to honour, sanctified, serviceable to the Master, prepared for every good work". This must all be in our minds. "If therefore one shall have purified himself from these in separating himself from them, he shall be a vessel to honour" means learning separation from the Christian profession.
Rem. So Philadelphia is said to have "a little power".
J.T. That agrees with what we have here.
Ques. Does a vessel imply something that is to be filled?
J.T. Just so; "But in a great house there are not only gold and silver vessels, but also wooden and earthen; and some to honour, and some to dishonour". The allusion is to a furnished house, some
{312}
things are made of gold, and some of silver; some of wood, and some of earth; "some to honour, and some to dishonour"; it is very plain, and applies to the profession of Christendom; all the vessels are there; the point is those who separate themselves from certain ones, those who learn how to do it.
Rem. So not only the conditions of service, but the actual bondmen are needed here and in @Matthew 18: 23.
J.T. Quite so; and the Lord says of Paul, "this man is an elect vessel to me". And what a model he was!
C.G. A vessel can be filled, and also carried about.
J.T. The Samaritan woman is as good an example of that as any. She left her waterpot, for she had been helped in her soul.
C.G. She became a vessel that carried the truth to the men.
J.T. Quite so.
A.H. These are very rich chapters of faithful men, good soldiers and bondmen.
J.T. Very good.
Rem. Each is to do it for himself.
J.T. This epistle is written to an individual, not to a company.
{313}
ABIGAIL AS TYPE OF THE ASSEMBLY
@1 Samuel 25: 1 - 9; @1 Samuel 14 - 19; @1 Samuel 32, 33
J.T. This section is one of many that are found throughout scripture, we may say from the beginning to the end, which speak of Christ and the assembly. It is not a little remarkable that it arises with God's operation's almost immediately in Genesis, to which Paul refers, "*I* speak as to Christ and as to the assembly" and this runs on to the end of the Bible, increasing as it goes, and then culminating at the end of @Revelation 21 and 22, and this one comes in in relation to other subjects, subordinate ones but nevertheless of vast import, that involve crises. Here Samuel dies, which is a matter of great importance, as is obvious, affecting the whole nation. There was a leaning toward division, so it was needful that the people of God should be returned to composure and restfulness and not be upset by what happened but proceed on the main line. And so we have here that Samuel dies. Things are happening at the moment that affect the people of God and so it is that many such things happen that try and affect the saints, but they should gain by it, too, for the Spirit of God in a crisis is to instruct us and form us and fit us. So that we begin with Samuel's dying. "And all Israel were gathered together, and lamented him; and they buried him in his house at Ramah". It implies a revival if, when great men have to be sought, somebody else comes in, and that somebody else is Christ and the assembly. All these sorrows affect us and God is saying that He is ready to return to the main line.
R.W.S. Therefore has something been operating all that time in Samuel's ministry?
J.T. Quite so; he was one of the greatest in meeting a crisis in his own ministry, and the next
{314}
point is that David arose and went down to the wilderness of Paran. "David *arose*".
A.B.P. Abigail was not the first wife of David. Would it mean a fresh aspect of the assembly?
J.T. Quite so; she was not the first type of the assembly, either. She comes in later down.
J.T.Jr. David was able to rise above the position occasioned by the death of Samuel.
J.T. That would be the idea, I think, because the sequel shows that he is great in his personality. These deaths are opportunities for personalities to come into evidence. "*We* have the mind of Christ" and therefore we are capable of handling these things and settling them.
R.W.S. When you speak of crises, do you mean church crises or crises in the world today?
J.T. Crises affecting the testimony, I would say.
A.N.W. Did Samuel stand for a ministry that brings in Christ in some kingship phase first? Is it not the king? We are not content without him.
J.T. Well that raises a constructive word. If we go back to the second chapter, we shall see that Hannah is in the position. "Jehovah will judge the ends of the earth; and he will give strength unto his king, and exalt the horn of his anointed" verse 10. So that Hannah in her mind is thinking of the "anointed". It is a poetical expression from a great sister that she would like to set before us. "Jehovah will judge the ends of the earth; and he will give strength unto his king". "His king" of course is in mind in David. "And exalt the horn of his anointed". Does that confirm your thought?
A.N.W. Yes; it amplifies it a great deal.
A.R. Why do you get royalty so much in Matthew's gospel? Does it work out the same idea here?
{315}
J.T. Just so; the king must be in evidence; so it is David, the king.
A.R. Why is the idea so much dwelt on by Matthew?
J.T. I think it belongs to Matthew's gospel, because it is the assembly gospel. @Psalm 45 mentions what we are speaking of. "Upon thy right hand doth stand the queen in gold of Ophir", verse 9. So the two thoughts are in mind, and Matthew has them in mind in the King, the Messiah, the Christ; and here, the sequel is the queen. She is in mind, so that Matthew tells us that a certain king would make a marriage for His son. The bride is not mentioned but you can see how the Spirit of God would have that in mind all through Matthew. The queen must appear, because she is part of the marriage; she is part of the scene.
A.N.W. It is interesting that Matthew should be the assembly gospel.
J.T. Well, it is; the matter of kingship, too, the matter of royalty, and the place the queen has in the Psalms, and John the baptist says, "He that has the bride is the bridegroom" @John 3: 29. The bridegroom is marked off by the fact that He has the bride, showing that the two thoughts hang together and run on into eternity.
V.C.L. Is the prime thought the recovery seen in relation to Abigail and Samuel's death as taken up at this point. Does that point to a distinct lesson in observing Abigail and David.
J.T. Just so; Samuel had his place with the people, so his ministry had its place, which is a great matter. The ministry of a brother has its place, too, but it was only an item in the whole scene, the whole history. The main line is resumed in this expression of Christ and the assembly.
A.P.T. Is Stephen's ministry up to a point like Samuel's? It makes way for Paul.
{316}
J.T. Quite so.
A.P.T. We have just lost a great servant (Mr. Coates).
J.T. Quite so; this very chapter is the one that came to mind when our dear brother was taken, because it would only make room for the main line to proceed.
C.A.M. I was thinking that very thing, that Samuel is referred to in @Psalm 99.
J.T. You have to place him among the priesthood as well as a prophet.
A.R. The queen is in suitable attire, is she not? She was in royal apparel, too.
J .T. That is remarkable, how the idea appears in the whole scripture, because our whole subject in the scripture began with Adam and Eve. Although primarily it deals with Christ and the assembly, the types began with Adam and Eve. They had dominion. The royal line was there, as it were. It was given to them that they should have dominion.
F.H.L. Royalty here is still in mystery, is it not in David, the royal side? It is not a public position, his anointing and kingship.
J.T. Quite so; It was done quietly, you mean? Yes, indeed, but there is a movement of the Spirit in this matter. "This is he" -- the movement of the Spirit is defined. It is no political movement; it is the movement of the Spirit, and that is what we get: we are getting that here. Something happens to call attention to Christ. "Arise, anoint him; for this is he" chapter 16: 12.
A.B.P. Another death seems to be necessary to liberate Abigail.
J.T. That is a good point. What a man he was! What a terrible man, standing in the way of divine purpose in regard of these two persons -- David and Abigail. "Nabal is his name, and folly is with him".
{317}
What a terrible man! Several other scriptures point to it, and that sort of man is current, you know. This is not the time to dwell on that side of things, but it is important to notice the character of the opposition to Christ and the assembly.
J.A.P. Does the book of Jude speak of God's dealings with a man like Nabal, coming in to disturb the assembly?
J.T. Yes, Jude and 2 Peter deal with this type of man who would stand athwart of what God has in mind in relation to Christ and the assembly.
F.H.L. Would the fact that he is a Calebite tend to mislead? We may lose time in looking at Nabal when we should be looking at David.
J.T. That does not save him from being a terrible opposer of Christ. What our children may come to! It is a solemn thing what lengths people may go to -- this terrible opposition to Christ.
D.A.P. Is there a line of persons who are in the secret of David's anointing?
J.T. Quite so; give us a little opening up of it.
D.A.P. Well, David was anointed in the midst of his brethren, and there were those who allied themselves to him, and as he proceeded he gathers more. And over against David, there was Saul and his line in public. David carries on in his service in secret. All that time that Saul was reigning, David had a secret system.
J.T. That is very beautiful, too. The Lord was anointed in the midst of His brethren. Very suitable. Saul had no part in that. That is one of the most beautiful touches -- anointed in the midst of his brethren.
A.E.H. Is there any thought in your mind in regard to David's going into the wilderness as this matter of Nabal goes forward?
J.T. I do not know. The suggestion to me is what
{318}
happens to any servant. This is leading up to something, so that a servant is always open for something to happen that will lead up to what will bring out what is in the mind of God. He arose and went down to the wilderness. "And there was a man at Maon, whose business was at Carmel; and the man was very great"; that is to say, it is an incident in the history of David but affecting the whole position. It shows that we are always ready to fall in with a great matter.
A.E.H. David was not in all that transpired there, but it would seem to suggest a sensitive person, and all this is a heaven-sent suggestion, this wilderness movement. Do you think so?
J.T. Yes, and the sequel of it. It was not a mere incident. "And David arose and went down to the wilderness of Paran. And there was a man at Maon, whose business was at Carmel; and the man was very great, and he had three thousand sheep and a thousand goats; and he was shearing his sheep at Carmel. And the name of the man was Nabal". We are told what that means. "And the name of his wife Abigail; and the woman was of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance; but the man was churlish and evil in his doings; and he was a Calebite. And David heard in the wilderness that Nabal was shearing his sheep". Notice it was in the wilderness that he was doing this. "Then David sent out ten young men; and David said to the young men, Go up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and greet him in my name. And thus shall ye say: Long life to thee! and peace be to thee, and peace be to thy house, and peace be to all that thou hast! And now I have heard that thou hast shearers; now thy shepherds who were with us, we hurt them not, neither was there aught missed by them, all the while they were in Carmel. Ask thy young men and they will tell thee. Therefore
{319}
let the young men find favour in thine eyes; for we come in a good day; give, I pray thee, what thy hand may find to thy servants, and to thy son David. And David's young men came and spoke to Nabal according to all those words in the name of David, and ceased" verse 1 - 9. Now these are the facts. Really we find an important matter, this man and his wife brought into the picture, and he is described, and she is described, and David is having to say to him -- not to her yet, but to him.
A.E.H. That is very interesting. There seems to be a striking contrast between the way Abigail is brought forward in this section, and the wife of Uriah, where the attention of David was first attracted to her. There seem to be traits that underlie the whole dispensation, the goodness and beneficence and grace of David and his young men. All that would help in bringing forward the assembly.
J.T. That is important. Nabal is brought into the picture in a most remarkable way -- and these young men of David who are also brought into the picture; it is important to see that these ten young men are in the service -- they took a message from David to Nabal, and they told it, and "they ceased" -- a fine point in the ministry. They did not go too far; they just told what they have got.
J.W.D. Do you think the resuming of the main line seems to come to light in a rather complete condition? If Samuel had not died and David had not gone in this direction, this condition of things would not have been there.
J.T. You mean, why did this come in here, and what is the point? It is very important. The incidents mentioned are each one in its place, and in the list, all these young men and how they speak at the proper time.
J.T.Jr. Do you think that this system of Nabal's
{320}
developed because of Saul's reign -- suggesting the church on the responsible side during that time, as over against the assembly represented in Abigail as in relation to what is of God, while the responsible side is related to Nabal. I was wondering if Saul still being *king* would allude to something in the ways of God that Nabal had developed on that line, and then the movement here is to get the assembly as seen in Abigail.
A.N.W. The Psalmist says, "The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God". Has not that element arisen lately -- there is no God?
J.T. And then this development under Nabal raises much in the matter that we have had before us as to how the assembly was set as a type, how it was set and held in certain connections that would hinder it coming into maturity in development, and all, of course, bears on the whole position now where the man Nabal shines, or that kind of man. There are men that are unreasonable, as the word is "fool". It opens up in the book of Proverbs -- ''ungodly"and"impiety"and the assembly is freed from all these conditions, and so we are extricated. That is the next thing. She is instructed of what happened by the young men. It is said",And one of Nabal's young men told Abigail, Nabal's wife, saying, "Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to bless our master; and he has insulted them", verse 14. Now we have come to the side of the extrication of Abigail, and her relation is the great thing. She is his wife. She knows exactly his state, the kind of man he is. And so with every true Christian. The Lord's people need to be instructed as to the kind of men that are ruling religiously, and it is important that they should know, because ultimately their deliverance depends upon God.
C.F.N. Legality marked the Galatians, and is
{321}
there not something on current lines or some form of legality that binds the saints?
J.T. It seems as if in the name Nabal (verses  3 and 25) the Spirit of God gives light for the saints as to what is holding them; some of them even going back into it, causing sorrow.
A.R. What is there in this idea of shearing the sheep?
J.T. It is to get the best they have -- the wool.
C.A.M. When there is a refusal, of course, we are to gird on our sword.
J.T. Well the chapter is so full of things. I think this matter of girding on the sword is important, too, because that is going to help, and the idea is found in the scriptures. The Lord says to Simon, Put it back into its sheath. It was not the time for it. The point is to get the idea of extricating Abigail now. We have Nabal carrying on his business, and we can see how he affected the saints. Now how is Abigail to be extricated from all this class of things that this man represents? His own servant tells us in verse 14. "And one of Nabal's young men told Abigail, Nabal's wife, saying", etc. Now this young man is one of those who are of value in the moment in which we are. The young men move, the servants move. Is it effective? Here we see the effectiveness of this young man.
A.E.H. To refer again to Galatians, we have a development of the thought, do we, in the period fixed by the father; and these young men say, We have come in a good day. Would you link it on with, that? If David had continued in the full light of that, he would have been saved this idea of girding on the sword, would he not?
J.T. Yes; he changes the whole position. What can he do for Abigail, to get her out of this position?
A.R. It says after the young man comes to speak to Abigail that she made haste.
{322}
J.T. She represents the assembly and she rises to a type of an assembly person. She had a final judgment about Nabal.
C.F.N. Is it also suggestive to see certain corresponding features in Abigail as worked out in David. In chapter 16, where he is anointed, it is said, "And he was ruddy, and besides of a lovely countenance, and beautiful appearance" verse 12. And here in Abigail, we have, "And the woman was of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance", verse 3. It is helpful to see those underlying conditions in her.
J.T. Abigail is in mind, but David's spirit is out of accord with her; the whole matter is laid bare. Nabal is going to be taken care of and God will do that. David has to learn that. The point is, now he is to come into accord with Abigail, because Abigail is on right lines. She is not attacking her husband. This is not the time for that.
A.E.H. Our service is to discern the features of the assembly and hold to it on the line of uniting it to Christ?
J.T. Quite so; and extricate it if you can, but David in the type drops down below his position. It is a poor thing if any of the Lord's servants have dropped down below the current level because they have taken on religious garments. They do not shine in them. They do not belong to them.
A.R. Do you mean going around like a minister?
J.T. Quite so; and it is now the point for us to see how Abigail comes into light in her own crisis -- this young man is informing her what has happened, and she has recourse to goodness. It is said in verse 18: "And Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two skin-bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of parched corn, and a hundred raisin-cakes, and two hundred fig-cakes, and laid them on asses. And she said to her
{323}
young men, Go on before me; behold, I come after you" verses  18, 19. That is to say, she sends the food before her, because it is a question of food for the brethren, and securing them food, and the official class in the ministry are not ministering the food, but she is; she takes on assembly features.
A.B.P. Does Nabal represent a rival system, because it says in verse 36 that he made a feast in his house like a king? It would seem there was a sort of rivalry there.
J.T. Just so; we have already heard about David.
C.A.M. This great outlay of food would show what a wealth there is in the assembly in a spiritual way, and that it is really a contrary element against this hostile matter.
J.T. That is a prime matter now; this food matter.
A.N.W. What an item it is in the release of this person.
J.T. It is remarkable, the quantity and the quality of it. It says, she made haste. What they needed was food.
F.N.W. In the ways of God, may a decline come in in service; not so much for the brethren to be occupied with the disturbance but to bring into lustre the assembly?
J.T. That is the whole point here. It is more the assembly than Christ. More is made of Abigail than of David. I mean to say, in quality, so that we are told that "Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two skin-bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of parched corn, and a hundred raisin-cakes, and two hundred fig-cakes, and laid them on asses. And she said to her young men, Go on before me; behold, I come after you". That is, she was wise. There is a great volume of food.
{324}
R.W.S. The quality and the volume and the woman herself -- there is some relation between those qualities and the complicated moral conditions? In Adam and Eve there were no complications. Every one was straightforward.
J.T. I think that is good. You mean in chapter 2 of Genesis, but Nabal, I suppose, would represent what the world is -- what it has developed into from Adam and Eve, that is to say, man and woman uncontrolled, what they have developed into, and how the assembly is being extricated. It has to be delivered from it. She rose to the position and knows just what to do in this volume of food and the quality of it and how it succeeded. So the story goes on to show, "And when Abigail saw David, she hasted and lighted off the ass, and fell before David on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, and fell at his feet, and said, Upon me, my lord, upon me let the iniquity be; but let thy handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine ears, and hear the words of thy handmaid". She must use plain language. It is the deliverance of the assembly from those wicked men that were in control. "Let not my lord, I pray thee, regard this man of Belial, Nabal; for as his name is, so is he: Nabal is his name, and folly is with him", showing how she had in her heart the true character of her husband. "And I thy handmaid did not see the young men of my lord, whom thou didst send. And now, my lord, as Jehovah liveth, and as thy soul liveth, seeing Jehovah has restrained thee from coming with bloodshed, and from avenging thyself with thine own hand, now let thine enemies, and they that seek evil to my lord, be as Nabal. And now this blessing which thy bondmaid has brought to my lord, let it be given to the young men that follow my lord. I pray thee, forgive the transgression of thy handmaid; for Jehovah will certainly make my lord a lasting house;
{325}
because my lord fights the battles of Jehovah, and evil has not been found in thee all thy days. And if a man is risen up to pursue thee and to seek thy life, the soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of the living with Jehovah thy God; and the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out from the hollow of the sling. And it shall come to pass, when Jehovah shall do to my lord according to all the good that, he has spoken concerning thee, and shall appoint thee ruler over Israel, that this shall be no stumbling-block to thee, nor offence of heart for my lord, either that thou hast shed blood without cause, or that my lord has avenged himself. And when Jehovah shall deal well with my lord, then remember thy handmaid". That is to say, she is become the deliverer of David in the false position, showing that the responsible element may be on a lower level. He refers to one who would be damaged because of want of understanding, damage the saints, and damage the testimony, and she rescues him.
F.H.L. Is your point in verse 20, "And as she was riding on the ass, and coming down by the covert of the hill, behold, David and his men *came down* opposite to her". They were found on common ground, as it were.
J.T. That is good, too. She was riding on an ass and coming down from the top of the hill, and David and his men were coming down the opposite side, and she met them. That is the meeting, but she is in the lead, you know. He was in danger; showing that a responsible brother may be damaging the saints through want of understanding, and she rescues him. That is constantly needed.
J.T.Jr. The assembly shines in verse 14, and @Matthew 18 brings the assembly before us.
J.T. "But if he will not listen to them, tell it to the assembly", verse 17. That is to say, he is exposed.
{326}
A.B.P. Would you see the application here in that great plan that is referred to in @Psalm 78 where it speaks of God's taking David from following the suckling-ewes and causing him to feed God's inheritance, and he fed them and he led them? Is Abigail like a feeding mother in that sense?
J.T. Just so; she certainly delivered and helped him.
J.W.D. Does it suggest that the assembly is greater than any servant? Does Abigail bring in the principles of the assembly, or how does it work?
J.T. The services of all of us are included in the assembly; I mean to say, that side. He "gave gifts" -- the gifts are all in the assembly.
J.W.D. But why the emphasis on the assembly here?
J.T. Because it is the subject of the chapter.
J.W.D. How would it operate? How does the assembly operate in Abigail?
J.T. The assembly would include all the gifts, viewed from the standpoint of an entity; she includes all the gifts. "That there might be no division in the body, but that the members might have the same concern one for another. And if one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; and if one member be glorified, all the members rejoice with it. Now *ye* are Christ's body, and members in particular. And God has set certain in the assembly: first, apostles; secondly, prophets; thirdly, teachers; then miraculous powers; then gifts of healings; helps; governments; kinds of tongues. Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all in possession of miraculous powers? have all gifts of healings? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?" @1 Corinthians 12: 25 - 30. I think there you have the suggestion that they are all in the assembly, and that is what Abigail represents in this section, which is one of the
{327}
most important sections in the types of the assembly. It brings up an important matter, because all the gifts are included in it. It is therefore greater than the gifts.
C.A.M. When you look at it in that way, you see the immense wealth of supply that there is that has been accorded to the saints, and the richness of it all, the beauty of the saints, too, as we have been taught what the assembly is. You wonder how all that is going to have effect before we leave this scene. It has a mighty power which is working for the extrication of the saints in some marvellous way.
J.T. Therefore the Spirit of God uses it to extricate any individual members and set us all free. These are the most important matters, so we ought to understand it and know that no gift can be superior to the assembly.
F.N.W. "In which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge". @Colossians 2: 3.
J.T. "All the treasures". Notice that!
A.N.W. As far as Nabal is concerned, is it our part to let it have its course? We do not attack it. It takes its course under the governmental hand of God.
J.T. So that what we see here is the great thought working out of Christ and the assembly. David had to be extricated, and any of us who may fall below the level of the assembly have to be extricated and set up in the light of it.
A.E.H. Would this great food supply and variety and abundance suggest occasions like this, when the effect of feeding upon these things is to lift us out of the lower level to which we are so prone to fall?
J.T. When we come to these readings, especially the larger ones, the assembly comes into evidence, what the Spirit will do, what He may use, if it be not in a sense of administration but a sense of ministry.
{328}
"Do ye not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you". @1 Corinthians 6: 19. The Spirit of God is operating and these meetings bring out what is there, and you are made conscious that the Spirit is there and the great thought of the assembly is there, and each person in his own place falls into his own level. He cannot be greater than the assembly.
V.C.L. If failure comes as it did in 1 Corinthians, would the suggestion be that those who had the light of the assembly in mind would save the position in appealing to Paul?
J.T. Quite so; God uses him to call attention to certain things, but even he is not greater, because he is part of the assembly. God has set them in the assembly.
A.P.T. In @Acts 23 Paul is extricated himself. Would the element that was used there be the assembly? He spoke against the high priest. I am just wondering whether the help connected with the assembly was there. In verse 2: "But the high priest Ananias ordered those standing by him to smite his mouth. Then Paul said to him, God will smite thee, whited wall. And *thou*, dost thou sit judging me according to the law, and breaking the law commandest me to be smitten? And those that stood by …".
I was wondering about those people. Is there some help there, was that in connection with the assembly? There was a divided company there, Pharisees and Sadducees.
J.T. You mean he made a failure there, but he extricated himself. He asserted what was right himself. He says, I did not know he was the high priest. It shows what a brother can be even if he does turn aside in any way. Dan leaped from Bashan and got out of a false position by spiritual power.
A.P.T. In other words, if I am wrong, I am wrong and I should admit it.
{329}
A.N.W. He quotes the scripture against himself.
A.P.T. I find there is a great tendency with some to stand on their own feet, and they always say, 'You are not right', but possibly they are wrong themselves.
J.T. What you say I am sure is important; that a brother can right himself. That is what Paul did. Dan leaped from Bashan which would suggest a brother getting out of a false position in the power of the Spirit; God enabling him.
G.V.D. Abigail really is extricating herself through her own activity.
J.T. She is extricating herself and David. She is really extricated by the young man who talked to her of certain things, showing how the assembly comes into action. It functions as it is served aright by its members. The truth is laid before her and she acts upon it.
W.C.R. David says, "Blessed be thy discernment".
R.D.G. Would it appear in the latter part of verse 26 that Abigail has light that God is about to remove Nabal?
J.T. Just so; she really represents what we are speaking of; that the thing is there in her. All she needs is to be informed: and she is informed by certain persons and she acts on the information, and then comes into evidence so that Nabal himself dies. She knows it. The whole matter is clear, and therefore David honours her. She is now coming into the position in the grace and dignity of his intended wife. "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me". He is recognizing her, which is a great matter. She is getting her full place. "Blessed be thy discernment". She knew what would happen. "Blessed be thou, who hast kept me", he acknowledges he needed her keeping, "this day from coming
{330}
with bloodshed, and from avenging myself with mine own hand". That is his tribute to her. I would say he is a worshipper; he is worshipping. I mean to say, the work of God, because she is an expression of the work of God before his own eyes. He is now rising to his proper place as to the assembly. He is like the Lord Himself.
Then the scripture goes on to comment on her. We are told that Abigail came to Nabal in verse 36, "and behold, he held a feast in his house, like the feast of a king; and Nabal's heart was merry within him, for he was drunken to excess; so she told him nothing, less or more, until the morning light. And it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out of Nabal, that his wife told him these things; and his heart died within him, and he became as a stone. And it came to pass in about ten days that Jehovah smote Nabal, and he died", verse 36 - 38. God did it. That is the only way that this present situation can be met. God is going to meet it. So Nabal died. "It came to pass in about ten days that Jehovah smote Nabal, and he died". That is the end of him.
G.V.D. "Who has delivered us from the authority of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love". @Colossians 1: 13.
J.T. It is God's intervention, and I would think pointing to what God would do. In Samson we have the idea of what one man will do. He killed more in his death than in his life, and can overthrow the world. But this is a picture of what God does. Nabal dies.
T.E.H. Would you mind saying a word about verse 34, David being restrained in connection with the suggestion of the assembly?
J.T. "But indeed, as Jehovah the God of Israel liveth, who has restrained me from hurting thee,
{331}
except thou hadst hasted and come to meet me". Then in verse 39, "And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be Jehovah, who has pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and has kept back his servant from evil; but Jehovah has returned Nabal's evil upon his own head. And David sent and communed with Abigail, to take her as his wife". That is the final issue.
A.B.P. That would be a great support in relation to David's soul. He had refrained from shedding Saul's blood in the previous chapter.
J.T. It is the same thing. It shows how God saves you from doing damage.
J.T.Jr. "David sent and communed". How he would take on the assembly in that way.
{332}
SOWING
@Genesis 8: 22; @Zechariah 10: 9; @Hosea 2: 23; @Galatians 6: 8
The brethren will observe that sowing is in mind; so I have read these scriptures. It is a sowing time. The passage in @Genesis 8 contemplates this time; while the earth remains this time continues. That is to say, the time of sowing is contemporary with the age of the earth, the present age of it. No doubt most of us know there are to be a new heavens and a new earth wherein righteousness dwells. There are to be such but they are not yet. What is now is the present earth and God has granted it certain advantages which are to be noted. When it ceases these advantages will cease; that is to say, seed-time and harvest will cease; cold and heat will cease; summer and winter will cease; day and night will cease. Therefore, we are in limitations; we are not in eternal conditions; they are limited conditions, extending from the beginning of time till now. But still, in the mind of God that is not a very long period, but God is pleased to grant these advantages to the earth and we are enjoying them too. Christians are as well as others; Christians more; they are the only ones who really do enjoy the mercies of God. Others take them as if they should be, as if men had a right to them, whereas they have not. We have a right to nothing as men in the flesh. Of course, we do know something about the rights of men and the like, but I am speaking now of actual facts that God speaks of. They are found in the word of God, the scriptures; and so we do well as brethren to be humbled in the light of these things. If we are not Christians then we do well to learn to be humble about them, because it is as we are humble about the mercies of God that God may continue them to us. If they are just
{333}
mercies they are not our rights; they are God's rights.
Well now, as I said, among these things is the matter of sowing; seed-time and harvest; it is a question of the time. The Spirit of God uses the idea of sowing very prominently throughout the Scriptures and I call attention to the matter now to show how it applies to persons; persons sown. What is in the passage read refers doubtless to cereals and the like, vegetables, what is sown to produce a crop for men's benefit; but then the thought is enlarged in the prophets, as you will see, in the passages read, to apply to men; men, women and children. And so in this remarkable passage in Zechariah Jehovah says, "And I will sow them among the peoples, and they shall remember me in far countries; and they shall live with their children and return". This is remarkable, dear brethren. It has a peculiar sort of application today, although not literally, because this is prophetic and we are not living in the age of prophecy in this sense; not that prophecy has not got light for us, nourishment and food for us, but it strictly belongs to the earth and God's purposes as regards the earth and this passage is included in that. The time is coming when the Jews, to be simple, will be sown. It does not say they sow themselves, nor does it say they are sown in a goodly position, but it is "among the peoples". God will proceed on these lines presently and we who are instructed in the scriptures and who know something about prophecy, which we should, everyone of us, we know something about the prophetic map, to use a familiar phrase, a good one; so that we can put our finger on the part of the earth that any prophecy alludes to, because it does certainly allude to the earth, and we can put our finger on any part of it to which prophecy may refer. But here the allusion is very general. "And I will
{334}
sow them among the peoples, and they shall remember me in far countries; and they shall live with their children and return". God is doing the thing. It may be that He is beginning to do it already, but I would say that what I said is true: that the prophecies refer to the earth and they refer largely to Israel, although they refer to nations too, but they refer to the earth. What we see here is evidently future. We cannot go out among the nations -- I have been over most of them myself and I do not know of any Jews that I can regard as sown among the nations. I know on good authority that a large number, maybe five millions of them have been destroyed during the past few years. It is an awful thing and God does not ignore it either. But it is not sowing; men are destroying men. When the sowing begins God will do it and He will do it presently. But it is a terrible thing that, we might say, Christians are responsible in a certain sense for the conduct of men generally. I mean to say, we cannot lift up our heads in the presence of these things without shame that the human race is capable of such a terrible atrocity as the destruction of five million or more people of a certain class, besides the others that are not mentioned. I was told fourteen millions were destroyed in the last war -- not Jews -- and I do not know that there are any less in this war. It is an awful thing that we have such hearts; men and women as they are here on this earth, that we have hearts capable of such conduct, such atrocity, such wickedness; but it is so, and it is well for us to face it before God and think of what the race is capable of.
But then this a beautiful thought, I think. I just mention it for a moment. "And I will sow them among the peoples, and they shall remember me in far countries; and they shall live with their children and return". So that we can comfort ourselves, which
{335}
we are entitled to do as knowing God. He is the God of all comfort. There is no comfort outside of God, but God is infinite. So we have plenty of scope. God is infinite, but He is the God of all comfort. And, as I said, there is comfort in this thought that God is presently to begin to sow his earthly people among the countries. The devil sows too. The Lord Jesus speaks about Himself, sowing the good seed, the sons of the kingdom. The Lord Jesus speaks about sowing sons, the sons of the kingdom of God. It is presently said that an enemy sowed tares in the same field. Tares are a useless thing; a useless weed resembling wheat. They are an imitation of what God is sowing. That is to say, Christendom has persons who are like Christians to that extent, but they are absolutely useless or worse. The devil has sown them. Someone comes to the Master and says to Him, You have sown good seed in the field but there are tares coming up. These tares are coming up. The Lord says, An enemy has done it. Who is the enemy? The devil. At least he has those who are sown on the earth, in Christendom, and the Lord says to leave them alone. We cannot destroy them. There are those who would destroy the Jews and have sought to do it, but God has dealt the same to them. It is not for us to destroy these useless weeds or tares. God will do that. The angels of God will come presently and bind them in bundles and burn them. These are the things that God will do on the earth. He will burn them. They will be bound up. No doubt it refers to societies with wicked doctrines and the angels of God will come down and deal with them; bind them up in bundles and burn them. That is what the Spirit of God says.
But here we have sowing. "And I will sow them among the peoples, and they shall remember me.." That is the point, dear brethren, that will come out at that time. People will begin to remember God,
{336}
instead of going in for all that this world yields. The Jews particularly go in for it; millions of them go in for what the world affords them. They have nothing else; they live in it, alas! But presently we have another seed which God sows, among the peoples too. They are still here and there among the nations; not back in their own lands, but God will begin to work in them where they are, as He does now with normal Christians. God begins to work in us as in the place where we are and presently we will return. That is what it says here: "And I will sow them among the peoples, and they shall remember me in far countries; and they shall live with their children and return". That is very comforting. People go to the movies and take their children too. It is a terrible thing to see those children led to those terrible places where they are only dealt out the worst kind of thing to feed on. The parents are turning around and the children are turning around. The parents live with the children. What a changed world it will be, but it is going to come, thank God! That is what keeps us going -- hope. The hope of the Christian is the going thing; it keeps us going. It is God. Hope fills our hearts, but never greater hope than I am now speaking of. I am not going to turn aside to dwell on the great things we can speak of in regard of hope, but what I am speaking of is very comforting, that God will presently begin to work in all those countries; here in America and in the whole of the British Empire and even among the heathen. Many of us here hardly realize the number of persons known as heathens. There are probably ten millions of people actual heathens. As soon as you think of these things you begin to humble yourself and to think, surely God will come in -- this cannot go on forever, nor will it, for God is long-suffering, not willing that any should perish, and He is getting in the assembly the greatest
{337}
thing in the universe. I am not speaking of that now; I am speaking of what God will do presently among the Jews and where they will be; whether they be in Christendom here or in heathendom, God will begin to work here and there and He will sow them. He says, "And I will sow them among the peoples, and they shall remember me ...". What a change! Take for instance, where we are here in this town today, and we see the people moving along to some place where the Lord Jesus is remembered, where the Lord's supper is celebrated, and where we see people moving in that track we would rejoice. But we do not see many. There are some who remember God. I hope there is no one here who does not, because this is the point of this meeting, that someone might be stirred up to remember God. If there is someone that does not remember God, if you have drifted away, do not stay there. Remember God. "And they shall remember me in far countries; and they shall live with their children and return". That is, they are turning toward Jerusalem. Jerusalem will be the great objective now for the Jews when God begins to sow; when the sowing time comes for them. When He begins to sow in far countries they will begin to move. There will be regular flocks of them going toward Jerusalem, undoubtedly; but they shall live with their children and return. It is almost sure that if a man gets wrong, he gets wrong about his wife and his children; but here he gets right about his wife and his children.
Now I will go on to the next passage to confirm what I said. It says, "And I will sow her unto me in the land". That is another matter. It refers undoubtedly to the land of Canaan, the promised land. God says, I spied it for Israel, as if a man were in an airplane and looked down and saw some land and saw it with such clearness it was delightful to his eye.
{338}
He says, I want that land for my people. That is exactly what God has done. There is no other land like it. You say, it is not easy to show it now. Very likely; but it will be. God will make it just what He saw. He is going to see the thing presently just as He did see it before. The fact of the matter is, dear brethren, that we were all seen and taken account of by God away back in eternity. "But whom he has predestinated, these also he has called; and whom he has called, these also he has justified; but whom he has justified, these also he has glorified". @Romans 8: 30. These are divine things and they apply to everyone of us here. We are nearly all Christians, I believe, and each of us is taken account of in that way. Before we had any being at all God saw us and He made us according to that pattern, so to speak, so that we are seen of Him according to that pattern. Each one of us is to be conformed to the image of God's Son. That is the pattern. We are taken up before we had any being at all, and then called, and then justified, and then glorified. That is what has happened. It is a most wonderful thing, really, and ought to fill our hearts, that God has so regarded us, and we are now under His eye according to what He has purposed, and He is conforming us to the image of His Son; all to be like Jesus.
So as I have said, the land of Canaan was spied by Him. He says, I spied it and selected it; and He says to His people Israel, I am going to give it to you. I will just read a verse in @Deuteronomy 8, that you may get some idea of the land that God has in His mind for them. It says in verse 7, "For Jehovah thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of waterbrooks, of springs, and of deep waters, that gush forth in the valleys and hills; a land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig-trees, and pomegranates; a land of olive-trees and honey; a land wherein thou shalt
{339}
eat bread without scarceness, where thou shalt lack nothing; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose mountains thou wilt dig copper. And thou shalt eat and be filled, and shalt bless Jehovah thy God for the good land which he hath given thee". Well now, you see, this is the divine word and you say, Well, I cannot find it. I certainly should not attempt to find it save as it is here as in the mind of God. It is there. That is enough. It will all come out in its perfection, and we shall see these same people that are sown in the countries now in that same land sown by God presently. That is what we get in the passage I read in @Hosea 2, "And I will sow her unto me in the land; and I will have mercy upon Lo-ruhamah". That is what will happen. It will be a land like that presently in the same confines as we have in Asia. The land of Canaan is a very small piece of land. If men were sent out to judge its value and knew all the different parts of it as the spies of old did, we should perhaps today find very little. I should say any bit of good land in this country is equal or better; any good bit of land in England is equal or better, and so in France, and so in Germany, but I am concerned about God's mind. That is pure gold to me, that mind of God. He can bring things about; He can call things that are not as if they were. He can bring things about; it is nothing to Him. Job says, "I know that thou canst do everything"; and so do I, and so does every Christian here who is really so. I will say again that God can do everything. Sometimes we may say a thing like that and forget that it refers to oneself. Whatever His mind is as to me He can do it. What is His mind as to all of us here, dear brethren? It is to raise us up and make us like Jesus. That is what His mind is: to conform us to the image of His Son. That is the scripture in @Philippians 3. So that you see how well off we are, and what I am saying now is just to
{340}
make us feel we are well off and that wonderful things belong to us, and that we are ourselves wonderful according to the mind of God. We do not need anything more than that. God will bring it to pass; confide in Him. This beautiful passage I have read in Deuteronomy is one of the most beautiful you can get in regard to the land. No need for any more iron ore or gold, South African gold, or those diamonds down there in the mines, thousands of feet down; no more need for these. The land of Canaan will have everything that man needs on this earth. God will show that. He will show how it can be brought about that all the best things according to man are found in the land of Canaan. He has spied it for them and it is all going to come about. I think what I am saying is just to try and encourage our hearts as to the great things that are designed for us and the great things we are designed for; for those who form the assembly are the very highest conception of what I am saying. The assembly is the greatest thought in the whole universe and we belong to it, dear brethren. Everyone of us Christians here is part of it.
So this verse says, "And I will sow her unto me in the land; and I will have mercy upon Lo-ruhamah; and I will say to Lo-ammi, Thou art my people; and they shall say, My God". You see what beautiful language there is there between God and us. We are His people and He is our God. He is our God. That is the position that these verses put us into, dear brethren. I have just read them, and now I go back to my verse in Galatians, which is, perhaps, a different view-point, but necessary to speak of now, that we should be concerned about this matter of sowing. I have presented to you the bright side of my subject, and I think you will agree it is a bright side too. Now I want to come to the searching side, and yet not without its brightness as I shall show. It says in
{341}
verse 8, "For he that sows to his own flesh, shall reap corruption from the flesh; but he that sows to the Spirit, from the Spirit shall reap eternal life". I have been speaking about sowing in countries; I have been speaking about sowing in Canaan, and now I have read about a person sowing to his own flesh. I stop at that to cause you to think a little bit. How are you going to sow to your own flesh? You know, naturally we like our own flesh. We speak of our relatives as our own flesh and blood. We speak of our children as our own flesh and blood. Of course we like them. How are we to sow to them, to our own flesh? I am not speaking of your relatives now, your children, I am speaking of your own personal body, my own body. How am I to sow to it? I do not know of anything more searching. I hope it is searching to everyone of us. Oh, how we do naturally love ourselves; lovers of ourselves, lovers of our own selves. How we love to look in the glass and if there is any little bit of beauty to admire it. Or, if there be any little bit of ability to admire it; poetical ability or whatever it may be, to admire it. I know what that is and you do, I am sure. Everyone here knows what that means. It is a most searching matter. You turn over the picture of your own self in your drawing-room or your dining-room or your bedroom and you see the things you like; looking at pictures, photographs and the like. It is a great matter, this thing over the shoulder -- taking pictures, taking photographs. It is one of the greatest things now with travellers. Everyone likes to have something strung over his shoulder with photographic accoutrements. It must be there, and it is to bring out the beauty of the things that be. You know I am not saying that the brethren are not beautiful in a moral sense and that beauty shows in the photographs, but I do say there is too much of it. It is not worth the trouble. But then I am talking about that and making allowance
{342}
for all that; in the drawing-room and the dining-room and bedroom -- wherever it be -- these are brought out and there are the persons. What is to be seen? Presently I turn the page over and I find this word from the verse I read, "For he that sows to his own flesh", there is no mistake as to what is meant. It is not simply his sons or daughters; it is his own flesh; it is himself. "For he that sows to his own flesh, shall reap corruption from the flesh". That is to say, that same old flesh; "shall reap corruption". See what you make of that. You say, anybody can talk like that and belittle other people and talk against persons; anybody can do that. And that is true; but I am seeking to tell the truth just as it is, and it is the Spirit of God I am quoting; no less than the Spirit of God. "For he that sows to his own flesh, shall reap corruption from the flesh". It is as sure as anything can be. You say, is it God's truth? It is God's truth. It is the actual word of God Himself, and He is telling us that if we sow to our own flesh we shall of that same flesh reap corruption. The passage in Genesis refers to seed-time and harvest, and it is the harvest I am now speaking of. The reaping is corruption, and, of course, all these things happen on the earth. Corruption comes out but we soon cover it over, or try to; but before God, there it is; not only the physical but the moral side. We read of loving our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption. How real that is. "In incorruption" refers to my state; I love Him in incorruption. My state in loving Him is incorruptible. I do not claim it and not have it real; the love I have for Christ is to be real. But then, think of what my own flesh is that I pride myself in as an unconverted man and, maybe, as an unspiritual Christian too; what I have to admit that I have reaped now that I have got older; because, you know, the reaping time is then. Personal beauty and
{343}
personal ability are affected by age, and all that goes with youth and manliness comes down. Age affects it. It is very solemn that age affects everything. Beauty goes, the marvellous intelligence that we sometimes speak of, and the poetic power and all that goes. Age will affect all that. Man goes to his long home. That is how it reads. The mourners go about the streets. It is a most sorrowful thing to see people ignoring all this, and yet there is nothing truer than that age will bring about these conditions, so that corruption is present. It is to be reaped. As middle-age passes some may know it, and then partially old-age and then old-age and then dotage. These things happen but they begin early. The reaping begins early. It is reaping after the sowing. Where one sows to his own flesh it is corruption. I do not wish to occupy you unduly with it, dear brethren, but still it is needed that our Christianity should become real.
So the other side is beautiful and glorious and stimulating. "But he that sows to the Spirit, from the Spirit shall reap eternal life". So that now you come to the open flowers of Solomon's type; the half-open flowers. It is a question of life. Life is seen in flowers particularly and, of course, in all creation the type is there. But I can hardly undertake to picture eternal life, the word is so marvellous; "eternal life". 'Everlasting' is hardly as strong as 'eternal'. 'Eternal' carries its own meaning with it. You might say it is a word coined by the Spirit of God to treat of that great subject, namely, eternal life. "For the wages of sin is death; but the act of favour of God, eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord". Wages on the one hand, gift on the other. Eternal life is a gift.
So I would just leave you with that, if I may. The time is coming as to this matter of reaping eternal life after the sowing. You say, well, I thought it was gift.
{344}
It is gift, but at the same time it is a product of sowing, and gift is one thing and sowing is another. If you sow for a crop you get eternal life, if you sow for it you will surely get it. It is the same eternal life that God gives, but nevertheless it is peculiarly precious. It is the fruit of my own sowing. God says, there it is; it is what you have been sowing all these years. I am going to give it to you in heaven. It is going to shine there in relation to all the saints. I am going to give it to you here even. "And the end eternal, life", @Romans 6: 22. Apply it at the present time. So that we are enjoined to lay hold of eternal life. Where is it? It is in Christ. But it is possible to get it by sowing. It is worthwhile understanding, too. I do not feel that I am boring you to seek to put it upon you to understand it. There is such a thing as sowing to the Spirit and reaping eternal life. It is the most precious crop I can name that becomes a yield to us from the sowing, and the sowing is to the Spirit, the blessed Spirit of God, sowing to Him. What a range of things to our minds, to our affections, to throw out our seed into that soil, the rich soil of the Spirit of God, and the crop coming back in due time. It is a question of sowing. "He that sows to the Spirit, from the Spirit shall reap eternal life". It comes exactly where you sow it. The Spirit of God yields it so that it comes back to you. I have a precious thing of my own sowing, my own commodity, as it were, and God would so regard it, so that we can enjoy it. It is His gift, but nevertheless it is brought about this way: namely, it can come from your sowing. May God help us, dear brethren, according to His mind, in all these matters.
{345}
SALVATION AND THE WORKS OF FAITH
@Titus 3: 4 - 7; @Matthew 24: 13; @James 2: 14 - 26
The proposal is to look at salvation as it is presented in Titus, and to look at the passage in Matthew, which says, "But he that has endured to the end, *he* shall be saved"; that is to say, the need of salvation is stressed in these verses, and then in the well known chapter in James, what is stressed is the works of faith -- the doctrine of justification by faith is among the best known, and attested to in the scriptures; at the same time the doctrine of salvation by works is also attested to, in other words, works are needed. It is said in the last verse of the chapter, "For as the body without a spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead". It is hoped that it would be helpful to have our minds run over these scriptures together and see how plain on the one hand Titus is, and other passages, but especially in Ephesians and Romans, and then while stress should be laid on endurance of salvation, the passage read from Titus is very full and varied, especially in the verses we have mentioned -- "But when the kindness and love to man of our Saviour God appeared, not on the principle of works which have been done in righteousness which *we* had done, but according to his own mercy he saved us through the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit, which he poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our Saviour", notice the word Saviour both as to God and to the Lord. And then "having been justified by *his* grace", that is three great terms are introduced here -- the love of God, and the mercy of God, and the grace of God. These are outstanding words or terms, and introduced because of salvation, that by which we are saved. The three terms are noticeable, and then as over against these and others like them, in Ephesians
{346}
particularly, you have the question of endurance in Matthew and the question of works in James.
G.V.D. Would it be right to say that there is God's side in this subject and also our side?
J.T. That is right. It is an important remark to make to start with. The first thing is salvation is of God, and then our side, that is the subjective, as it is called, involving the Spirit. It is also important, outstandingly so, and I think perhaps largely omitted if not ignored, in dealing with salvation.
E.H. Is salvation viewed in this chapter as initial?
J.T. Just so, read it over again. It is a beautiful phrase, "But when the kindness and love to man of our Saviour God appeared" -- that surely is initial, and then it is strengthened in the matter of terms by the negative -- "not on the principle of works which have been done in righteousness which *we* had done, but according to his own mercy he saved us" -- mercy as well as loving-kindness and then the word "grace" in verse 7, "Having been justified by *his* grace" and then "the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit, which he poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our Saviour"; so that what has been remarked is clearly right: it is initial. It proceeds from God immediately, but yet we cannot but see that without works and without endurance we can hardly have Christianity.
T.D. There is great activity right through, is there not?
J.T. Just so. It began with those that heard Peter preach, although he preached beautifully through the whole gospel the repenting ones said to him and the other apostles, what shall we do?
T.D. I only had in mind the early church in Acts, where it says they continued in the apostles¬ doctrine, the breaking of bread and prayers. There was a great deal of activity.
{347}
J.T. That is a good way of putting it, because as we remarked, the preaching as such was finished. Repentance had taken place, and they began to ask, "What shall we do, brethren?" They did not ask what God had done, because evidently Peter had made that very plain, but it was right for them to ask what they should do. Peter would not turn it aside at all. He said, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit" @Acts 2: 38.
S.M. The word "poured out" is very beautiful here, is it not? How free the salvation is. Does that correspond with Ephesians where it speaks of God "who is rich in mercy"?
J.T. The word "poured out" would be a suggestion of great liberality on the part of God, not sparing. David said, "Take not the spirit of thy holiness from me" @Psalm 51: 11, as if he felt it could happen and would not appear in the liberal way which we see here. And so in Romans, it is said that the Spirit sheds forth the love of God in our hearts, showing the liberal sense in which the Holy Spirit is here, and how He takes care of us. Indeed, if we are to consult John, we shall see that the word is Comforter -- the word is really "Paraclete" -- which means one by us to take care of our affairs -- all that pointing to the liberal conditions in regard to the means of salvation.
F.H.L. In @Exodus 33, God seems to link His glory with it. "I will make all my goodness pass before thy face ... and I will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy" verse 19.
J.T. That is a statement covering what we are speaking of. It looked on to Christianity, because the law made nothing perfect. Even the matter of salvation was not perfectly presented. It awaited the
{348}
redemptive work of Christ and the coming in of the Spirit, so that we should see the working out of it.
C.A.M. Referring to the expression "kindness and love to man of our Saviour God" there is a love that comes from God that perhaps we might call the love of purpose. Would it be right to say that the feelings here are the feelings that God would have consequent on the intrusion of sin and all that we needed to be saved from.
J.T. As if God would feel for you. As we know, the word is philanthropy as if God is capable of that in this matter. It is hardly found anywhere else, but God is capable of philanthropy in this matter of salvation, and it implies what feelings He has in regard to man, as needing a Saviour.
A.R. It says in verse 4, it "appeared". When did it appear?
J.T. Well, I suppose it appeared in Christ. That was the general position. It awaited the incoming of the Lord Jesus Christ. He was marked off from the outset as the One who should do things, foreshadowed in a man like Noah, and now He is here, and Paul is taking account of the matter and I should think it would allude to the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ as made known in public, because He did not appear until He was baptised. After He is baptised He goes into the wilderness for forty days and is tempted and then He returns in the power of the Spirit and is seen in Galilee, and at Nazareth He announces in power and grace that the Spirit of Jehovah is upon Him and has anointed Him to preach. I believe there it is properly seen. They are all affected by it, at least to a point. They marvelled at the words of grace that were coming out of His mouth. They did not stop; they were flowing out.
Rem. Zacchaeus introduced the thought of alms to the Lord. He says, "the half of my goods I give to the
{349}
poor". The Lord said, "Today salvation is come to this house". @Luke 19: 9. Would the works of God be done by Christ there?
J.T. Quite so; so that we have the son of Abraham, and he announces to him that salvation today is come to this house. Salvation had come; it was there; and yet it had to be worked out through redemption. It is essential to heaven but the general thought was there.
T.N.W. Would what the Lord Jesus said in @Luke 4 have a wider bearing than just Israel? Would that have man in view?
J.T. I would think so; Luke has man in view.
A.N.W. Does all this side of God come in by proclamation whereas the matter of our side is a matter of ministry. I was noticing the verse after the one read in Titus. "The word is faithful, and I desire that thou insist strenuously on these things, that they who have believed God may take care to pay diligent attention to good works". Does that come as a matter of ministry and teaching?
J.T. It does. We should be stirred up about that side. We have it in Ephesians very suggestively, "For we are his workmanship, having been created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God has before prepared that we should walk in them". But Luke, as has been alluded to, is that side which would fit into what we are saying now. I mean the Lord's own word to Simon in chapter 7. I believe that is why the thing is come to light. Luke opens up the truth in that way as coming to light. So, "I have somewhat to say to thee", the Lord said, and he said, "Say on". He was the sort of man the Lord could use, although apparently not converted; but still he was the sort of man the Lord could use for the point in question. He put the matter to him. "There were two debtors of a certain creditor: one owed five hundred denarii and the other fifty; but as they had
{350}
nothing to pay, he forgave both of them their debt". And then the Lord raised the question of love. He says, "Which of them therefore will love him most? And Simon answering said, I suppose he to whom he forgave the most. And he said to him, Thou hast rightly judged". And then He turns to the woman, as if the bearing was there in a very striking way. The kindness and love of God was there. He turns to the woman and He said, "Thy faith has saved thee; go in peace". The thing now is to keep to the divine side of the matter according to what time we have and make way for the obvious necessity of works.
Rem. "All things which Jesus began both to do and to teach".
J.T. It would be a question of teaching; what the Lord did in His life down here; what He taught, and what He did. It is more the idea of persons who are serving that is in mind in the opening of the Acts, because Acts is to bring out what the apostles did. They were servants, and therefore the point was what they said should be heard. They persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles. The question of doing is from God's side according to the Acts; the Acts is full of it, and it is really what comes in here first; what God has done and one might select certain passages from Peter, for instance, in his address at Caesarea, and from Paul in his preaching at Antioch. I am only referring to certain samples of preaching which should be taken as models, and then see how they lead up to the other side, that is, the obvious necessity for works if we are to have Christianity. If it were a question of persons being justified and going to heaven, then we perhaps could omit works, but the scripture does not omit works. The idea is they should be here on earth as the testimony to the power of God involved in salvation.
{351}
J.A.P. Is the early part of Romans, chapters 1 - 7, God's side?
J.T. Quite so. Chapter 8 makes the way for the Spirit's work. The Spirit is alluded to in chapter 5 but the subjective position in man is taken up properly in chapter 8. The Spirit is mentioned thirteen times in the early part of the chapter, and that is what we have in mind to stress. Room should be made for the Spirit if we talk about being saved.
T.E.H. "Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling", it says. Why the fear and trembling?
J.T. Quite so; the thing is there; the thing that God has effected is there.
T.E.H. I wondered as to the necessity for fear and trembling.
J.T. When Philip preached there was great joy in that city; there is no word about fearing and trembling; but I am sure in Paul's ministry it is laid down; it is needed. It is a solemn matter to have to do with God. One who was a great servant said just before he died, it is a solemn thing to have to meet God. It is a very important thing. We should not treat it lightly. We have to meet with God in all His holiness, if the Lord takes us.
G.V.D. There are many people who feel that they can add something to the Lord's work on the cross. If it is a matter of our being saved to go to heaven nothing can be added to that perfect work. It is done from God's side.
J.T. It is a question of what can be done by the Spirit, because He has part in that too. It is a question of working out that too in our souls; what the Spirit accomplishes in view of salvation.
A.P.T. Peter says, "He that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him". That is in @Acts 10. Had he reached a result there yet in prayer? How far had Peter got on with the centurion?
{352}
J.T. I think I can understand that Peter would go further than what we have; that is to say, the matter of what God does -- it is salvation. I can understand that Peter would say more than that to Cornelius, because Cornelius had already established a testimony or memorial in heaven himself, and he would expect to learn something about that, and so the angel tells him that his prayers had been heard and that they had come up as a memorial. He was already a subject of the work of God, and he would expect more, I would think, and Peter gave him more than the ordinary bare terms of the gospel that Romans presents.
J.S. He was a God-fearing man, was he not?
J.T. He was; just imagine that he should be regarded as having a memorial in heaven, and yet he had not got the Spirit. That is a matter to be questioned. Do we understand that?
R.H.S. Is this matter worked out collectively, too? The Lord says to Ephesus, "I know thy works ... and thine endurance".
J.T. Do you mean that it works out from the subjective side?
R.H.S. In relation to all of us in a locality.
J.T. Christianity was in the mind of God in purpose. It was not simply that persons should be forgiven and go to heaven, but that we should be down here in the testimony. The earth is to have a testimony, and that hinges not only on the redemptive work of Christ but on the Spirit, because the Lord says, "For if I do not go away, the Comforter will not come to you, but if I go, I will send him to you" @John 16: 7. As if it were an absolute necessity as to the whole plan. And that is the thing for me to follow now, as to the plan involving the Spirit and the Lord's going to heaven in order that He should come. You may say, He was here before; but He was
{353}
not in the sense of gift. John says, by the Spirit, "for the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified" chapter 7: 39, showing how careful God is as to these thoughts -- that it must be worked out and followed; that we should not balk things -- leave some things out and take them as if they are not of any consequence, because God is particular as to what He says, and so they must be followed through.
A.P. Is the confession of Jesus as Lord a good work?
J.T. It is part of what is obligatory on the believer, certainly. It is enjoined: "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe in thine heart that God has raised him from among the dead, thou shalt be saved", @Romans 10: 9, showing that confession and believing with the heart are essentials to salvation.
D.P. From what Philip conveyed to the eunuch, did he see the necessity for salvation?
J.T. Well, look at the facts. Philip had gone to the desert, by direction from the angel, and obviously it was that he might meet the eunuch, and he was reading the scriptures in the prophet Isaiah. He had been to Jerusalem. Why did he not meet the brethren at Jerusalem? Was there any remissness in him? Apparently he did not meet them, and if he were genuinely affected, I would say, he should have met them, because they were there in large numbers, like many who have missed their opportunities, and yet God is unfailing and affords them other opportunities, and that was the case with the eunuch. Evidently God prepared this man as he prepared the fish that swallowed Jonah. He prepared him; God prepared Philip. That was one of the matters he prepared him for, and so he accosted the eunuch. These are important remarks, because they show what God's grace is in the matter of salvation. The Spirit said,
{354}
"Approach and join this chariot" @Acts 8: 29. And he went and joined it, and the eunuch invited him up, and Philip said, "Dost thou then know what thou are reading of?" Well, now I would say to any one that is concerned about his soul to tax his understanding, because God has given man understanding enough to make him qualified to listen to God, and God does not address cows or sheep in that sense. They have not the mind for it, but man has, and therefore Philip refers at first to understanding. "Dost thou then know what thou art reading of?" and he says, "How should I then be able unless some one guide me?" We cannot deny that, but still he appealed to his understanding, and so in @Romans 10 to which allusion has been made, the matter is referred to. "The word is near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart". The thing is there. Man is capable of it, but man is capable at the very outset of being helped by God's voice.
S.F. Would you say something about the washing of regeneration and the renewal of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. That is, one feels, a necessity. It is a remarkable phrase that is used in Matthew. The word "regeneration" is used in Matthew's gospel as introducing the millennial day, but Paul alludes to it here as belonging to Christianity, the washing of regeneration and the renewal of the Holy Spirit, which would show that the subjective side comes in early.
A.I. Would the washing of regeneration be bound up in what was said to Paul before he received the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Well, I do not know. The word that the brother in Damascus used to Paul was "Arise and get baptised, and have thy sins washed away, calling on his name", @Acts 22: 16. That must come very near to the washing of regeneration, and baptism
{355}
alludes to it. It is the thing as accepted and understood, because the mind enters into these matters, just as it does at the Lord's supper. Why should I not be baptised, immersed? Well, the Spirit of God makes it plain that that is the mode that God has ordered, and God will support it, and in order to be ready for the Spirit, we need to be washed. The washing of regeneration and the renewal of the Holy Spirit, I would say, is very closely allied to new birth, on the one hand, and baptism, on the other.
F.S.C. Walking in newness of life, is that seen here? "We have been buried therefore with him by baptism unto death, in order that, even as Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father, so *we* also should walk in newness of life".
J.T. It is linked up with baptism but although these are cardinal truths and initial truths, yet they are not very much known. That is the feeling one has and therefore our Christianity is more or less shallow, and the washing of regeneration, I believe, is linked on the one hand with new birth, the actual power of God operating by the Spirit in the soul, and then on the other hand the public matter of confession involved in baptism.
A.R. New birth is an internal matter. Washing of regeneration is an external matter.
J.T. It is. Therefore new birth is a necessity before anyone will accept the idea of washing. And so the Lord immediately after the first inquiry as to new birth in @John 3, then refers to washing. The second reference is that one does not enter into the kingdom without washing.
F.N.W. Do you mean the remark of the Lord, "Except anyone be born of water and of Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God"?
J.T. Quite so. God is alluded to. The second
{356}
reference to water is the one. Baptism is closely allied to the new birth. The first reference is the actual work of the Spirit in bringing in new birth and then the water allied with it as a necessity for cleansing, because the need for purity is so essential if we are to come into salvation.
A.B.P. Is there a link with @Acts 2? In answer to the question, What shall we do? Peter tells the men to repent and be baptised and they would receive the Holy Spirit. But then later it says, "And with many other words he testified and exhorted them, saying, Be saved from this perverse generation", verse 40. I wondered if the reference to the perverse generation in relation to baptism carries with it the thought of washing of regeneration.
J.T. I suppose it would. I thought of that too, as to the Jewish conditions; the conditions into which new birth is introduced. The defiling conditions that were there had to be met and I believe that is what Ananias meant when he said to Paul "Why lingerest thou"? You should know that this is a necessity -- and yet he was just barely converted, but he says, "Arise and get baptised, and have thy sins washed away, calling on his name".
A.P.T. It says, "Why lingerest thou?" Does it link on with @Titus 3: 3? "For we were once ourselves also without intelligence, disobedient, wandering in error, serving various lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy". Is there a change of state or condition that one is recognized in an external way.
J.T. It is a corrupt condition among the Jews. It is a parallel with the corrupt conditions among the Gentiles although with the Jews it was deeper. The claim on God would make them pretentious in that way and hence the great need for a new birth to take them out of the whole condition that the law had brought them into.
{357}
C.A.M. Would this word 'regeneration' be connected with the baptismal idea? As we think of the Jews it helps us, does it not? Paul as in prison seems to represent both.
J.T. Do you mean he represents the Jews?
C.A.M. Of course he represents this present dispensation in such a special way, but he also included what they will do.
J.T. And therefore Matthew would fit because it is the introduction of the coming dispensation. The regeneration is necessary; indeed it is a Jewish name for the introduction of the millennium, but Paul brings everything in in Christianity. He would say, They have not anything that we have not got; we have everything.
C.A.M. That is a very interesting thing, because these are the only two places in the scriptures where that word is used.
A.P.T. The greater includes the lesser in that way. Are you inferring that this dispensation is the greatest?
J.T. It is the greatest of all. There is nothing left out of it.
A.R. It is a question of getting into the kingdom now. This idea of washing is the way to get into it, I suppose.
J.T. The Lord challenges Nicodemus about it. "Thou art the teacher of Israel?" He gives him credit of being the teacher; not an ordinary Pharisee but a leading man, and he says, You do not know these things! The Lord is saying, I am here to tell you everything.
D.P. Is this dark background as seen in verses 1 - 3 in Titus to bring out that God has moved? If we see a change now in anyone, can we say something has been effected there? Is it right to say that that change is of God when we see it brought about? The
{358}
change is not in the public condition or in the environment. The change seems to be now in men.
J.T. It is in men. God is not, however, taking up this clay to make a believer of it, as He did when He took up Adam. He is taking up a man, an actual man, woman or child to make something out of him. That is important to bear in mind. Man is such that God can use him for the carrying out of His thoughts. And, therefore, the change must necessitate what the man is; the kind of being he is. God has prepared all this beforehand, and that man is intended to be used for this great purpose. Therefore, we have no angels being used for conversions. We have men only, and that is what is in mind here.
A.R. Is that why you get so much about teaching in John's gospel?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord is called Rabbi immediately by the persons who come to Him. The first are the two that followed Jesus from John the Baptist. They call Him Rabbi, which meant He was a Teacher and the last person, you might say, in the gospel in chapter 20 -- (chapter 21 is really an appendix) -- is Mary Magdalene, and she says more than Rabbi. She says, Rabboni, and all this reminds us of the necessity of learning; or else we shall be just shallow and no testimony to any great extent at all, whereas the divine intent is that man should be not only here on earth -- he belongs on the earth -- but, whereas when Christ came to earth and went to heaven, then man goes to heaven. But God has put man on the earth and he is to be a testimony on the earth and that testimony requires that he has a mind. He can be appealed to. As Philip said, "Dost thou then know what thou art reading of?"
C.A.M. That is very interesting that God is not taking up a piece of clay, and He is not taking on angels in this regard. It would surely speak to us in a
{359}
sobering way that there are capabilities in us, mental capabilities, and capabilities of answering to such feelings in God's heart.
J.T. It is very remarkable and really wonderful for us to ponder, as you think of the immensity of living beings that there are from the very lowest up to the highest before you come to man, the various forms of life that are contemplated in @Genesis 1 until you come to man. Therefore, God would say, it is nothing at all if I do not get man, "Let us make man in our image". Nothing like that is ever said before not even of angels "After our likeness; and let them have dominion" chapter 1: 26. God says, I can do something, and of course man failed, but still those who have been brought into the assembly and have been saved, are men, because God could make other creatures and convert them if He wished to, but He is not doing it. He is holding to the idea of man.
C.A.M. Do you think it is a consideration for us that any one of us might be concerned about the preservation of our minds as long as we are here. There is a great tax put on our mind, but proceeding on this line, surely our minds would be for God, and there would be a sort of guarantee.
J .T. "*We* have the mind of Christ". Man has a mind to be converted with. He could not be converted if he did not, because he has a conscience and mind, but when you come to the mind of Christ, you have a great addition, and it is needed for God to build up His great thoughts.
A.R. Adam gave names to all the animals. What a mind he had!
J.T. He is really the crown of creation, and he was able to name every one of them and whatever name Adam gave it, that was its name.
T.E.H. Would it be right to say that Cornelius must have had a remarkable understanding as a
{360}
man? He would be seeking out "glory and honour and incorruptibility, life eternal" -- @Romans 2: 7. He would be the subject of the work of God in this way?
J.T. He would be in mind, no doubt, in what is said in @Romans 2, and what there was before. Cornelius would be a sample of how God could take on a man, even though he was not a Jew, and use him.
Ques. Do we see the thing in view in Revelation that the tabernacle of God is with men; not with the angels.
J.T. Yes, with men.
J.S. Peter's mind would be helped by the sheet that was let down from heaven.
J.T. It would indeed; it would be a voice to him. He had to be instructed, showing how great this matter of Christianity is, because it is a question of @Acts 10, and how Peter himself had to be brought into the thing. He did not have a special work in him yet he preached the gospel in @Acts 2, but he did in @Acts 10.
Rem. "Pass over into Macedonia and help us".
J.T. Another thing comes up there; that is, it is not simply a man, but certain men that came under certain education, certain influences, that is to say, the man of Macedonia was a Greek. The history of humanity was in mind. Nothing happens for nothing. These Greeks were capable men; they had cultivated their minds. God recognises that, and He takes them up even to use their language. These are not accidents, but what we are saying now shows what God had in man, and He could make another being if He wished. He could make many beings if He wished to, but He is not doing it. He is keeping to His primary idea and not abandoning it at all. The Lord Jesus became Man, and that settles the matter, that Person has become Man.
Ques. Is it a wonderful triumph too, when we have a fallen creature made a vessel of light?
{361}
J.T. Quite so.
C.A.M. I suppose you would say that because Christ has been exalted as Man, we need the Spirit.
J.T. It is a question of being made like Him. We are not deified but still we come very near, as we think of having the Holy Spirit, having the power of thinking as Christ does, and loving as Christ does.
A.R. Like what He is now?
J.T. That is the divine thought. Redemption is necessary, but now it is accomplished we are to be like Him where He is now. We shall see Him as He *is*, not as He *was*. That is the divine thought.
J.A.P. "So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law" -- @Romans 7: 25. Is that the basic idea that we must be subdued in our minds?
J.T. I think so, and so you have power over your mind. That is another thing. It is an instrument that He can use. @Romans 8 is built up on that. "So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law; but with the flesh sin's law".
A.B.P. Does the reference to the mind in @Romans 1, "being apprehended by the mind through the things that are made", verse 20, suggest that man is capable of being reached?
J.T. God can use him. A great deal more has to be said about that, because the moral side has to come in, but still there it is, apprehended by the mind. Of no other creature is that said, but man is capable of that.
A.P. And yet according to @Romans 12, it is to be renewed.
J.T. Exactly; "transformed by the renewing of your mind". Well, as usual, we do not go the whole way, but we are dealing with divine things, with great things. We have not really got to James.
J.A.P. I would like to ask one question about the works of the law, as over against the works of faith in
{362}
James. We are justified by faith without the works of the law. That is one kind of works but the kind of works you have been speaking of is another.
J.T. They are ordained of God. He has ordained them that we should walk in them.
A.N.W. I wish you would say one word more about the works of Cornelius. "Not on the principle of works which have been done in righteousness which *we* had done" -- @Titus 3: 5. How did they go up to heaven as a memorial before he is taken up? It says they went to heaven. "But a certain man in Caesarea -- by name Cornelius, a centurion of the band called Italic, pious, and fearing God with all his house, both giving much alms to the people, and supplicating God continually -- saw plainly in a vision, about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming unto him, and saying to him, Cornelius. But he, having fixed his eyes upon him, and become full of fear, said, What is it, Lord? And he said to him, Thy prayers and thine alms have gone up for a memorial before God". @Acts 10, verses  1 - 4. Those works must be good and acceptable placed in relation to this matter of salvation that we have been considering.
J.T. It is a question of what happened before; in the very beginning God was working. "My Father worketh hitherto and I work". God had been working, and serving humanity in a certain sense, but only serving them anticipatively in view of Christ, but the work was going on. Cornelius would come into that. Although Judaism had come in, He has the same mind as to it. It says, He is the God of the nations also, and if He is the God of the nations, He has been serving them. There must have been a great harvest anticipatively in the Old Testament and that without us should not be made perfect.
A.R. In connection with hospitality, in James, that is the first mention of works.
{363}
J.T. He is reflecting God. Of course the heavens declare the glory of God. There are many things we could observe that God used before redemption.
A.B.P. Does the Lord link on, in a sense, the idea of works in @Luke 7, as a proof of faith when He tells Simon what he had not done and points out what the woman had done.
J.T. Quite so; it says, She anointed the Lord. How did she learn to do that? God is God and He is working from the very start.
F.N.W. Does the knowledge in the believer's soul of the sovereign work of God always serve as a leverage in the working out of these good works by the Spirit that was given to him?
J.T. Just so.
F.S.C. Is James an advance?
J.T. I should not say that; I would not put him alongside of Paul; at the same time, we must leave them as they are. What James wrote is scripture and what Paul wrote is scripture. It is a remarkable thing how people view Paul's writing. There are grades and quality contemplated in the scriptures. Paul wrote the letter to Titus, you know, and he is contemplating in the letter what the gospel really is. Paul has his place, and James has his place. It says the Lord appeared to James. He appeared to him by himself. He has a great place. He was a man who could act for himself, and a man needed in a crisis.
{364}
FEAR
@Genesis 15: 1; @Psalm 23: 4
I have read these two verses to speak of what they speak of, and that is fear. Fear is a great element. It is the beginning of wisdom, we are told. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, but the fear of the enemy is another matter, and that is more what is in mind. Abraham and David are taken up in these verses; taken up to some extent at least, because they are divine favourites. It may he said by some that all are favourites, and there is truth in that too; although we can clearly understand that there is a difference between a person saved so as by fire and saved by the activity of love. So heaven has its own way of denoting its favourites, and it would stimulate what leads to favouritism in this sense; favouritism to heaven. The best example I can get of favouritism of divine persons is the apostle Paul. There must be many not especially mentioned, but beginning the list, if one might mention it, is Enoch. He was not, we are told, for God took him. God did not take him because he was displeased with him in any sense. On the contrary he pleased God. He had this testimony that he pleased God before he was taken. And Noah may also be mentioned, but I have more now in mind to stress Abraham a good deal, because he is a family man. Hence, to be the heads of families is a great aspiration; not the least because it tests us to be heads of families, and the test brings out what there is of God in the head whoever he may be. Paul himself calls attention to the fact that among the ministers of the word of God there were not many fathers, Ten thousand instructors is a wide range as applied to the instructors as compared with fathers. He said there were not many; not 'not any' but there were 'not many'. So John speaks about fathers. "I write
{365}
to you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning", meaning that they were conversant or had a great knowledge of Christ; not simply as in redemption but from the beginning, redemption being in view, of course, but fatherhood preceded it as a qualification, as an acquirement.
So I venture to speak of Abraham as a prominent person among the favourites of heaven. Others I might mention, such as David, such as Moses, a peculiar favourite, of whom it is said, "the form of Jehovah doth he behold". He would excel even prophets. Moses had a peculiar place, therefore, among the servants of God. "Why then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant, against Moses?" So that God is against all those who are against the favourites of heaven. Moses is regarded as a leading person in that sense and then David too, without coming into the New Testament. But I linger around this thought because I believe God is bent on bringing about favourites, heavenly favourites at the present time, such as He will have liberty in translating to heaven. Enoch is the great prototype of all of them. Before his translation he had this testimony that he pleased God. I do not have anything to commend more to the youth here tonight than that they should seek to please God. And so with Abraham in this peculiar chapter. I say peculiar because it is the first chapter in which the word of God is formally presented. It is said here, "After these things the word of Jehovah came to Abram in a vision". It is the word of Jehovah. In having gone over favourites one has in mind the word of the Lord; not the commandment but the word; and Abraham is the first to have it presented to him. Therefore he is outstanding in that sense, and it came at a time before which he had been through trial. He had been through trial with his nephew Lot. Lot is a
{366}
remarkable man, but his uncle brought him along as he was called out. Jehovah said He called him alone, but he brought Lot anyway. You might say, He was his nephew. Well, we have to be on our guard against our nephews or nieces. So the sequel showed that Abraham had good cause for regretting that he brought his nephew along with him. God had called him alone; and here Abraham is signalized as having been the first to whom the word of the Lord came. I mean formally, because the word of God was there at the outset from the time light shone. God spoke, we are told, and it was done. That was the word. He commanded and it stood fast. That is akin to the word. And then, "Because it is the God who spoke that out of darkness light should shine". @2 Corinthians 4: 6. He commanded and spoke that light should shine out of darkness; but there is no formal reference to the word of Jehovah until this chapter. And it is quite significant that it should be in this chapter and that there should be a fear attached to it. Fear in the sense that we should not be affected by it. And what is in mind in speaking thus is the danger that fear may hamper us in our testimony; not the fear of the Lord, of course. That is the beginning of wisdom; but the fear of man; the fear of circumstances, the fear of hostility. Our testimony may be damaged by it, even the fear of physical harm; but especially circumstantial harm, such as might arise from personal circumstances. It is one of the greatest things that comes to many dear brethren, that we should be above the fear of man. "What can man do unto me?" it says.
And so Jehovah says to Abraham here in a vision, "Fear not, Abram". You might say that was a sort of formula although it is not quite. It is not quite so frequently alluded to in scripture as we might think; but it is alluded to. For instance, in the New Testament
{367}
when the angel Gabriel appeared to Zacharias the father of John the baptist, he said, Fear not. There was no need of fear. An angel will cause you no fear if you are a righteous man, and he was said to be righteous, both he and his wife. There was no cause, therefore, for fear. And so with Mary and the Lord's mother -- "Fear not". And so in the book of Joshua there are many references. "Be thou strong and very courageous", was said to him. He was a leader of God's people in the war, and dear brethren, we must expect war. If we evade it because of fear we will suffer damage and the testimony will suffer damage. I speak thus very advisedly because I have seen so much of it. One's own mind has suffered from it: the fear of danger when there is no fear; and even if there were fear, go through it. For it is given to us not only to believe on the Lord Jesus but to suffer. And He says, "And be not afraid of those who kill the body, but cannot kill the soul; but fear rather him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell", @Matthew 10: 28. Fear Him. That is wholesome fear. But fear of the adversary is another matter. It has to be carefully watched and evaded for it is given to us, as I said, not only to believe but to suffer. The Lord went through it. He went through it unflinchingly. He felt it but He went through it and was victorious.
And now to come back to this scripture; I am speaking of Abraham. I have in mind, of course, in the second scripture I read to speak of David, but Abraham, I might say, is young in the faith. He was in the faith; in fact he is said to be the father of the faithful; the father of all those who believe. He is first spoken of in chapter 12 and he is called out. We are in the age of persons being called out. "I called him when he was alone", Jehovah said, but He did not leave it at that. He said, I blessed him. So that if
{368}
we take up the right attitude we shall be blessed. Go through it. Warfare is involved, but victory is involved. That is a certainty. So the Spirit of God undoubtedly had this in mind in taking up this young man, although in the ordinary sense he was quite old at the time; seventy-five or so, but he was relatively young. He lived to be one hundred and seventy-five years of age, so he was not much more than one-third of his age at this time. Jehovah certainly felt for him and would guard him. He had no child, no son or daughter; and that in itself was a danger in his case, as the facts show. So that is what God says to him -- "Fear not, Abram". Abram immediately says, "Lord Jehovah, what wilt thou give me? seeing I go childless". That has to be faced. There is danger wrapped up in it, and he immediately speaks of it to Jehovah. God had said to him, "Fear not, Abram; I am thy shield, thy exceeding great reward. And Abram said, Lord Jehovah, what wilt thou give me? seeing I go childless". The sequel of this shows that there was great danger wrapped up in the barren condition of this man and woman. But God foresaw that too. Abram says, "Lo, to me thou hast given no seed, and behold, a son of my house will be mine heir". Now again we have the word of the Lord. I am stressing this and have already stressed it, but I am referring to it again, because the realm of the word of God is the very realm in which we are to live. It will constantly test us -- the word of the Lord; not simply that He says certain things, but the word of the Lord is a particular thing. Indeed, the Spirit of God describes it in @Hebrews 4: 12, "For the word of God is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. And there is not a creature unapparent before him;
{369}
but all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do". We have really no choice in that sense, if we are believers at all. The word of God is the realm in which we are to live; the only safe one really. It will unfold things to us, open up things to us; but it would correct us. It will cut through our purposes and ambitions. And so it was found here in this chapter; twice over already in these verses, and it is the first mention of it formally. Surely Jehovah has in mind to make much of Abraham. He has already made much of him. He is going to add to him. His soul is going to be pierced through. I am not speaking thus because Abraham is here to listen to me. He is not. He once was in the sphere of hearing the word of God and that is why I am speaking about him. We are here and each one of us is now obligated to pay attention to the word of God, and we see how it affected Abraham. He said, "Lo, to me thou hast given no seed, and behold, a son of my house will be mine heir. And behold, the word of Jehovah came to him saying, This shall not be thine heir, but he that will come forth out of thy body shall be thine heir. And he led him out, and said, Look now toward the heavens, and number the stars, if thou be able to number them. And he said to him, So shall thy seed be!" That is, God is now in His words full of encouragement to His servant and what I am saying is amplifying the first sentence read: "After these things the word of Jehovah came to Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram". "After these things". I have already alluded to these things in chapter 14 particularly. It is the chapter in which Melchisedec appears: king of righteousness, king of Salem, priest of the Most High God. But other things have happened in the chapter and these are the things I have already touched: the danger of being afraid of them. If we become afraid of
{370}
circumstances we shall not be able to carry through the government of the house of God because it involves what Satan does not like. There is not time for me to go over the ground of what has been said of comparatively recent times, as to what should not be done to alleviate the state of things in certain persons, because of the danger of them being turned aside; and that danger is that they will turn aside to evil; and the danger that would be averted would be evil -- leaven laying hold of people in their homes; in their marriage links, in their family links. Some of you may think I am unintelligible -- I am not plain enough; but what I am saying is plain to most of you. There has been a trend among the brethren of lowering the standard of the fellowship, and I am warning now that God is not going to brook it at all. He will go on even if He has to reduce the number that are going on. If they go away, as the Lord says "Will ye also go away?" -- if they do, He will say to us, There are certain principles that *I* have set out and I am going to stand by them, and I will stand by those who stand by them, even if the numbers be reduced. God is more concerned about quality, about holiness and purity than He is about numbers. Of course, He loves numbers if they are such as He wishes; and He is going to have numbers. We read of the many brethren -- many. We read of the word 'few' in scripture too, referring to the saints. "Into which few, that is, eight souls, were saved through water", @1 Peter 3: 20, -- Noah and his house. Eight souls were not many but God was determined to have them and He had them. We do not hear of any turning away at the door of the ark. Many did not come to the door. I know that. Millions did not come Only eight came, but they came, and the ark moved along with them, showing that God is not concerned about filling vessels or ships. He is concerned about
{371}
the quality of the persons who are in the path of faith professedly. And so there was no lowering of the standard in Noah's day. He kept to the principles. There are those who have a vocabulary that God cannot set His seal to; nor can faith set its seal to; the word 'narrow' for instance. It is said the brethren are too narrow. Well, scripture says, "For narrow the gate and straightened the way that leads to life". @Matthew 7:14. Let us be sure we have that word in our vocabulary in its meaning. "Wide the gate and broad the way that leads to destruction". I am endeavouring to bring in the idea of vocabulary, because Christians ought to have a vocabulary of their own. God has. He is not afraid to use the numeral eight referring to the number that were saved. You might say, It is not enough for a meeting. Well, they were there one hundred and fifty days or so. Can we not believe there was something for God in the ark? One thing to be noted is they were all grown persons, all mature persons. God has had that in His mind too, maturity. "Until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ; in order that we may be no longer babes". That was at the door of the ark -- no babes, no little ones. You say, Well, that is somewhat contradictory of what you have been saying, because a household implies the babes. I spoke about households and fathers of houses and households imply babes, but not in the ark. You will not find any trace of a babe or a young person among the inmates of the ark. Do not misunderstand what I am saying, because there must be children. God said, "Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth". He said that to Adam and Eve, and it holds today. At the same time we have to follow what God does in His wisdom and He did not direct that the children
{372}
should be there. You say, Well what became of them? Did Noah not have any? Did his children not have any? We are not told. There were eight souls saved by water and heaven does not hide for a moment that there were no children, because God intended to bring out something and He is intending to bring out something now too, and He will use others suitable for that something so that we may have the truth, and have it standing and stand by it.
So that it is worth the while; the fellowship is worth the while. It is worth the name of fellowship. If we have in mind simply to augment the fellowship in the sense of numbers then fellowship will soon disappear and become idolatry, so that it will have to disappear. God will not go on with it. Pardon me for lingering so long. I find if I become pressed I would like to hear if it is the Lord's voice and I keep on at that; I feel I am safe keeping on at that. The brethren need that. They do not necessarily need a long address; not necessarily. Paul spoke until midnight, but that must have been necessary, very necessary, even if it called for, apparently, the death of a boy. Let him die if the word of God cannot go on because of him. But Paul enfolded him in his arms and said, "His life is in him", and brought him up and he became a brother among the brethren. I say 'brother' though he is not called a brother; but a boy may be a brother. Some of you here who are boys are brethren. Thank God for that! You are in danger, though, because you are boys. You need maturity and if you ignore what you need you are in danger.
So as I said, we want quality. Therefore we come back to what was said to Abraham, "Fear not, Abram. I am thy shield". Look at this. It is a matter of protection. Just a few nights ago we were speaking about the wall of the heavenly city; how great it was,
{373}
great and high. That is to say, evil was excluded. The wall was supposed to exclude evil. There was a great and high wall. And then we are told about the beautiful ornamentations at the bottom, at the foundation of it. It is most beautiful to think of all that, and all that is because of what I have been saying -- the danger of lowering the standard of fellowship. And now God is saying to Abraham, I know the danger you have been in. I know you have had three hundred and eighteen trained soldiers in your house. God would say that to Abraham -- three hundred and eighteen trained soldiers in his house. I do not say they were always soldiering. I do not think they were. They were trained soldiers in the house of Abraham, but we may be sure they did other things. I do not think brethren would get on very well if they did nothing else but soldiering, or fighting. Love must be made way for. But to come back to Abraham: "I am thy shield, thy exceeding great reward". The shield is protection. Of course, it is very good to have protection if there is danger -- persons who would attack you or kill you. But that is not all; the next word is, "I am ... thy exceeding great reward". That is what you are going to get in your position; so that the word 'fear' enters into that. Fear not. But what enters into that is "great reward". Danger, of course, may be there, but "great reward" is there. God is telling us, dear brethren, that we belong to the Abrahamic line. He is the father of us all. None should be more interesting to us here tonight than Abraham. His name means, 'father of a multitude'; not simply that he had a wife and a house. That would be small as compared with this wonderful expression, father of a multitude, which is the name that Abraham acquired from God after this. So that he has the idea of protection of which I have been speaking, and if we have not got that
{374}
protection and if we do not avail ourselves of it, and if we are afraid of our circumstances the fellowship will become deteriorated and disappear. We may as well face these facts, because if God is to go on with us He is bound to impress us with the facts. It is urgent and we must recognize these facts and not fear with any amazement. So we have protection and it really implies that Abraham is a comparatively young brother. He was young in the faith. He was the father of the faithful but he was comparatively young in it and he needed this encouragement. He needed not to fear. "Fear not, Abram; I am thy shield, thy exceeding great reward".
So the history of Abraham is just to open up all this. I could not speak of anything more important or practical than what I am saying. The history of Abraham stretches out before us in its -- I could not say infinite and yet in a way it is infinite -- length, because Abraham is just the outgoing, as it were; the fact of what God is in man. God is not man; Abraham was a man. God is to be worked out in Abraham, and hence the reward would undoubtedly include children. Hence the word is, "And he led him out, and said, Look now toward the heavens, and number the stars, if thou be able to number them. And he said to him, so shall thy seed be!" Now listen, "And he believed Jehovah; and he reckoned it to him as righteousness". And then, as I said, the wonderful history of Abraham just opens up to our minds at the present moment, if our minds are ready for it. The Spirit of God would enlarge the thought, the history of Abraham, implying that we are all the children of Abraham; in fact, the children of God. And the children of God is what we are said to be in the gospel of John particularly. "Now are we children of God", it is said in the epistle. But in the gospel we have the thought that it is given to us; the privilege is given
{375}
to us to become children of God; "born, not of blood, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God". That is our great heritage and it enters into the moment as I am speaking; the heritage that we belong to and that we have implies the children of God. We have the brethren. We cannot say how many; they are said to be many. There are many sons and there are many brethren; many brethren of Christ and many sons of God, so that we will have plenty of fellowship, plenty of love eternally. It is, therefore, incumbent upon us to be urgent in regard to the principles of God, and to maintain what is suitable to the house of God in the way of government whatever it costs. It is most painful to survey the history of the testimony as one has the opportunity of doing, and see how many are lost; lost for simply selfish reasons -- people turning away from the truth as they turned away from the Lord. And I would say to you now, you young people, "Will ye also go away?" Peter says, "Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God". The priestly side is stressed there, and we cannot afford to lose the priest, nor shall we. If they are real priests they will stay. It is because they are not priests they go.
That is about all I have to say, only I have to go to David for a moment. It is not because David was so old or because he had such a large family, or because he had such wealth, such military ability, but because and only because he had experience. David had experience. Abraham is not represented in the passage I have read as particularly having experience. He needed to get right as to what God could do for him and would do for him, and had done for him. But David in the psalm I read says, "Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
{376}
fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me". These are the words of an experienced man, a man experienced with God. He is the author of the number twenty-four, not the author of the number twelve. That is Jacob. David is the author of the number twenty-four; that is to say, double twelve, two dispensations instead of one. We are a dispensational people. Those who form the assembly are dispensational people, but not necessarily in the singular, but people of dispensations. We belong to dispensations. We know something about the coming dispensation and we know something about the past. We are in the present and it is the greatest of all the dispensations, but David is the author, as I might say, and the worker-out in the first book of Chronicles of the number twenty-four and it is brought into the New Testament; that is to say, the Revelation. The word 'revelation' largely enters into the matter of twenty-four. The word is 'apocalypse' and signifies an unveiling, things opened up to us that are not yet manifest. Those who love God will get the unveiling of His mind; and the book of Revelation is just that. It is the unveiling and almost immediately we have four and twenty elders and four living creatures. David has in mind what is used of God to open up the dispensational idea in the plural; I mean, the dual character of it. That is to say, the place that is ours is in the longest and greatest of all, because it involves the assembly. It is formation and it is testimony; what it is to be in heaven; to open up the heavenly side here on earth. That is our dispensation. But then we have been looking down on the coming dispensation, or what is called the millennial day. The word 'millennial' is of course, one thousand years; the oldest man was nine hundred and sixty-nine years old, but he did not attain the age of one thousand. But presently we shall
{377}
be living eternally. In a moment we shall be transferred; maybe in a meeting like this the transformation will take place -- the translation to heaven. We read how Paul says that the Lord appeared to five hundred brethren at one time, most of whom are still alive, he said, but some have fallen asleep. They are not changed yet. They have died; they have fallen asleep, but they are not raised. But when the millennium comes, the very threshold of it, the thousand years, it says, "blessed and holy he who has part in the first resurrection". It opens up the first resurrection. It begins with that; but then it runs on here on earth with men and women and children in flesh and blood. Children are spoken of and old people in flesh and blood. God is going to show what He can do in retaining people here on earth in flesh and blood. He can keep them alive one thousand years. Some will have to go; they will die under judgment even in that thousand years, but in general it is a wonderful time. It is a time of perfection in which God keeps things going in men in flesh and blood and we have part in that too. We have part in the present dispensation which is the greatest, as I said before -- the longest and the greatest in the sense of the formation of the assembly; in the sense of the calling out of the assembly. Now I am speaking of the most blessed and greatest things, that we are called out and yet left here as men and women to glorify God in bodies of flesh and blood. It is said of the Lord that He ate before them; He partook of actual human food that would sustain blood and flesh. The Lord partook of that after He rose from the dead. It is what He can do; what God can do. What can God not do? So that if God says He will retain men here for one thousand years, He can do that. And then what I am speaking of now is that we shall have part in this wonderful thing as well as having
{378}
part in the present, the gospel period; the period in which souls are called out and formed into an assembly through the gospel. At the same time we are going to be translated before the millennium starts. "Blessed and holy he who has part in the first resurrection: over these the second death has no power", @Revelation 20: 6. We shall never come into the second death. We will go into heaven; we belong to heaven. We are translated to heaven by the power of God; but in that sense we have part in the coming dispensation, which is another one, as I said before, of flesh and blood, but God keeping it in power, showing what He can do. We shall look down upon it. We shall reign over the earth; not on it but over it. So you can see that great things are ahead of us, but what I am speaking of now is the present, and the importance of being without fear. Fear not those that kill the body. We are to be without fear of circumstances, going through according to the will of God. It is said of David, "He had served his own generation by the will of God". If we do that we will attain to the divine principles. Stand by them whatever they may cost us.
{379}
TIMOTHY EXEMPLIFYING CHRISTIANITY
@Acts 16: 1 - 3; @Philippians 2: 19 - 22 @1 Corinthians 4: 17; @1 Timothy 3: 14, 15
In reading these scriptures I have in mind to bring forward one who is a concrete example and expression in measure of Christianity, and in using the word Christianity I refer to what it is essentially; that is, in persons. It is not a mere system of teaching, but a system of ways and qualities in persons. It is, therefore, to be distinguished from all other religions -- I use the word 'religion' because it is in a sense a religion, in the sense of what is pure and what is in love. It has this distinction that it is expressed in qualities, in characters, in ways. I think it right to make these remarks at the outset so that we may all have in mind that we belong to what is to be taken account of in the sense of personalities, in the sense of persons; not merely of doctrines or principles but of persons. And, of course, persons come and go. We are told that one generation passes away and another comes, and as each one comes we have to take notice of the qualities that there are, and how much the Spirit of God has had to do with them, for this is the whole point -- what is effected by the Spirit of God. It is really a most wholesome and interesting study that Christianity is thus constituted -- not set up as, say, for one thousand years and the same people continuing on in it. There will be something like that in the millennium, and, of course, in the eternal state of things that is all that there will be. There will be no generations coming and going there. It will be a happy state of things in which love will find its rest; in which God will find His rest. But now we have the coming and going, and hence the constant exercises, for we cannot say that any two or any four or any great number of persons must be alike and
{380}
must be of the same age. We are all different, and the difference is taken up in many forms. Indeed, it is to be marvelled at that there is such variety and yet in a certain sense all are alike. It is what is very suggestive that we all with unveiled face look as in a glass and are made alike; changed into the same image. "We all"; that is, Christians; yet that does not imply that there are no differences, nor, indeed, that there are any two alike any more than it has often been remarked there are no two blades of grass alike. That may be a very strong statement but it is well supported and it shows what a Creator we have. We are to remember Him. "And remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth". For that is when you get the right impressions. We are more impressionable in our youth.
I have taken up Timothy because the Spirit of God has taken him up and because he was taken up in a crisis. Christianity is largely composed of crises. Some of us may pass through them without knowing they are there, but those who are with God know, and it is essential that we all should know what the nature of the crisis may be and why and whether we are contributing to it, or whether we are alleviating it. And so Timothy came in at a crisis. Indeed, he had a companion in service, a most likeable man. He is one of the best examples, we might say, of the early servants; a most likeable man; a most valuable man; that is, Barnabas, a man that was ennobled, I may say, knighted by the apostles. I use the word 'knighted' because it is a well understood title. It is a matter of title because of merit. Timothy was like Barnabas but Barnabas was older, more experienced. He had a great place with the apostles and used his influence too, to help others. That is another point I would seek to make, that whatever influence I have, not to hold it for myself or use it for myself but use it
{381}
for others, to promote the spiritual growth of others. And so Barnabas took Paul to Jerusalem and introduced him to the apostles, and when there was a great servant needed he went and sought out Paul. He did not promote his own interests or offer his own nomination or promote it. He went to Tarsus and sought out Saul; not Paul yet but Saul, and he found him; not that he was hiding like his namesake of olden times, he was hidden among the stuff. That was Saul of David's time, or at least, of the time of the kings. He was the first king of Israel; he was hid among the stuff. It was no great recommendation for him to be king, for the idea of a king is the man that is able, and he needed to be able to overcome the Israelites¬ antagonists in those days, but he was hid among the stuff. But Saul of Tarsus was not hid among the stuff; not that he was in the front to promote his interests. He was away in Tarsus and that was all the more creditable, that Barnabas went afield to find Saul and he found him and brought him to the field where the work was going on. There he and Barnabas laboured for a year. I should like to have been a companion of Paul or Barnabas in those days. It was not my lot to know much of the earlier servants but I did know a little. It is a great advantage to know the servants of God. So it was that Paul and Barnabas toiled for a whole year in Antioch; that is, Antioch of Syria outside Israel. And they taught the assembly. The assembly needs teaching and they taught the assembly for a whole year. No doubt it was the basis of the usefulness later of the assembly at Antioch.
Well now, having said that about Barnabas, he and Paul had a feeling between themselves. The word 'feeling' is used and, dear brethren, it is well that those of us, at any rate, who do any special service, should watch for feelings arising in our hearts toward each
{382}
other. They are most baneful even if they be in a Paul or in a Peter or in a Barnabas. And they were separated; they separated from one another, and it was because Barnabas would have his nephew John Mark go with him in the service; whereas John Mark had left the work. He had gone into it and left it. He was restored, thank God, and so was Barnabas, but for a while they were divided and these things are written of them so that we might learn as in relation to our fellow-labourers and fellow-brethren so that we may have right feelings toward each other and have not any atom of adverse feeling or feeling of rivalry. And so it was that they were separated and Paul was left to labour with Silas as far as we see, but presently he found Timothy and the verses I read in chapter 16 are to show what a find it was. He was a young man whose father was a Greek; he had this disadvantage. His mother was a Jewess. There is something said about his grandmother too; something very worthy is said of her and it was a great advantage to Timothy that he had her as a grandmother. So he is spoken of thus and he was well spoken of among the brethren, which is another important matter if we are dealing with young brothers, as to what the brethren think of them. What is the brethren's estimate of them? Especially if they are to be used as he was -- a gifted man but a young man. He got his gifts from God but he got gift through Paul too; a remarkable thing. Gifts were in those days, in the rich times of the dispensation, through others; in Timothy's case by the laying on of Paul's hands, which would mean that he would leave some impression on this young man, and doubtless the young man would not be slow to take on what he saw in the elder brother, in the more able. But I am speaking now of him coming in in a crisis and filling up a gap, a void that had taken place, and that would have caused some weakness in the
{383}
work in those parts were it not that Timothy was found. Paul found him and set him up. So I am speaking thus to young brothers and sisters that you are to be on the lookout for voids created, because there is always a danger in a void. Hence, if a brother or sister dies, if the Lord is pleased to take a brother or sister, we are told something about one baptised for the dead. It is an expression that we have to understand, which would mean that if a brother or a sister dies there may be a void, as I said. There may be a loss sustained in the service. And so each of us is to be on the alert to come forward and do what can be done, so that there may be no weakness caused by the departure of a brother or a sister. A departure, of course, is not their own doing -- departing to be with Christ. The Lord takes us one after another and how interesting all that is. One generation passes away, the Lord taking them, and another coming. Presently they will be taken and another one coming; but then the voids come in in those cases. One is taken out of Plainfield, one is taken out of Philadelphia, and one is taken out of Baltimore. There are voids created in the present generation, I may say, and we have to rush, as it were. Nature would do so in our bodies to meet a crisis and so it is that in the body of Christ there is, as it were, what would rush to meet the need. It is a question of life. That is, the void is to be filled out by what is living, because it is a question of the body of Christ and that requires what is living.
So, as I said, we have this and that one falling out, dying, as was remarked, but some departing, turning away as if they knew better than all that came into the assembly since Pentecost and they turn away; a most solemn thing. But then if they do turn away there is a void and the point is to fill that void; not with the one that left or one like him, because if he
{384}
were right he would not leave. If he belonged to the assembly characteristically he would not leave. God has set certain in the assembly. Why should I leave my post my position?
Then the next thing is, as I said, how the thing is to be met, and so Timothy is the best example I can set out, or one of the best, and especially because he is a young man, and this passage contemplates him, as you might say, converted and well spoken of; not simply one foot in the meeting and the other out; he is well spoken of. He is a good brother already; he is worthy of mention. And so we have him in this passage, and Paul goes on with his work. There is no void, so to speak. That is what we find in chapter 16: "who had a good testimony of the brethren in Lystra and Iconium. Him would Paul have go forth with him, and took him and circumcised him". Notice he was not begging Timothy; he would have him; it was urgent according to the wording. He was to be Paul's companion. Well, that is enough to set us on our way in this inquiry, for we can visualize the great apostle in the height of his labours left by Barnabas and Barnabas¬ nephew, or cousin. And Paul finds Timothy. He would see a lovely picture; a lovely tiro; a young brother taken up and well spoken of by the brethren in the place and Paul would have him to go with him. What an honour -- a young man such as he, that he is honoured to be a companion of the great apostle Paul! Well, you can see that these are things to be sought after, to be desired, and if we seek after such an honour then there must be something else. There must be a purchasing to ourselves a good degree and much boldness in the faith. That is to say, one has to turn to himself and see what he is able to do and fill out what is needed. So that he is not a detriment to Paul nor to the company because it is said of Paul, "Paul and his company" as if God would
{385}
honour Paul. He is mentioned in chapter 13 as having a company. When his name is changed to Paul, which means 'little', I understand he is honoured by heaven and heaven says he has a company. That does not mean he had a party or that he was a party man. He had persons that were like himself, lovable persons, useful persons. And so they had a place in Paul's company. I hold that up as well as I can to make it shine forth for that is the idea. I want to make the thing shine so that we may come into it and covet it, to join such a cause, such a society, such a fellowship, such honour. And it is open to us, dear brethren.
Well now, the next thing I want to bring before you, this being so, is what Paul says of him in the great epistle to the Philippians. I am confining myself to the verses I read; there are others I could read only I tried to reduce the text as much as possible. I do not like to use too much scripture. A little of it goes a long way. Let scripture speak for itself. You do not want to read out yards of scripture, because scripture can do a lot in a little time and with a little of itself. So I read these verses one by one, and the second one is written to the Philippians. I need not comment on them. They are one of the most delightful circles of brethren that we have in the Scriptures. I scarcely put any before them. Their history is unique. But I am not going to be diverted by that, but Paul is writing to them. This is one of the letters that we spoke of today; one of the three letters that have a unique place in the scriptures. They are the finish; Paul's letters are the finish of scripture; in fact, he says so. He says in Colossians that God had given to him to complete the word of God and he did complete it. He completed the scope of scripture, and these three epistles -- first Ephesians, then Philippians and then Colossians are especially to be noted, as
{386}
filling out the idea of scripture. This thought has come to mind, I might say, lately. I commend it to the brethren, that we must read everything from the standpoint of the epistles, especially the Pauline epistles. If you look into them you will see that Paul is asserting that what he has written is final; even the gospels are not final in the sense in which his letters are final. The gospels are, of course, more copious and luminous but not so final as Paul's letters.
And so he is writing to these Philippians, and he is telling them about his beloved Timothy, and he does not hesitate to use the word 'beloved'. Paul had a beloved brother. I would conclude that at any time Paul would look around -- Is Timothy there? That is the way I feel about it. He would say, where is Timothy? That is the way I would understand that Paul would feel about this young man. How valuable he was; how useful he was. And so he says here (this is a good opportunity to speak about Timothy): "But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus to you shortly", as if it were a great matter in his mind and calculations that his beloved Timothy should be sent to a certain company of Christians, and that company were the Philippians. And so the reading is, "But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus to you shortly, that *I* also may be refreshed, knowing how ye get on". You ask, Why did he say that? Why is he going to be comforted by sending Timothy? Timothy will not be with him when he is sent to the Philippians, but he will be comforted because the Philippians will be comforted. They needed the comfort more than Paul did and they get it in Timothy. That is what I want to point out, and I urge on the brethren to be able to comfort their brethren, old and young. How much comfort can we extend to our brethren, because that is what he says about Timothy. "That *I* also may be refreshed, knowing how ye get on". He
{387}
would be comforted because he would get the word from Timothy. I want to be like that. If I am going across to England as I hope to, I want to be like that; doing a little in the sense of comforting the brethren. They need it over there; they do indeed. You can hardly realise what our brethren have been through for the last five or six years. It is hard to keep from weeping at times according to what one saw and heard, and so the need of comfort. Therefore Paul says, "that *I* also may be refreshed, knowing how ye get on". When I came back to America last December I found three brethren turning away from the meetings in New York. They did it themselves. They did not tell us why. Well, is that Christianity? It is not. Not that I am belittling the brethren. But I am telling you the truth. There is no Christianity in that; there is no comfort in it. Paul says, "that *I* also may be refreshed, knowing how ye get on". That is to say, one knows, and Paul did know the state of the Philippians and they had a good reputation. We might say, you do not need to ask about the Philippians, but Paul needed to ask about them. That is what he was accustomed to do. When the Thessalonians were converted he says he was afraid that Satan would hinder them. Satan is ever ready to damage when there is a convert. Paul thus regards the Philippians. He was concerned, and so he would like to know their state and wanted Timothy to go and comfort them and bring back a report to comfort him, which he did. Then he goes on, "For I have no one like-minded who will care with genuine feeling how ye get on". He says, "For *I* have no one". Why did he not say the Lord did not have another? But he did not say that; he is speaking of himself and Timothy -- the beautiful links that were between himself and Timothy; links which belong to Christianity, which ornament Christianity and are
{388}
descriptive of Christianity; yet there was no jealousy not even as regards Paul's feelings and affections for his beloved Timothy.
Well now, I go on to the next passage and that is @1 Corinthians 4. Now he is writing to the Corinthians and they were not the equals of the Philippians nor of the Ephesians nor even of the Colossians. I need not say a word to belittle the dear Corinthians, but the apostle says enough to enable us to judge there was a very, very low state there. And so Paul says, I cannot go myself but I am sending Timothy. If I could I would go myself just to show you what Christianity is and what it should be in your circumstances. And so I say this to this meeting here in Plainfield. I have to consider Plainfield as to what their Christianity is, and New York, and all the places where there are meetings. It is a question of the Christianity we are going on with, whether it has enough in itself to be a testimony to heaven and to earth. The Corinthians did not have that; they did not, indeed. Some of them were falling asleep; some were actually dying because of their conduct; a most solemn thing to have to say. "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep". @1 Corinthians 11: 30. They did not all die; all the refractory ones did not die, thank God. No doubt they were held and recovered not only physically but spiritually too. But still they were dying. How terrible that was, and how sorrowful too; but it only reminds us of what we were saying today. It was a large assembly; it was a great result as to numbers, but numbers are not all. But yet the numbers came to something in Corinthians because the second epistle shows that great results in the way of recovery had taken place. The second letter is most encouraging. So happy was Paul about it that he says, I am speaking about you everywhere. In effect
{389}
who in any sense are in his position and have gift and that is what he says. The restoring work of God had brought about such an effect in that assembly, and Paul says exultingly, I am speaking about you everywhere. You say, how do you know he said that? Well, I do know; You are in my heart, he said, and you are known and read of all men because of what is in my heart about you. I tell the brethren; I love to do it. At dinner tables or tea tables, I am sure it often came out in Paul's remarks. He would love you to go to Corinth. He would say, a great change has taken place there; and a great change had taken place. He says, there are others who have not judged themselves yet, but I am waiting until your obedience is entirely completed and then I will deal with them.
And so here in our chapter 4 he says, "For this reason I have sent to you Timotheus, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ". See how he spoke of him again; how refreshed he would be as he thought of Timothy when he would write such letters as these to Corinth. "For this reason I have sent to you Timotheus, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ". Now notice, dear brethren, "of my ways". He could hardly say anything about their ways in any praiseworthy sense. He would say it at times: I do not praise you here -- I praise you here. That is the way he wrote to them, so careful he was and so fair too, in his judgment about them.
Well now, here he says, "who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ, according as I teach everywhere in every assembly". What I want to say about that is as to a brother like Timothy -- any of us ability and means to get about, whether he is able to correct conditions among the brethren and whether he
{390}
is able to correct them authoritatively, to point out what is wrong and to show why he is saying it is wrong. These are the most important things I know of in brethren who minister and who go about among the saints, and whom Paul would, if he were here, entrust with messages. So that it is not as it is now, that a brother can go about and say what he likes. Pardon me, but there is a good deal of this. We are saying too much without consulting scripture. The apostle would not have sent Timothy to Corinth to correct Corinth and to show in Corinth what his ways were elsewhere if he did not count on Timothy going by scripture and giving scripture for everything. And so he sent Timothy, "who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ". It is not a question of Timothy's ways but Paul's ways; the one that Paul had entrusted with the truth. In fact, later we are told that Paul had committed the truth to Timothy to be entrusted to faithful men, able to instruct others also -- such confidence he had in him. Although a young man, he could rely on him to hold to the truth when he ministered as Paul ministered, because he would minister just as Paul did in a way. He and Timotheus and Silvanus preached the Son of God. I might venture to say that if I were there and could have, perhaps, three nights there, I might find Paul preaching the first night, Timotheus the second night, and Silvanus the third night and they would all preach the Son of God. They would all have the same points to insist on. There would be no divergence, no disunion in the ministry. Indeed, we are enjoined in Philippians to say the same thing; not only saying the same thing but thinking the same thing. That is the point in ministry. And so Paul would have every confidence that if he sent Timothy to Corinth, whatever came up, whatever matter might come up for discussion in a meeting in Corinth,
{391}
Timotheus would insist on the truth as taught by Paul. I can visualize the position, and I think it is right that we should visualize what Scripture presents to us so that we might realize the thing now and work it out now amongst each other.
So he says, "who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ, according as I teach everywhere in every assembly". Not simply his ways, Paul's ways, but what he taught, what Paul taught everywhere in every church. That is, there is no divergence. His doctrines were always the same. I would say, of course, he would get new thoughts, but all would be in keeping with what he had before. It is quite right to have new thoughts. It is a characteristic of a Christian's ministry that it is fresh, but not necessarily different from what has been done before. I am stressing this. We do not need to go in for novelties in order to make our addresses important. There is nothing in that at all; nothing to be relied on either. It is a question of the truth. The thing must be according to truth. Paul speaks expressly of persons who love the truth, and love of the truth is, I might say, as important as love of the brethren; I would say, of more importance -- love of the truth. Well, Timothy could be trusted, as Paul would say, for this matter: Paul's ways in the truth as they are in Christ.
And then Paul's words in his letter to Timothy himself; it is @1 Timothy 3 and I will read it. "These things I write to thee, hoping to come to thee more quickly". That is another thing with Paul. He was always holding out the thought that he would come. Sometimes he almost suggests that the Lord was coming. And, indeed, He does come; even if He does not come corporeally he comes into the assembly in the power of the Spirit. He comes Himself, too. So here he says, "These things I write to thee,
{392}
hoping to come to thee more quickly". I have often thought of Samuel. He went around everywhere; he had a circuit and you can understand if he were coming to a place they would have some fear about the great prophet Samuel. Indeed, they would fear when they heard that he was coming, and so here Paul says, "hoping to come to thee more quickly; but if I delay". He may delay and you may get weary of waiting as Saul did of Samuel. He got weary waiting for Samuel. But I do not want to get weary waiting for the Lord, or ministry either, because ministry will come if we are patient. It may come next year if it does not come this year, but the Lord is fresh and full and loving. He has plenty and deals it out to us, as we are told in the gospels, "Blessed is that bondman whom his lord on coming shall find doing thus". @Matthew 24: 46. To minister a portion of meat to the household; a ministry to the household of Christ. The Lord has great store set on that, and when He comes He will set us over all that He has if we are doing that. And so we have to be on our guard as to what the Lord finds us doing, as to whether we are serving the saints a portion of meat in due season.
So Paul says, "but if I delay, in order that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth". That is the last word I have to quote. It is a matter of waiting for the Lord to come. That is really what is meant. If he delay that you may know in the meantime how to behave yourself in the house of God, even Timothy. That is what the apostle meant -- that his beloved Timothy should not be misbehaving when the Lord came. We are apt to slip into misbehaviour, especially young people -- and old ones, too. The Lord is looking out; He is watching. "What I say to you
{393}
I say to all, Watch". He has a great lookout. The prophet Habakkuk says, "I will stand upon my watch", and he says, "though it tarry, wait for it; for it will surely come, it will not delay". That is a passage quoted two or three times in the New Testament. It is a word for us, that the Lord will come. "Yea, I come quickly". He means that, but we are to understand what He means by the words. It is eighteen hundred years now and yet it is true that He is coming quickly. I speak now to the young men and young women to behave in the meeting, to behave at the desk, to behave at the workshop, to behave in the house. "What I say to you I say to all, Watch". And then the apostle says here again, "but if I delay, in order that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth". How serious it is to misbehave there. I have already pointed out that people died because they misbehaved. You say, that is serious. Well, it is serious. If they were Christians they went to heaven. It does not mean they were unbelievers; not at all. The application to unbelievers would be when the Lord comes, Anathema Maran-atha, @1 Corinthians 16: 22. That is, a curse will be pronounced when the Lord comes. It is not while He is away; it is while He is away we may be taken to be with Him for misbehaviour, as 1 Corinthians tells us. I do not proceed further. May the Lord bless the word.
{394}
FINALITY IN THE APOSTOLIC EPISTLES
@Matthew 26: 26 - 30; @Mark 14: 22 - 36; @Luke 22: 19 - 21; @1 Corinthians 11: 17 - 26
The apostolic epistles as affording finality are in mind, together with the passages in the gospels that treat of the Lord's supper; with a view to comparing them with Paul's presentation, and seeing how the apostle comes in as final. The passage in @2 Timothy 2: 15 which says, "cutting in a straight line the word of truth", is good in view of what has been said, and to see what place the apostles have in the New Testament. It is said that the converts "persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles" -- @Acts 2: 42, and it was the teaching and fellowship of *the apostles*, not the teaching of Moses or David, though they have their place. Consideration of this saves us from much error and misappropriation of scripture. It is thought these four scriptures by comparison help us to see that apostolic teaching is final in all matters; for Paul is given to complete the word of God.
A.H. Would the Lord have in mind the authority of their word, in saying, in @Matthew 28: 20, "teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have enjoined you"?
J.T. Good; we will look at it. "But the eleven disciples went into Galilee to the mountain which Jesus had appointed them. And when they saw him, they did homage to him: but some doubted. And Jesus coming up spoke to them, saying, All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth. Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations, baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have enjoined you. And behold, *I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age", @Matthew 28: 16 - 20. Matthew is
{395}
very precise as to assembly truth; it is to bring out the position they held. The "you" is the eleven; no other set of men had such a place in the whole world as these had. They were appointed by the Lord to meet Him in Galilee, Jerusalem is ignored and slighted; though in Luke He says, "do ye remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high" -- @Luke 24: 49. According to Matthew, He is here always. The assembly too is here in Matthew, and if its voice is not listened to by the offending brother, "let him be to thee as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer", @Matthew 18: 17.
F.I. Have you in mind as to the three settings in the gospels that they are to be governed by the Corinthian one?
J.T. It is the last word on this great subject. It helps to see how the scriptures are thus divided up.
Ques. Does Paul supersede the twelve?
J.T. Well, yes, but it is not formally stated. The place of the twelve runs on into eternity. Though Paul is not mentioned in the foundations of the city, he had the peculiar place of completing the word of God, the ministry of the assembly, and the ministry of the glad tidings; so there is a great emphasis on Paul.
A.H. Paul was very concerned in his letters to Timothy that we should get the gain of his ministry.
J.T. Very good, and other things too. He comes forward at an appointed time as if the testimony required a new touch for revival; it is a touch running through the dispensation. "This man is an elect vessel to me", the Lord says in @Acts 9: 15, as if His elected one was to be used in revival, so that all that had gone before was to be revived by Paul.
A.M. The Lord's reference in @Matthew 13 to the householder bringing "out of his treasure things new and old" would perhaps bear upon this.
{396}
J.T. Yes, I think so, but it would be less formal; the "have ye understood all these things" would refer to them, the twelve, and the Lord accepts that and defines what it means, "For this reason every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old". As to a householder or a scribe, he would be an accurate man, one who could be trusted. They were viewed as understanding, and were in a peculiar place in the testimony as bringing out of their treasures things new and old; the thought of having understanding is to make a very strong appeal to us, as our meetings are very weak; how much value is there in them? or how much do we really understand?
Rem. Philip says to the eunuch "Dost thou then know what thou art reading of?" @Acts 8: 30.
A.H. The passage in @Matthew 13 is very striking, as the Lord answers them according to what they had said.
Ques. Is Paul speaking in a similar way to Timothy when he says, "Think of what I say, for the Lord will give thee understanding in all things"? -- @2 Timothy 2: 7.
J.T. That would be moral authority, but apostolic authority, especially in Paul, would be special.
Rem. He says of Timothy "he works the work of the Lord, even as I", @1 Corinthians 16: 10. We must have a model, Paul uniquely so, but the Lord was first.
J.T. To be able to say that things are not right, we need to have our understandings opened as in @Luke 24 by the Lord; He is less official there, though it speaks of Him standing in their midst; Luke does not say *He came*. He may stand up, as it were, at any time and you feel you are under criticism. @Luke 24 is unique as to the Lord going to heaven at once;
{397}
heaven is the centre of authority. He stood up suddenly, maybe they had not known He was there; He says "it is *I* myself", how gracious He was! The Lord comes in in that way. According to Luke it is "Thus it is written", He would give us a proper understanding as to what has been said, so that we are intelligent. The Lord was there ready to give them anything they wanted; He would encourage them by asking them if they would give Him something to eat. Then He says, "Thus it behoved the Christ to suffer, and to rise from among the dead the third day; and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations beginning at Jerusalem"; how gracious! It is the thought of grace. Then He went to Bethany, and then He went up.
F.S. The Lord Himself gives the final touch at the end of each gospel.
J.T. Yes, indeed. He is the most gracious Person there, and yet He can correct what is not right.
Ques. Why do the twelve not give us the same finality of things as Paul?
J.T. He was the Lord's choice, one of his favourites, like Abraham, and Abraham holds a peculiar place; so does Paul, and so does John, but in love; Paul was loved too, but he makes more of the authority of scripture than of love.
Ques. Does Luke make no space between the Lord's resurrection and His going up, because He had in mind that the apostles should come out?
J.T. He left them fully equipped and *sent* the Holy Spirit to them; the apostles had the place first, and the Spirit is sent to help them.
Rem. "Till ye be clothed with power from on high".
J.T. Yes, the Spirit is sent to support them and that gives character to all we have in the Acts.
{398}
Luke's second treatise gives more than the first about forty days ...
Ques. Is there a sort of advancement in these three records?
J.T. Matthew has the first place; Peter has the first place too, and I think that of the writers Matthew is first, because he gives such a place to Peter and the assembly *before* Paul appears. Paul came in as a reviver. The assembly is with us eternally, and it must be listened to. Paul is not mentioned in @Revelation 21.
Rem. Matthew stresses the greatness of the assembly: "Hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it", @Matthew 16: 18.
J.T. Yes. Mark gives the authority of the ministers. In @Mark 16 they had all failed, and the Lord sat down with them and upbraids them, and then, in spite of their unbelief, they were to preach everywhere, and they did so, and He worked with them. Thus the ministry is suggested in Mark, and that involves the place the Supper has; things are made to hinge on the Lord's supper, all three gospels have it, not John, but Paul has it too. The position is linked up with the Lord's supper, so I chose these three to compare with Paul. So he says, "But let a man prove himself, and thus *eat*" -- @1 Corinthians 11: 28; he *must* eat, or he will give up the truth.
Ques. In @Acts 2: 46 it says, "breaking bread in the *house*", but Paul sets it in relation to the assembly.
J.T. It is a good way to bring the truth out; the house is in order over against the temple, and breaking bread in the house is to cover that. It was never in the temple, never partaken of till He went to heaven, because He is absent. In @1 Corinthians 11 we have "in remembrance of me" or 'for the calling me to mind' (as the note says); only Luke and Paul say that, and something is added in 1 Corinthians; the
{399}
thought of remembrance, not only in the bread, but in *the cup*. No one in the Reformation, and in Protestantism generally, ever took notice of what Paul says.
Ques. As to the eating, had the Lord more in His mind than His literal body; and does Paul bring in more?
J.T. Yes, and so should we; He had His own body in mind, but also the assembly, His body; His mystical body is especially brought in by Paul; whereas @Matthew 26: 26 would not go so far as Paul, but refers to His own body.
Ques. Does Matthew stress the eating of the passover lamb, roast with fire?
J.T. The word "eating" involves appropriation, and we need to appropriate our brethren; *they* would not forget each other, and the Lord stresses that. We sit in restfulness before Him and *each other*, and we see what we are collectively.
Ques. Why does the apostle preface what he has to say with, "In this point I do not praise", verse 22?
J.T. It is well to have to face what the collective position is, whether in the Church of England, or the Roman Catholics (where it is most abominable), or whether it is amongst ourselves. The new covenant is mentioned in Matthew in the setting of the passover and the unleavened bread, which really come before the Supper to purify us.
Ques. As to eating His body and drinking His blood, could we have a right understanding of these apart from Paul?
J.T. No, he began with that. We constantly have reference to Paul; he speaks much of himself; God gave him that place.
Ques. Is "this do" limited to eating and drinking?
J.T. "This do" must be taken by itself; it refers
{400}
to the loaf; He "broke it", it refers to the breaking, a symbol of what enters into the supper, notice each gospel says He "broke it"; and then Paul says, "in like manner also the cup" ("after having supped" refers to the passover) ... "as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me", @1 Corinthians 11: 25. That is where the remembrance is, in our drinking of it; that is the force of it; the remembrance is a dual thought, as in Paul's account the idea of remembrance is also attached to the cup.
Ques. Is it to make both available to us?
J.T. Yes, the Supper is for our appropriation.
Ques. Is there anything that corresponds to the Lord taking the bread and the cup? Some think that there is a correspondence in what the Lord did, and what the brother does.
J.T. Yes, that is right. The passover was there, with many loaves; the Lord took one loaf; a single thought; so with the cup. There is a certain correspondence with the Lord's own action, but we may make too much of it. It requires a spiritual brother to do it. The emblems of the passover had not been removed, and that helps. It is *His* supper; the passover is Jehovah's. The Lord has inaugurated the supper Himself, from elements that were there.
Ques. Is that why John does not mention it?
J.T. Yes, he deals with what is spiritual.
Ques. Do you connect the remembrance with the breaking of the bread, and our eating of it with appropriation?
J.T. The breaking of the bread is the memorial.
Ques. Would you not include the giving of thanks?
J.T. Certainly; it was a part of what He did.
Ques. What would be the significance of "in like manner"?
J.T. It deals with what the Lord did, and it is
{401}
stressed when we are doing it; a certain satisfaction comes into our souls in connection with the drinking; the idea of drinking has a great place in scripture.
Ques. What would be the difference between the remembrance and the announcing?
J.T. I do not know. "For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come"; a very solemn side, shewing that we are announcing a most definite thing, *His* death, no matter what the conditions are in this town. That is what it means.
Rem. The remembrance is in the minds of the saints, and no one can see it; but they can see the eating and the drinking.
J.T. In the gospels it says they left Jerusalem and went to the Mount of Olives; they were on the 'up-line' now, not from Jerusalem but from the Mount of Olives; it makes way for the spiritual side that comes in after the supper.
Ques. How does the actual bearing of Matthew's and Mark's accounts apply to us now?
J.T. It came to me at the beginning of the meeting, we were sitting here, not in our permanent position (to sit in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus is our permanent place), but much as they were in @1 Corinthians 11; and much comes up as to their behaviour in their houses that Paul refers to, and the Holy Spirit was there to maintain suitable conduct. We have to watch that nothing objectionable comes in. In @Acts 20, at Troas, there were several brothers with him to add weight to what he says; so this is to have importance in the mind of the Corinthian saints; the word "assembled" is used in @Acts 20, and it says, "Paul discoursed to them", which must have had reference to the behaviour suitable to the Lord's supper. Intelligent persons should be there. The apostles do not bring in what was new only, but
{402}
correction; that was what Paul was doing. How long was his discourse? The word used later is altered by the Spirit to "spoken" or "conversed", but the *discourse* was spoken by Paul.
Ques. Can we be helped on the difference between the gospels and Paul, especially having in mind the omissions in the different accounts?
J.T. I had that in mind. You can see there are several; the remission of sins, for instance; then in 1 Corinthians Paul has the memorial mentioned twice, though Luke mentions it once. The saints are alluded to in the eating of the bread, and their satisfaction in the drinking of the cup, but both are connected with each other, and would refer to appropriation of each other in each case. We have a satisfying portion; it is worth being there.
Rem. That is how the saints progress and are helped in the truth.
J.T. Yes, indeed; one can feel it in one's soul.
Rem. *Both* elements are partaken of.
J.T. Yes; the Roman Catholics have worse than error, they only have the bread. The saints are to be made happy.
The effect of "calling to mind" is little understood, and it has this dual character. Christianity is a joyous thing; the supper is not a mere sacrament.
Rem. In result we have the consciousness that the Lord is with us.
J.T. We *know* it.
Rem. The "new covenant" implies freshness.
J.T. Yes, "new" has the sense of freshness.
Rem. Luke writes with authority though he is not an apostle.
J.T. He is on moral lines. He may have been a Gentile; he brings out how affected he is by what he is saying. He links his two treatises together, "all things which Jesus began both to do and to teach",
{403}
@Acts 1: 1. It is how we are affected by *His doing*, and then by His *teaching*.
Ques. Why does Luke only refer to the remembrance once?
J.T. Yes, he only speaks of it once, but Paul twice.
Ques. Was Luke influenced by Paul?
J.T. Luke must have gained much from Paul.
Rem. He is a remarkable man who brings out his truths without bringing himself before you.
J.T. He is indeed a lovable brother.
Rem. The breaking of bread at Troas in @Acts 20 involves the assembly and implies the whole service of the supper.
J.T. Yes, we would judge that from the way it is put.
Ques. Is it suggested that we should use Paul's language in speaking of the emblems?
J.T. Paul is the last word, though Luke was very near him. The gospels go "over the wall", and have in mind what is coming afterwards, but Paul refers to this dispensation only. It is very instructive and important to be accurate too. The gospels were for the Jews too, but Paul has the assembly in mind only.
Rem. "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment" (@1 Corinthians 14: 37).
J.T. Very good; not one can justify himself for absenting himself from the supper. *It is the Lord's commandment*.
{404}
SONS OF THE KINGDOM
@Matthew 13: 24 - 30; @Matthew 36 - 43
J.T. We have here the idea of sons. The principle of the kingdom indicates that the sons are begotten of that principle, and hence the word of God is spoken of as sown, but here it is the persons themselves. They represent the brothers or sisters who believe, whom the Lord would have in mind for maintaining His testimony in the positions in which He would set them. Hence they would prove characteristic persons, whoever they were, selected and sown; serving and taking on all that relates to the Lord's affairs in the sense of the kingdom. So that if we are alive to the situation, we know that we can count on such in all emergencies, and know that the Lord's things will be cared for. The devil sowing his sons shews what will work in the opposite way. These two kinds are together, not in the assembly, but in the sense of physical contact, allowed to grow up and ultimately dealt with as we shall see. This gospel does not deal with us as being taken up, that is with the ascension, but as continuing and holding the ground; holding God's testimony, and the removal of whatever offends; it all eventuates in the millennium. These remarks will be intelligible because they come from Matthew, who does not deal with the ascension or the rapture; these are found elsewhere.
Ques. What is in mind as to the seed being persons?
J.T. The scripture expounds the parable from verse 37, and says, "He that sows the good seed is the Son of man, and the field is the world; and the good seed, these are the sons of the kingdom, but the darnel are the sons of the evil one". That is why in the beginning of the chapter it says, verse 3, "Behold, the sower went out to sow: and as he sowed, some
{405}
grains fell along the way", and so on; it is "grains", the word of God, not persons.
Ques. Are you suggesting the root in the heart of man, "the implanted word", @James 1: 21?
J.T. That is right, what is implanted in our hearts; it is the word of God, and what we are as thus formed, and as serving the Lord in the kingdom. Therefore we are to look for such, each in certain positions, and as time went on they would be recognized as those locally "in each assembly", as @Acts 14: 23 speaks of them. Paul and Barnabas chose elders, who would be set in the assemblies to rule. I give this as an illustration. In this town there are certain who are known as caring for the Lord's interests, and it is known throughout the world in the same way. His interests are not left. David left the sheep with a keeper; that is the idea.
Ques. Are sons formed in the kingdom?
J.T. Well, the truth of the kingdom is seen in each gospel, and the same can be said of the epistles; each has its own particular view. Matthew gives this particular view; so scripture is seen fitting to scripture; we have to go to the epistles; hence Romans is formally said to be the kingdom of God, and teaching the fundamentals of the kingdom, with the gospels also, so Matthew ends with "And behold, *I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age", @Matthew 28: 20. So this particular parable contains the end of the age. The point to bring out is that the Lord would have His interests cared for, taught and governed too.
Ques. Is there something contradictory in the darnel?
J.T. Yes, the Lord says that in the exposition of the parable. He dismisses the crowds; parables hide the truth, but exposition opens it up; it was a good sign that they wanted to know (verse 36); it takes
{406}
place in the house, as now, when the Lord would open up something to us. The apostles being there had some understanding as they went over the scriptures; the "sons of the evil one" are opposed, as maybe, there are opposers in this town.
Ques. Has the Lord in mind that they should become men of influence, "the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father"?
J.T. Just so; when Paul went to Troas in @Acts 20, there were seven brothers who accompanied him, "And there accompanied him as far as Asia, Sopater son of Pyrrhus, a Berean; and of Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus, and Gaius and Timotheus of Derbe, and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus", verse 4. In each position these men, who held Paul's doctrine, would hold the ground. Paul here discoursed as if there was something needed, something they had to learn before they could break bread, and so it is today. I feel that the breaking of bread is not well understood. Anyone wanting to know could have asked any one of these men. "Many lights" (verse 8) means spiritual lights, men who could teach.
Ques. Would these men in @Acts 20 be like "sons of light"?
J.T. They would be sons of the kingdom, which carried the idea of power and instruction.
Ques. Would Barnabas in @Acts 11 being sent to help in Antioch be on this line?
J.T. Yes, I would say that Barnabas would discern what was in the place, for there was quite a work of God there, and it seems that he felt unequal to it. Under the Lord's guidance, he would feel that Saul had what was needed; he had the ministry of the assembly, though it was not known publicly yet. Barnabas surely would have some sense he had it, and that is why he sought him out.
Rem. The success of the teaching there resulted
{407}
in the "large crowd", verse 24, giving place to the "assembly", verse 26.
J.T. Just so; and so it is in this town, if it is like that; let the crowd melt away and the assembly come to light. In @Acts 20 they are spoken of in three pairs. It is the great Ephesian position here; and if they would say that what Paul was saying is not scriptural, well, Paul would mention those two from Berea. Why are those men mentioned, if it is not so?
Ques. Does Paul speak well of Timothy in @Philippians 2: 20, "I have no one like-minded who will care with genuine feeling how ye get on"?
J.T. Just so, an excellent example whenever care is needed. Timothy was sent to Corinth at one time, to put them "in mind of my ways" -- says Paul -- "as they are in Christ", and the Lord does it Himself now, for we have no one like Paul now, unless He uses a brother of moral weight.
Ques. Is there any connection between the sleep here, in verse 25, and the sleep of Eutychus in @Acts 20? In a wrong sense, I mean.
J.T. Yes; it is culpable, "while men slept"; it is a man who works by imitation, as the note suggests; hence the need of watching; there is no need to be an elder to watch.
Rem. Paul speaks of such activities in @Acts 20: 29 - 30, and ends with, "Wherefore watch".
J.T. Just so; see what has grown up in connection with the great Romish system.
Rem. So Paul enjoins Timothy as his "true child in faith" to remain in Ephesus, to "enjoin some not to teach other doctrines", @1 Timothy 1: 23.
J.T. Just so; Paul could do that; he had certain brothers, like Timothy and Titus, who were what you would call 'apostolic delegates'. Apollos was a servant on the same ground as Paul, but serving independently from Paul at Ephesus at an early date,
{408}
@Acts 18: 24. But "Aquila and Priscilla, having heard him; took him to them and unfolded to him the way of God more exactly". So he was viewed as a labourer; so Paul says, "*I* have planted; Apollos watered; but God has given the increase" -- @1 Corinthians 3: 6, so he became a recognized servant very quickly. But he was not minded to go to Corinth when Paul asked him, @1 Corinthians 16: 12. Thus independent service is maintained, and so is dependent service; it shews the variety of workmanship.
Ques. Do we need instruction to know what is of the enemy?
J.T. Paul says, "that we might not have Satan get an advantage against us, for we are not ignorant of *his* thoughts", @2 Corinthians 2: 11.
Ques. Do we have to be initiated into this?
J.T. Very few of us are.
Ques. Would there be a connection with this teaching and the breaking of bread?
J.T. It may have that at a later date, just to shew how the truth can come in in a different way, and maybe now it is to shew how things require to be properly manned. The priesthood is weak, there are long pauses when the most precious time is before us. The sisters have to feel it and go through it; and it is not right to sit and to say nothing; the Spirit would use us, if we were active in our minds. I say the priesthood, because Aaron was not *called* a priest until the Hebrew servant is seen in @Exodus 21 governed by love, and then we have the priesthood specifically named in Aaron and his sons; they were there before, but not mentioned by name till *love* is active. It is the lack of love; but something can be said, and let it be said intelligently. It is general too this lack of intelligence.
Ques. Are we to take on the instruction of the sons of the kingdom?
{409}
J.T. I mentioned Troas, because if you followed what happened there, these seven men would not act like that.
Ques. Should we be "cutting in a straight line the word of truth"? @2 Timothy 2: 15.
J.T. Yes, if we are not doing that, any Berean would shew us up.
Ques. What is the implication of the "sowing"?
J.T. It is just characteristically that. The Lord sowed; and the devil sowed the darnel; "sowed" means set in a position in which we grow up.
Ques. May we be like children and lack the sense of responsibility?
J.T. Yes.
Rem. They say they understand according to verse 51.
J.T. Yes, the Lord does not dispute it, and goes on in verse 52 to enlarge on it, as to the brother who "brings out of his treasure things new and old". He goes about ministering or preaching for he has a treasure, even at the tea table; he has something good, not the news of the world, but "things new and old".
Rem. The key to taking part is if we have a treasury; @Psalm 45: 1 indicates that his heart is "welling forth with a good matter".
J.T. The sons of Korah say that; "My heart is welling forth with a good matter: I say what I have composed touching the king. My tongue is the pen of a ready writer".
Rem. That *is* the treasure.
J.T. Yes, the writer has got the things; he is calling upon all that is within him -- @Psalm 103: 1; it is what the Spirit has formed.
Rem. "Communicating spiritual things by spiritual means", @1 Corinthians 2: 13.
J.T. Yes, that is "the depths of God" -- @1 Corinthians 2: 10, and these things should be under our hand.
{410}
Ques. Will there be discrimination at the end, "the completion of the age"?
J.T. It is the time of introduction before the millennium; it is depicted in the Revelation; in that book we need not expect a good time, but we are waiting quietly, knowing the Lord's promise to Philadelphia, "*I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world" -- @Revelation 3: 10; but the trial will come.
Ques. Is the truth to have a separating effect upon us?
J.T. Quite right.
Ques. Does growing together involve reaching maturity?
J.T. That is not the assembly setting, but geographically, say in Europe, not in Asia only, evil is left in both, they both "grow together".
Ques. Do the sons of the kingdom grow up to God?
J.T. "Grow" there involves maturity; sons of the kingdom means a man you can rely on; it is the sons who suffer too.
Ques. Would they be like Ananias in @Acts 9?
J.T. A very good suggestion, only he was refractory at first.
Ques. Would the reason for the lapses in our comings together be due to the failure to understand this principle of separation?
J.T. No doubt there would be a want of formation, indeed a malformation, something allowed, it may not be a demon as in @Luke 11: 14, "He was casting out a demon, and it was dumb; and it came to pass, the demon being gone out, the dumb man spoke"; so "he was *casting out a demon*", the devil is behind completely silent persons. Why are people dumb all the time? The young man of Nain, raised from the dead, "began to speak" -- @Luke 7: 15; it is
{411}
Luke's thought, so he describes the Lord's own way of speaking, "the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth", -- @Luke 4: 22.
Rem. In @Revelation 4 and 5 every mouth is open.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques Is it another side in the speaking of the Corinthians -- @1 Corinthians 4: 7 - 8?
J.T. Yes, they were like children with toys, playing with their gifts, at one time; so Paul says, "no one, speaking in the power of the Spirit of God, says, Curse on Jesus; and no one can say, Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit", @1 Corinthians 12: 3. We might open our mouths and say wrong things; we must notice that. This one, in @Luke 11, who had his mouth opened speaks right.
Ques. Is there a danger of formality and routine?
J.T. I suppose that applies to Christendom; they have very little gift there, but the speaking abroad in Christendom is in a humdrum way; there is nothing of the Spirit of God; they are not subject to apostolic teaching. God governmentally prevents them.
Ques. Was the prophecy of Micah the son of Imlah before Jehoshaphat and Ahab in @1 Kings 22 in the power of the Spirit of God?
J.T. A fine scripture; a man faithful, and that can only apply now where there is moral power. One knows of those who can influence others, that they grow in grace.
Ques. Is the difference in these settings important?
J.T. The Spirit of God makes these paragraphs, "Then, having dismissed the crowds, he went into the house; and his disciples came to him, saying, Expound to us the parable of the darnel of the field", He left the outside and came inside and they asked Him to expound this parable only, and supported what was said in verse 51, and there are many other
{412}
things; He says, "*all* these things"; but He does not dispute their "Yea, Lord". It was very nice, and throws light on all this parabolic section.
Rem. The Lord was the householder in verse 27, and the scribe in verse 52; he became patterned after the Lord.
J.T. Just so. The Lord was Son over the house; Peter followed after Him, Paul also pursued the way.
Ques. Is verse 27 a suggestion that we should be free to ask the Lord? Does the absence of enquiry burden us?
J.T. I am sure that is good. The Lord has greatly honoured these conversational discourses. These special meetings, especially at the weekends are divinely set up, and a brother who is suitable comes along; then ask questions! Brethren do not ask enough.
Ques. Are we therefore to discern that and go to the Lord about it?
J.T. Yes; and brothers who are invited to go to certain places, the more they are with the Lord, and the more they are cast on Him for the right word, He certainly will not fail them.
Ques. What is the significance of the reference to the Son of man in verse 41?
J.T. The Lord uses it of Himself about eighty times. It involves His worldwide position.
Ques. Was His ministry effective to the two going to Emmaus, "He interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself", @Luke 24:27.
J.T. He used very strong words to them, though that was not in the house.
Ques. Does the Lord imply suitable conditions are needed for teaching the truth, in "having dismissed the crowds"?
J.T. Just so; the crowds could not understand,
{413}
hence the need for parabolic ministry. Those that are really born of God, *in principle*, are those who truly understand.
Rem. It is in accord with the gospel of Matthew and the side of the kingdom, that "his disciples came to him".
J.T. He has the same thought in @Matthew 5: 1.
Rem. Everyone has to be in the spirit of enquiry.
J.T. Yes; and the sisters too, though they ask at home; all should enquire when they do not know.
Rem. The Lord says to Peter, "Then are the sons free".
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Is coming to Him the principle of acknowledging allegiance?
J.T. Quite so.
{414}
FELLOWSHIP WITH ONE ANOTHER
@John 1:7; @Acts 21: 1; @Leviticus 11: 1 - 3
Reference was made this afternoon to @Acts 20, this love chapter, this Ephesian chapter, "And having said these things, he knelt down and prayed with them all. And they all wept sore; and falling upon the neck of Paul, they ardently kissed him, specially pained by the word which he had said, that they would no more see his face. And they went down with him to the ship. And when, having got away from them, we at last sailed away". The note here speaks of the force or wrench of love, anything that would divert us; so to be held together is in mind. So also this chapter in Leviticus runs down as to what is to be eaten, and what not; it is the thought of appropriating one another in love; so the passage ends in, "This is the law of cattle, and of fowl, and of every living soul that moveth in the waters, and of every soul that crawleth on the earth; to make a difference between the unclean and the clean, and between the beast that is to be eaten and the beast that is not to be eaten", verses 46 and 47.
So I quote this one verse in John's first epistle, "But if we walk in the light as *he* is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin". It is not so much to enlarge on the fellowship, as to what may be entered into spiritually, but to use this verse as to our receiving one another. Those who are believers correspond to the clean animals; they are clean and holy and thus suitable for appropriation; that is they are for our food and enjoyment, in that sense. The word "fellowship" of course is used otherwise, and its meaning too, as of course it has other forces too, as in, "the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord" -- @1 Corinthians 1: 9, and the
{415}
fellowship of His death in the Lord's supper, and here too it is "fellowship with one another"; and then again there is the fellowship or "communion of the Holy Spirit" -- @2 Corinthians 13: 14, a very precious word, that we are brought into the fellowship of the Spirit.
What is in mind now is that we are brought into the fellowship of one another. It is enlarged on by the use of the animal kingdom. Its place in the kingdom is typical of persons. Leviticus, in keeping with itself, stresses the character and quality of the beasts. Deuteronomy treats of the same matter, and begins the section, chapter 14: 1 with, "Ye are Sons of Jehovah your God": in view of the creation being thus dealt with we are to clothe ourselves with our heavenly relationship; we are the sons of God; and the Spirit has His part in this. He is the "spirit of adoption, whereby we cry" (as the Lord Jesus did), "Abba, Father". @Romans 8:15. We are all brought into this wonderful relationship of sons with the Father, always carrying with it our heavenly dignity and relationship. We have to watch our relationships and associations, with what or whom we mingle; all these enter into it, so that it is not so much sons of God or sons with Christ (though that all comes into it), but that we may rightly clothe each other, as sitting together as the sons of God. Not thinking indeed that we may be better than others; we have all been bought with the same precious blood. In @Exodus 30: 13, we have "half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary", each one cost so much, hence the similarity; what God has paid; what we have cost Him. Hence we begin on the right footing, humbling ourselves, and kindly affectioned to one another, each with the other. So we have to look around and see the persons with whom we are in fellowship. So it is I read those verses in @Leviticus 11,
{416}
with the hope that each, including myself, may think aright, and when the time comes to sit down in the service of God, to have divine thoughts of each other. We are no longer in our houses when we are in the assembly; there is no distance here; we have to learn to leave such in its own place, *not* in the assembly. We have to gather our values from what is in the assembly, the place of light, God's house as in @Isaiah 56, it is "the assembly of the living God"; -- @1 Timothy 3: 15; each one has to be reckoned according to the divine values, "the shekel of the sanctuary". We cannot be always there, but when the time comes, the service is to be marked by divine values.
I venture to link on @Leviticus 11 with this; it is the priestly chapter; it deals with the service of God, and the persons who have part in it, persons who are typified in "the sanctuary". We must get accustomed to that language; "saint" is a word from the vocabulary of the sanctuary; Aaron was "the saint of Jehovah", @Psalm 106: 16. So there were those who "went away back and walked no more with him. Jesus therefore said to the twelve, Will ye also go away?" @John 6: 66 and 67; it is the young people who do this, thinking of the world's prospects. @John 6 is a long and testing chapter, where the Lord is speaking of His flesh and blood to be appropriated; we have to understand that; it applies to Christians. "Many of his disciples went away back", and murmured, as Moses himself did (even the most distinguished may do this, and be governed by the general position, and complaining; a very important point). They "went away back and walked no more with him", a very strong statement. So it is with young people so often, walking no more with the Lord or His people. I had to do with such a young person recently, who said, 'he would no longer walk with the Plymouth Brethren!' It is like Saul calling
{417}
the Israelites "Hebrews" -- @1 Samuel 13: 3, an unspiritual way of speaking of the saints. Later a brother passed his house and heard the radio, and the common sounds that come from it; and so it is that some go away. So the Lord said no word to them as to going away, but to the brethren He says, "Will ye also go away?" We are apt to fall away secretly, hankering after something; and so Peter says, "Lord, to whom shall we go?" You will not get that in the newspaper or the novel; they belong to another world, and so do we! "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God", as if to say, 'We have experienced *Thee*, Lord, and know who Thou art'; that is Leviticus, the holiness of God's house, the priestly book. We heard today that priests in the true sense are very scarce. Jehovah says of Aaron, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well", @Exodus 4: 14; it is as if Aaron was accustomed to pray, and yet he is not called a priest there, but a Levite. Though to Moses Jehovah says "thou shalt be to him for God"; God was setting up a system, with Moses at its head, 'Aaron is to be your spokesman or your prophet', because Moses had said he could not speak well. This is the gracious way that God speaks in His house; 'I will not set you aside, I will help you, and support you' God says; so He deals with His servant; God had estimated Moses, and said, 'I will stand by you, and by Aaron'.
I have been diverted by this in coming to the chapter in Leviticus, the priestly book where you get all the instruction. This chapter is to amplify and adjust us as to animals; they are God's creatures, and if not used for types, are hardly to be mentioned in scripture at all; but they come in here as types of Christ in the most precious way, and also as types of us. I remind the brethren that these creatures are
{418}
just persons, and if we say that we have certain persons for our companions, we must answer to God if our companions are not in accord with what is here; so we have in verse 45, "For I am Jehovah who brought you up out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy". I am now speaking of beasts and fowls as types of persons, and I have only in mind to read the verse that speaks of clean persons, verse 3; the chapter is too long, not that it is not worthy to be read, for it is, but not now; there is no time. So it says, "Whatever hath cloven hoofs, and feet quite split open, and cheweth the cud, among the beasts -- that shall ye eat". Notice how wide and how liberal God is with His creation, linking us on with the first order of man; so Adam was just made (the same day as Eve, no doubt), and all the animals and birds (not the fishes) were brought to Adam to see what they were to be called. He did not tell Adam anything as to the types, only as to the naming of the animal, and whatever he called it, that was its name, as if God was pleased with His great creature. We cannot say Adam had been to school, but he had been in God's school. God says to Job, of behemoth (@Job 40: 15), "which I made with thee"; we may as well accept it in lowliness. Adam is distinguished at once, as placed over the animals that God intended to be types of ourselves. If we want companionship, and much is made of this today, we have the clean and the unclean, the believer and the unbeliever, and so Paul says, "what part for a believer along with an unbeliever?" -- @2 Corinthians 6: 15, and God takes it up as to mixed marriages, partnerships and the like. I will not be long, so verse 3 speaks only of the clean, not the unclean, and there is not the time to speak of these latter. The "cloven hoofs, and feet quite split open" means a brother, or a sister, or a child at
{419}
school who has learnt not to make companions of worldly people, and from such to keep aloof, though we cannot go out of the world, as Paul says, @1 Corinthians 5: 10, but this is a question of our companionships, as I read in @Acts 21: 1, where they could hardly tear themselves away from Paul, and it was mutual; I want all to notice that. What it means to be in fellowship thus, and not to flout the word of God, His holy page, in mixed marriages and so forth. We are to have the power to divide, to distinguish, and to chew the cud. Let us go home and think it over; it is the truth. But you say, 'You must understand that I want something more, not only that'. You say 'we have had a good meeting because Mr. So-and-so was there', but there has to be the chewing of the cud on your part. Isaac, the type of the heavenly Man, was meditating in the fields towards evening, and he saw the camels coming -- @Genesis 24: 63; it is the power that carried Rebecca, it is how we reach Christ.
Now there is one other thing in verse 9 that I would speak of. "These shall ye eat of all that are in the waters: whatever hath fins and scales in waters, in seas and in rivers, these shall ye eat". I am speaking to those who know more about fishing and the sea than I do. God has wonderful things in the sea. The Christian knows of the wonderful things that God did in the Mediterranean, and what that wonderful creature Jonah was carried in means. We get it in the scripture here, and persons who have fins and scales are able to go against the tide or stream, not like dead fish, which go with the stream. There are such things as currents in the oceans, and we may get into the current of trade unions. You need fins and scales to escape them!
Now in verse 13 it says certain birds are "an abomination", and then in verse 21 it says of winged crawling things they should eat, "those which have
{420}
legs above their feet with which to leap upon the earth", that is the locusts, and such like. Then in verse 36 we come to "a spring or a well, a quantity of water"; you say, That is very interesting to me; a quantity of water to purify; we were in the midst of it this afternoon, and we still are! If outside you meet something defiling, you may be carried away, but in here you are safe; that is spiritual power; a little bit of heaven on earth, where the world is banished from us; the assembly means that; hence the importance of getting to the meetings. Then verse 37, "And if any part of their carcase fall upon any sowing-seed which is to be sown, it shall be clean", that is the thing that is deputed of God to bring forth fruit; we have to learn what these things mean, for "he that toucheth their carcase shall be unclean", so we must watch them severally, because the power of God is in the seed to be sown; it is not yet affected by the pollution. Now, you say, if water has been put there; well, it is a matter of a newborn state, just sown, as it were, but then bad doctrine pretends to be water, that is, the scriptures, then it is unclean. I want you to read it carefully and to understand what God is after. We must watch the little ones, that they do not get deformed, or they may be damaged all their lives. I am speaking to the fathers and mothers, the older brothers and sisters; the new-born ones are clean, yet maybe, something happens overnight, and they become unclean by some damaging influence. May God bless the word.
{421}
THE LORD'S SUPPER
@1 Corinthians 11: 17 to end; @Matthew 26: 26 - 30
J.T. It is in mind that Paul's account of the Lord's supper is the last and final one, and the one to be read and understood as we partake of the Lord's supper. The records elsewhere should all be read with this one, but this is actually what he himself *received from the Lord*. The three evangelists, Matthew, Mark and Luke all record what happened when the Lord was here; it was all written into the regular records given in the gospels, and that of the Lord's supper as well, included as part of the New Testament, but as having a bearing towards the millennium. It was not intended for the millennium, but for the assembly; the facts however, that are related, bear on the millennium; the gospels all do, and maybe the brethren may not understand this, and if we are to cut "in a straight line the word of truth", @2 Timothy 2: 15, we must bear this in mind; what the Lord said in the days of His flesh, and what He said when He went to heaven. These remarks have allusion to Paul's letter; it is the final record, though maybe the gospels were written afterwards. The apostolic letters have the final place in all matters; hence we must look at them in this matter of the Lord's supper. What is written here shews how much we may digress, and do so in the taking of the Lord's supper, even to death; because he says here, "So that whosoever shall eat the bread, or drink the cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty in respect of the body and of the blood of the Lord. But let a man prove himself, and thus eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. For the eater and drinker eats and drinks judgment to himself, not distinguishing the body" (not distinguishing *the Lord's body* it means). So "On this account many among you are weak and
{422}
infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep. But if we judged ourselves, so were we not judged. But being judged, we are disciplined of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world" -- verses 27 to 32. So that the Lord's supper has a great place, a major place, and next to the assembly, the *first* place, and all that relates to it.
Ques. Are we to feel the seriousness of the matter?
J.T. Yes, that is why I began reading at verse 17.
Ques. Is coming "together in assembly" of great importance?
J.T. Just so, and he says, "When ye come therefore together into one place, it is not to eat the Lord's supper. For each one in eating takes his *own* supper before others, and one is hungry and another drinks to excess", verses 20 and 21; that is what they were doing, and it was written to condemn them, for the assembly was being despised.
Rem. A dignity attaches to the supper.
J.T. Just so, and Paul tells them that other eatings and drinkings are *not* on the same level as the Lord's supper, and says, "If any one be hungry, let him eat at home, that ye may not come together for judgment", verse 34. Our houses are distinct, and the eating and drinking in them, even if we are together as brethren in them, from the place where we take the Lord's supper; the Lord's supper itself is on a much higher level.
Ques. Does Paul's discourse in @Acts 20 bear on this?
J.T. Interrupted, you mean, by the matter of Eutychus falling? How long the discourse was we are not told, but it was of considerable length; it says, after Eutychus was restored, the apostle went up "and having broken the bread, and eaten, and having long spoken until daybreak, so he went away" -- @Acts 20: 11; so that the truth he had in his mind, was
{423}
continued and evidently finished, so that the adjustment needed in Troas, as in most other places, was put right.
Ques. Did the divisions among the Corinthians affect them at the supper?
J.T. They were not acting as the assembly should act. The letter is addressed "to the assembly of God which is in Corinth"; they were looked at as that, in spite of their state, which shews how longsuffering the Lord is in dealing with assembly matters; so it reads, "Paul, a called apostle of Jesus Christ, by God's will, and Sosthenes the brother, to the assembly of God which is in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints, with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours: Grace to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ", @1 Corinthians 1: 1 - 3. The apostle had to say the most severe things to them in spite of all this as to the Lord's supper.
Ques. Would their being "enriched in him, in all word of doctrine, and all knowledge" imply that they were "intelligent persons"? @1 Corinthians 1: 5 and chapter 10: 15.
J.T. The first nine verses of the epistle are objective truth, that is it is predicated of the meeting there, "I thank my God always about you, in respect of the grace of God given to you in Christ Jesus; that in everything ye have been enriched in him, in all word of doctrine, and all knowledge (according as the testimony of the Christ has been confirmed in you), so that ye come short in no gift" -- verses 4 to 7; that is in the abstract sense, and all the first nine verses are said as if there was no blemish, because the assembly is there.
Ques. Do we discern in it all the working of love?
J.T. The absence of it was not condemned by Paul, for there were men of value. So I do not think
{424}
the Lord meant to discount anything because of the state, according to these first nine verses. The hortatory part begins with verse ten, and there he speaks of the discrepancy. When he speaks later of the incestuous man, and such things, he speaks of unleavened bread, and says, "according as ye are unleavened" -- @1 Corinthians 5: 7. That is what they were abstractly.
Rem. In chapter 11: 18 Paul speaks of their divisions, and then says, "that the approved may become manifest among you".
J.T. Just so; they are to be "among *you*"; they are not seen in the world.
Ques. How can we hold the truth abstractly?
J.T. How could we go on otherwise? In many instances we are very low down as at Corinth, and one wonders how the apostle could go on. They did not travel as fast as the Spirit of God; He was ready to commend the repentant man, but they were not.
Ques. Would Timothy striving to present himself "approved to God" (@2 Timothy 2: 15) be like "the approved ... among you" in 1 Corinthians?
J.T. Timothy was to be a workman there, but here Paul has in mind the state of the whole assembly, and he says, "For I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified" (@1 Corinthians 2: 2). He limited his ministry because of their state.
Rem. Is the supper on Lord's day morning the greatest test as to where we have been in the week?
J.T. Just so; it is public, and not done in a corner, and hence the importance of being accurate. Paul leaves out certain things that are recorded in the gospels, and he also adds to their accounts. Luke mentions the memorial only once, here it is twice.
Ques. In the references to the bread and the cup you mean?
{425}
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Why did he say he received it from the Lord?
J.T. He was the only one who could say it. It really belonged to the assembly, and he had the ministry of the assembly given to him.
Ques. Is the eating intended to have a moral effect upon us?
J.T. We must have the actual emblems, the bread and the cup; we are never told what was in the cup; in chapter 10 the cup comes first, but in the actual partaking the bread is first.
Ques. Why does he mention divisions and sects before the Lord's supper?
J.T. To shew what they were doing. We may hardly realize now what they were doing, and how serious it was. They were meant to be taking the Lord's supper, but they were not. "For each one in eating takes his *own* supper before others, and one is hungry and another drinks to excess" -- verse 21; such conduct allowed; it shews how patient God is, where the assembly is in mind.
Ques. What does the memorial signify?
J.T. It is mentioned both as to the bread and the cup here; and the latter is only found here. The Lord intends it to be a heart matter with us. We are on His side, and hence the position is exposed to persecution.
Ques. Is it more His person here?
J.T. Yes, it is His person, but it is His *absence*; that is the thing. The Lord intends that what He had effected should be shewn and known before He comes into the company. There is what He has that He loves and can come to. It is ourselves to begin with, and the Lord loves to see us, and as we keep the directions, He will come.
Ques. Is the heart to be filled as well as the mind?
J.T. Just so; all that is suitable, for they are
{426}
intelligent persons. But He is not here, and the teaching is to affect us so that we become intelligent.
Ques. Is there a distinct difference between the teaching here and in @Acts 20?
J.T. What Paul says in the discourse, you mean. You can add what he said also after he had taken up Eutychus, "And having gone up, and having broken the bread, and eaten, and having long spoken until daybreak, so he went away", @Acts 20: 11. Paul is the main person in the matter, and he went away after the long speaking, which was conversational now, and no doubt it was about the supper.
Rem. It was so that those who entered into the conversation would be able to be left.
J.T. Yes, and they "were no little comforted", after Paul's discourse and his "long speaking" (though no notes were taken that we know of!). The whole assembly had got low, and lost the sense of the Lord's supper *prophetically*; I mean, it had lost its ground, almost to the verge of idolatry, where it is now.
Ques. Is Paul's discourse necessary there, and @1 Corinthians 11 helps us to understand this?
J.T. Just that.
Ques. Would recovery be on that line? No doubt they were fully recovered before he had done with them.
J.T. I think that. Paul's discourse in @Acts 20: 7 is like what we read in @1 Corinthians 11. We cannot be sure how bad the situation was at Troas, but we do know it was very bad at Corinth.
Ques. Why is the memorial mentioned twice, the supper beginning and ending with these two elements?
J.T. As to actual physical fact, but whether the thought of it ends there, I should hardly like to say, because I think it goes on. The thought of the Lord's
{427}
spiritual body, that is the saints as one body, goes on to the place the assembly has in the service of God.
Ques. Should we be affected first by the Lord's absence and then by His presence?
J.T. That is good. The fact that He is there is good, and must mean a change; it goes on to the brethren and the sons of God.
Ques. Is oneness needed, but it did not exist among them?
J.T. He began with that in chapter 1: 10 and what follows, "Now I exhort you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all say the same thing, and that there be not among you divisions; but that ye be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same opinion. For it has been shewn to me concerning you, my brethren, by those of the house of Chloe, that there are strifes among you. But I speak of this, that each of you says, *I* am of Paul, and *I* of Apollos, and *I* of Cephas, and *I* of Christ. Is the Christ divided? has Paul been crucified for you? or have ye been baptised unto the name of Paul? I thank God that I have baptised none of you, unless Crispus and Gaius, that no one may say that I have baptised unto my own name", verses 10 to 15; he shews it was a fact that there were schools of opinion.
Ques. Is there a reference here to the Lord's own body?
J.T. I would say that is why @1 Corinthians 10, verses 16 and 17, comes before chapter 11.
Ques. Why is "the night in which he was delivered up" referred to at that point?
J.T. To touch us and affect us. Why should we go on with a party spirit, when His betrayal should be before us and humble us. *They* were not humbled, they were puffed up.
Rem. So Paul here is enforcing that it is a love matter.
{428}
J.T. Just so. "For I received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you" (verse 23) really refers back to verse 17; it was the night of His betrayal, and yet they were carrying on as he describes.
Ques. Is what He was doing in the night put over against what we are doing? Is Paul's thought to sober us?
J.T. Just so. He was delivered up, and by whom? One of His own; and hence let us challenge our hearts as to where we may be when taking the Supper. He had spoken of Judas, the betrayer there, not of His actual death. Of that He says, "thus shall the Son of man be in the heart of the earth three days and three nights" -- @Matthew 12: 40, which is also to affect us, and so it says in verse 27 of one eating the bread or drinking the cup unworthily, that he "shall be guilty in respect of the body and of the blood of the Lord". That all makes it very solemn.
Ques. Are we to be conscious of being approved or being disapproved?
J.T. We should be.
Ques. Would you make clear the difference between the presentation of His body and His blood?
J.T. "This is my body, which is for you: this do in remembrance of me. In like manner also the cup, after having supped, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood", verses 24 and 25; the word "supped" refers to the passover supper; it means He has finished with the passover supper and is dealing with His own supper, "in remembrance of me". But you are concerned as to the new covenant?
Ques. Is the love of God presented in the new covenant?
J.T. Let us go back again to the use of the word "this", "*This* is my body", that is one of the "this's"; and "*This* cup is the new covenant in my blood" is the other; "this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in
{429}
remembrance of me". The question is, what does "*this*" mean? It is not manifestly the actual wording of the new covenant in @Jeremiah 31. That is a formal covenant made with "the house of Israel and with the house of Judah" -- @Jeremiah 31: 31, not with us, and does not have the same force as the word of the covenant here in this chapter. The idea of covenant is there, but to bring it here and say this is the blood of the new covenant, well, we cannot say the new covenant is formally introduced with us; it was the cup that they drank, but it was only an illustration of that. The covenant established by the blood of Christ is another matter, which we drink as a memorial; so the thought of the new covenant is there, but not "with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah"; that is not what he is dealing with here; it is the *memorial*.
Ques. Is there any reference here to the Hebrew servant of @Exodus 21?
J.T. It means He shed His blood.
Rem. In the cup He says, "I love", @Exodus 21: 5.
J.T. Well, yes; but this is "the new covenant in my blood".
Ques. This record is final here. Certain things are left out; remission of sins, for instance. Should they be referred to?
J.T. They should not be.
Rem. Paul's ministry is something extra; it is our charter.
J.T. That is just the word. He brings something to bear on us, and it is to affect us.
Rem. We cannot say the Lord when here said what Paul said, but He said this to Paul. The remission of sins comes in @Matthew 26 in connection with the cup, so in drinking we would carry it in our minds.
J.T. We need intelligence as to how we take the
{430}
Supper; if you quote from the gospels, then quote them intelligently; Paul received this from the Lord via heaven.
Ques. Did not all come through the Lord's words in the gospels, but this came to Paul direct?
J.T. Examine it; it is extraordinary language, especially in this epistle.
Ques. Is the teaching to enable us to all say the same things?
J.T. Just so; and if a brother says, (I have heard it, not in this country!) that the Father's name or the Holy Spirit's name was connected with the Lord's supper, he did not know what he was saying.
Rem. So that *this is* our charter.
J.T. Just so.
Ques. May we address God later on when the Lord comes in?
J.T. It is never said to be God's supper or the Father's supper or the Spirit's supper, it is *the Lord's* supper. We need to be priestly, not as the priests in @Malachi 1 and 2.
Ques. Should we not address God at all?
J.T. No; it is the Lord's supper; we are made priests to Him, and He can proceed in this precious time; as constituted priests we know what to say and how to feel.
Rem. "He is thy Lord, and worship thou him".
Ques. Is Paul enforcing the thought of the Lord's love in the supper, so that the remembrance is for His heart, but the memorial for the world?
J.T. It is for our hearts too, as in the case of the cup-bearer; "Only bear a remembrance with thee of me when it goes well with thee", Joseph says to him, @Genesis 40: 14; this is over against the typical scripture in @Exodus 32: 1, "For this Moses, the man that has brought us up out of the land of Egypt -- we do not know what is become of him!" We *ought*
{431}
to know what is become of Him, of Christ, for He is risen and in heaven, and is ready to come to us when the time arrives; He loves to hear us and to come to us.
Rem. If we understood more the announcing of the Lord's death, we would be more subject to the teaching of the Supper.
J.T. It involves the government of God; there it is most solemn; "But let a man prove himself", that is, prove himself as to judgment.
Ques. Does partaking of the Supper rightly need moral power with us?
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Are we to look for some intelligence in those asking to break bread?
J.T. It is the business of the elder brethren to teach them; hence the elaboration of the truth of the passover in @Exodus 12, especially in verses 43 to 50, is a parallel thought, and the difference in the passages is like the difference between the gospels and Corinthians. What Paul gives here is basic.
Ques. When does the proving take place, before, or at the Supper?
J.T. All the time. "So that whosoever shall eat the bread, or drink the cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty in respect of the body and of the blood of the Lord. But let a man prove himself, and thus eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. For the eater and drinker eats and drinks judgment to himself, not distinguishing the body" -- verses 27 to 29. I should not like to limit the 'proving', though it would be very intense during the eating and drinking. The proving with Israel was with the unleavened bread; leaven was to be judged, and @1 Corinthians 5 bears on this, as to the judgment of the wicked man, as to the truth about sin, and the truth as to whether we are sincere.
Ques. Is there to be continuity in the Supper, "until he come" (verse 26)?
{432}
J.T. That is a solemn thing. It is His public coming, and all is dealt with then.
Ques. But if this proving takes place at the Supper would it not interfere with our service?
J.T. It shews us it is before us throughout the week, like the feast of unleavened bread which was for seven days.
Rem. You feel this teaching to be very needful.
J.T. I never felt it more, because the Lord is stressing it in view of the service of God, and the time is short.
Ques. Is a word suitable after the Lord's supper?
J.T. It is quite in keeping.
Rem. On the lines of teaching?
J.T. Yes.
Rem. Sometimes we feel that it is easier to give thanks for the bread than for the cup.
J.T. I do not think so.
Ques. Does the Lord make us know His presence then?
J.T. The breaking of bread calls Him to mind; our pure minds know what to say and what to do. The bread is "for the calling me to mind"; we recognize Him as the bread is broken.
Ques. Are the questions raised in chapter 10: 16 on the line of "proving"?
J.T. Yes; it is the public position; the idea of fellowship is not in chapter 11, but in chapter 10. Chapter 11 is privilege, and the inside position. But the idolatry mentioned in chapter 10 is what we have abroad in Christendom, from Rome downwards.
Ques. Why is "as often as ye shall drink it" mentioned in connection with the remembrance?
J.T. That is not said in regard of the bread. The memorial in the bread lies in the *breaking*, not in the eating.
{433}
Ques. What is in mind in the discipline (verse 32)?
J.T. I suppose the general sense as mentioned in @Hebrews 12 applies. It is attributed to any conduct objectionable at the Supper where He is; I see it more today. But chapter 10 is public.
Ques. Self-judged persons may still be disciplined by the Lord?
J.T. Quite so; "For the eater and drinker eats and drinks judgment to himself, not distinguishing the body", verse 29; it alludes to a person who is misbehaving; "But if we judged ourselves, so were we not judged", verse 31. The persons spoken of as "we" there are misbehaving in the assembly.
Ques. Would the discipline in @Hebrews 12 be in view of holiness, but this is different?
J.T. Yes; it is a remarkable thing that it is dealt with in this way.
Ques. Are *all* included in "if we judged ourselves"?
J.T. "For the eater and drinker eats and drinks judgment to himself, not distinguishing the body. On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep. But if we judged ourselves, so were we not judged" -- verses 29 to 31. It means the person who is misbehaving.
Ques. Should we be clear of everything that may be laid to our charge?
J.T. Quite so. "So that whosoever shall eat the bread, or drink the cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty in respect of the body and of the blood of the Lord", verse 27; that is what is in mind; something is laid to the charge of the Corinthians; "But let a man prove himself, and thus eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. For the eater and drinker eats and drinks judgment to himself, not distinguishing the body", verses 28 and 29. Not distinguishing the Lord's body is almost a crime.
{434}
Ques. Is it like the sin of chapter 5, or is this more serious?
J.T. Both are equally serious. The apostle is very tender when dealing with the Lord's body, and I hope the saints are all taking it in; it is most serious how little is taken in.
Ques. Is the same end in view in the discipline as in the ministry, to bring us to things?
J.T. Yes.
Rem. Coming together "for the worse" (verse 17) is very solemn.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Does the reference in chapter 10: 7 apply to this, "The people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play"?
J.T. It is what happened at Corinth; he is dealing with that kind of thing.
Rem. The Supper is not to satisfy our natural hunger.
J.T. It says, "If any one be hungry, let him eat at home, that ye may not come together for judgment" (verse 34).
{435}
REMAINING IN THE WAY OR LEAVING IT
@Mark 10: 17 - 22; @Acts 18: 24 - 28
The positive side of the truth is in mind in connection with Apollos and the negative side in the young man in @Mark 10, who, you will observe, ran into the way; it says, "And as he went forth into the way, a person ran up to him". Apollos had also come into the way, and he is especially the one in mind to be spoken about. He remained in the way; the young man did not. Maybe some here tonight have been in the way, and have left it; in the language of scripture, which says, "if he draw back, my soul does not take pleasure in him"; but the positive side is, "*we* are not drawers back to perdition, but of faith to saving the soul", @Hebrews 10: 38 and 39. There is pleasure in addressing such brethren; I never have any difficulty to address the saints, but often feel difficulty in addressing unbelievers. The saints generally listen to "the implanted word", which as @James 1: 21 says, "is able to save your souls". The word has the power. There is the sense of being saved by endurance to the end; and saved by water; there is also the idea of being saved "as through the fire" -- @1 Corinthians 3: 15. Noah and his family were "saved through water", @1 Peter 3: 20. So Paul speaks to those at Corinth who would need to be saved "as through the fire", their works being burnt up, they themselves being saved. It is of great importance to see how you have been saved. Each will be saved of course by the Lord Jesus, as Saviour, but these are features by which we *are* saved; and continuing to the end is a great and essential matter, that is that we are not likely to run into the way, and leave it as the young man did. It says, "And Jesus looking upon him loved him" -- verse 21; how He could love one so disappointing is a challenge to our minds. But one thing can be said, that our thoughts
{436}
may trammel what divine Persons do and say, and the scripture will tell us how He could love that rich young man. It is worth while thinking of; the variety of ways. They can act by Themselves, unhampered by our thoughts and creeds and such things; They have Their own outlook and point of view, and what They do and have done, and have *recently* done, we must accept. One would hesitate to say the Lord would love an unconverted young man here; before His death things were different; it says of Him in @Psalm 113: 6, "Who humbleth himself to look on the heavens and on the earth"; He could address men as they were. If one ran into the way, He gave him credit for it; He did not ridicule him. This young man says, "Good Teacher" or as the Authorised version says, "Good *Master*"; today many servants have become masters, and vice versa; the Lord did not correct him in that, but in his thoughts, "Why callest thou me good? no one is good but one, that is God"; that is the divine way, to direct our thoughts to God, who is "the Father, of whom all things, and *we* for him", @1 Corinthians 8: 6. Some say God is the Father of all men; scripture does not say so, but it says, "One God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all", @Ephesians 4: 6; He is the Governor of the universe, but He is "in us all"; *we* are the "us". We may regard ourselves as under God, and that He is our Father; we have no greater authority than this, the authority of the Lord Jesus. My idea is to stress the thought of being taught. The first title by which His first followers called Him was 'Teacher', or "Rabbi"; they left John and followed Jesus, they had found a better Teacher, @John 1: 38. In Bethany a woman anointed Him upon His head, which means His supreme intelligence as a Teacher. To Him Mary Magdalene says the same in effect, "Rabboni, which means Teacher", @John 20: 16. I am thinking now of the idea of being *taught*, and how ready the Lord is to teach us. It is not
{437}
only the things that are said, but it is a gift, and means power; we have "shepherds and teachers" (@Ephesians 4: 11), both being one gift, meaning care and teaching; the gifts are persons in each case. We are wonderfully furnished by the Lord to meet the current needs in our souls. "Good Teacher ... Why callest thou *me* good?" That is the teacher and the teaching; *we* can teach others what we have in power in our souls; and if it is in power in your soul, you will pass it on in power. Then we have the following remarks in the passage. The Lord loved him, and in that regard we need to be taught. He might love one then, but not now. He was there as the Creator. He had come down and so could love. This young man called Him, "Good Teacher", he respected Him, "and kneeling to him" in the way; the Lord did not pass him, nor blind Bartimaeus either (@Mark 10: 46), it says He "desired him to be called"; it was grace reigning; presently it would "reign through righteousness" -- @Romans 5: 21; it was the Lord here in His own personal rights on behalf of God. In @Luke 7 the centurion says, "*I* also am a man placed under authority" -- verse 8; another beside the Lord who was "under authority", He was under the Father's authority. The Lord recognized the centurion as a man under authority, and a good man who loved his servant; a rare thing, for a bondman meant in those days slavery. But the centurion loved his own servant, who was sick, and he besought the Lord for him; so it says (@Luke 7: 9), "And Jesus hearing this wondered at him, and turning to the crowd following him said, I say to you, Not even in Israel have I found so great faith", the Lord recognized it. In @Mark 12 one of the scribes asked Him, "Which is the first commandment of all? And Jesus answered him, The first commandment of all is, Hear, Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord; and thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thine understanding, and with
{438}
all thy strength. This is the first commandment. And a second like it is this: Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. There is not another commandment greater than these. And the scribe said to him, Right, teacher; thou hast spoken according to the truth. For he is one, and there is none other besides him; and to love him with all the heart, and with all the intelligence, and with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love one's neighbour as one's self, is more than all the burnt-offerings and sacrifices. And Jesus, seeing that he had answered intelligently, said to him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And no one dared question him any more", verses 28 to 34. The Lord saw that he had answered intelligently, for He named things and persons, as the last Adam. So this young man ran into the way, and certain things ensued; they are so beautiful, these conversations in the gospels; the Lord of glory doing it; it all shews His wonderful affection.
Now to proceed to my main subject. I have finished with this young man, who ran into the way, that none of us may be found running into the way, and leaving it, for "if he draw back, my soul does not take pleasure in him". The Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit are very discriminating in respect of love.
Now as to Apollos and how he came into the way; a most remarkable young man, who came from Alexandria, and was born there. He was "an eloquent man, who was mighty in the scriptures", @Acts 18: 24. He was in the way, he knew "the way of the Lord", not yet "the way of God"; we will speak of that in a moment. "He was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in his spirit, he spoke and taught exactly the things concerning Jesus, knowing only the baptism of John. And *he* began to speak boldly in the synagogue" -- verses 25 and 26; presently Aquila and Priscilla spoke to him "the way of God". "He was *instructed* in the way of the Lord", and
{439}
my word is that *instruction* is a most important thing. I have spoken of the two disciples who left John the baptist; there are also Mary of Bethany, Mary of Magdala, Nathanael, and many more, and many here; nearly all in this hall are instructed persons. One sees it characteristically among the brethren; they are instructed; they have been taught; and so Apollos comes up to this standard. He was "instructed in the way of the Lord", a properly selected phrase, and so is the other one mentioned, "the way of God". I am now endeavouring to reach this point. Aquila and Priscilla observed this man; they are to be noted. Aquila was born in Pontus; he was a Jew, and his wife Priscilla, a Jew and a Jewess; they had to leave Rome according to the government; when it was a question of divine instruction they would obey God rather than man; but here they were subject to the powers that be; they left Rome, and a good thing they did, for they found Paul, or rather, Paul found them. They were tent-makers by trade, and he lodged with them, chapter 18: 1 - 3. He had just been at Athens, a very hard place, but God makes His selection. In this town relatively the number of believers is large, but not so in Athens, the seat of learning; there were those who wished to be learned at Athens, and the Athenians called Paul "this chatterer"! Let someone try and convey what that meant in speaking of Paul. At Lystra in chapter 14 he "took the lead in speaking", for it was really "Paul and his company" -- chapter 13: 13, yet here called "this chatterer"! It was no chattering as Aquila and Priscilla spoke of the way of God. Paul spoke long, right into the night, of the Lord's supper; I cannot say how long; and after the breaking of bread, they had a long conversation. This was Christianity at the beginning, when God had His way in it. In @Acts 14: 1 it says, "they ... *so* spake that a great multitude of both Jews and Greeks believed",
{440}
their speaking was the means of believing. God had made Paul's mouth and Barnabas's mouth and Apollos¬ mouth, and so with every believer. Aquila and Priscilla left Rome; they originally came from Pontus; why should we question their origin? Cornelius, a Roman centurion, was going to be made something in heaven. There is, of course, the moral side, where we can stand and suffer, but it is the divine side, the side of counsel and purpose; all is, dear brethren, on that side, and these persons have distinction on earth on the moral side as well. Paul and Aquila and Priscilla were all in the same business house, I may say; what beautiful conversations would go on among these three tent-makers! They were working with Paul, and Paul, when he left Corinth took them to Ephesus, and left them there. Finally Apollos arrived at Ephesus, it says in verse 24; it was a great moment for Ephesus and for Paul, for he "was mighty in the scriptures", and it says, "He was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in his spirit, he spoke and taught exactly the things concerning Jesus, knowing *only* the baptism of John". In the next chapter twelve men near by knew it also, but not as much as Apollos. One wonders why some are so slow, and some so quick, in taking in divine things! Paul did not say much; nothing as to time, weather, politics, only he says, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" They were to think on that; they were to be converted; they had not even heard of the Holy Spirit; why were they so ignorant? Why did they lack instruction? I am not chiding anyone here, but I speaking in general terms, so that we all challenge ourselves as to the matter of being instructed in things. And so Apollos "spoke and taught exactly the things concerning Jesus, knowing only the baptism of John". It is not said he "did not even hear if the Holy Spirit was come", it is simply said, "knowing only the baptism
{441}
of John". So far he was intelligent; as to certain matters of the truth, well, *know* them, *know* that; so it goes on, "And *he* began to speak boldly in the synagogue. And Aquila and Priscilla, having heard him, took him to them and unfolded to him the way of God more exactly". We are now dealing with an excellent person, not only a convert; he learned scripture accurately (so we are not to guess, but to get it accurately!); that was Apollos; we can well understand how he learned quickly, just as Nathanael learnt in @John 1. It is my simple thought, not to take any advantage of the brethren, but just this, *Be accurate as to the truth*! Bibles are cheap, so is the ministry, but we need the meditation on things, the chewing of the cud, as we had yesterday. Are these clean things, or clean persons? One may be a Christian, and yet not worthy of the company of other Christians. We want to have the company of those who are real believers, in dwelt with the Holy Spirit, to appropriate them, the saints of God, We shall have them all in heaven of course, for saints met in glory may be there in a promiscuous sense, but they will be in heaven and we shall meet them there, for there is only one standard in heaven:
<blockquote>"Nor what is next Thy heart <br>Can we forget; <br>Thy saints, O Lord, with Thee <br>In glory met. <br>Perfect in comeliness <br>Before Thy face, <br>Th¬ eternal witness, all, <br>Of Thine own grace". (`160:8)</blockquote>
The time is *now* to get understanding, "with all thy getting get understanding" -- @Proverbs 4: 7, that we may become instructed in the way of the Lord. Presently you will meet a brother and sister who will
{442}
invite you to their house; Aquila and Priscilla may have had only one room, but they asked him in, maybe after a meeting; we are in these times of speaking "often one to another" -- @Malachi 3: 16; and they spoke to him, and they learnt from him too, but *he* learnt "the way of God more exactly". They would say, 'We have been with Paul and have heard great things', and Apollos would prick up his ears to hear of Paul, the great apostle. We have not got him now, only his writings and much is made of Paul. He says to the Corinthian leaders, "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognize the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", @1 Corinthians 14: 37; it is one great commandment, a singular thought; one great authoritative commandment; we have a dual commandment in the two epistles, and I am insisting in my little way that we should be true Bereans, @Acts 17: 11; to see if what was said by the great apostle was right; let us be like that. Apollos was a model for incomers to the gospel; we have in @John 21: 11 the catch of one hundred and fifty-three "great fishes", and Apollos was a sample of a great fish; it says there, "and though there were so many, the net was not rent"; the net here, the divine net, did not break. He was ready to be corrected; Apollos seems to be next to Paul in prominence, so Paul says in @1 Corinthians 3: 6, "*I* have planted; Apollos watered; but God has given the increase", to bring out the greatness of this servant, to bring him in with himself. So he says (@1 Corinthians 3: 1) "And *I*, brethren, have not been able to speak to you as to spiritual, but as to fleshly; as to babes in Christ". The Corinthian saints were not very far on, so instead of having the best teaching, they had to be fed with milk, "not meat, for ye have not yet been able, nor indeed are ye yet able; for ye are yet carnal"; that is why I read the passage that shews he is classed with Paul,
{443}
and we are to note that "*God* has given the increase"; and now the point is that God is bringing in souls, like the fishes mentioned in the end of John's gospel, typical of persons; and in Apollos¬ case, we have one great fish, as it were, caught by a line; so great that he could be linked with Paul at once, after being with Aquila and Priscilla one day. Paul says to him, @1 Corinthians 16: 12; 'I should like you to go to Corinth', but Apollos was not at all minded to go, so Timothy went, @1 Corinthians 4: 17. Apollos refers to independency in the work of the Spirit, which is a great matter. We have to be on the alert for such to teach them the way of God, not the way of the Presbyterians, or the way of the Church of England; this is the great way spoken of in the scriptures, and a brother and his wife were there to help him.
I finish now with verse 26, "And *he* began to speak boldly in the synagogue. And Aquila and Priscilla, having heard him, took him to them and unfolded to him the way of God more exactly. And when he purposed to go into Achaia, the brethren wrote to the disciples engaging them to receive him"; I am glad to believe that this word means *to receive him gladly*; that is a matter to look into if we are desirous of fellowship among the people of God, that they should receive us gladly. If any applicant or enquirer is here, let him be sure he is commendable, and let the brethren be sure they receive him gladly. "And when he purposed to go into Achaia, the brethren wrote to the disciples engaging them to receive him, who, being come, contributed much to those who believed through grace. For he with great force convinced the Jews publicly, shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was the Christ". He was the great acquisition at that time, and there are such today, waiting to come into fellowship; none should be left out. The Spirit of God is sweeping the house for every lost piece of silver; it is *our* business to receive such.
{444}
SYSTEMATIC TEACHING IN CHRISTIANITY
@Luke 8: 1 - 3; @Acts 20: 1 - 8
J.T. These two scriptures afford instruction as to certain features of the early days of Christianity, and these features obtain now in certain conditions; and it is hoped we shall see by the consideration of the early teaching that *systematic teaching* marked the introduction of Christianity, that is to say that the economy (or dispensation) was set up having the features of a system of teaching, as it is said of the early believers, "they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers", @Acts 2: 42. One has particularly in mind in regard to the system, the twelve apostles seen in this chapter, "and the twelve were with him". So it says, "he went through the country city by city, and village by village, preaching and announcing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God; and the twelve were with him". It is understood that the numeral twelve as attached to the Lord's service involves not only what is systematic, but *love*. Whilst things were done systematically in an ordinary sense, they were marked by love, and in this particular position we see the system is marked by grace; that is, the power of God in the exercise of grace. It says, "and certain women who had been healed of wicked spirits and infirmities, Mary who was called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out"; the power of God was there in the kingdom exercised in grace; the systematic working of the Lord Jesus was seen in these persons, but the love too; "and Joanna, wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many others, who ministered to him of their substance". Then in @Acts 20 it is thought that it corresponds with this in the service of Paul, certain who companied with him, their names being given, who obviously
{445}
represent Paul's work. The facts here shew the systematic way of doing things; "And there accompanied him as far as Asia, Sopater son of Pyrrhus, a Berean; and of Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus, and Gaius and Timotheus of Derbe, and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus"; it is this, that the Spirit of God is accrediting the facts in the presence of these men; they were the exponents of it; furthermore it is in view of the end of the dispensation drawing nigh that these features should be arrived at in those who love the Lord, and that these things should be done well, and carry with them what is in Christianity.
Rem. In the recovery we are brought back to what was at the beginning.
J.T. Quite so, especially to what is given by His most successful servant, Paul.
Ques. Do we see the effectiveness of love, in @Luke 7, in both the Lord and the woman?
J.T. That is a good suggestion; it is a well-known gospel chapter. We see in Luke how effective the Lord's service was, and how men of this world, leaders, servants employed by this world's system, military people, and the like, became adjusted; so we may see it today; believers in military service, and what God has helped us in lately is right, that believers should not be employed in taking life, The centurion of the beginning of @Luke 7 was a humane man, and even more than that, for he says, "For *I also* am a man placed under authority", it implies that he discerned the Lord was there under authority, which is a feature of the dispensation. We need to be ready to observe the work of God, what it is, even in a soldier.
Ques. How do we get this teaching and love today?
J.T. God employs means. Things are to be done on right principles, and done *well*, and we should not
{446}
be slipshod in our service, doing it, or not doing it, as we choose. We may have to say, "We are unprofitable bondmen", according to @Luke 17: 10, and so we are, in a sense, because of the 'overheads', for we cost Him more than He gets in return!
Ques. Is Paul using the leverage of love in saying he has "all the brethren with me"? @Galatians 1: 2.
J.T. Very good; it is another thing he is asserting, that he has the brethren with him, that is, in sympathy; the Galatians were denying this, or giving it up.
Ques. Does the sense of what we have cost stimulate us?
J.T. Quite so. Hence John the apostle says, "that we ... may receive full wages" (@2 John 8), which is remarkable. He has a right to do as He pleases with what He calls His own.
Ques. Do we see the administration of love in questions arising among us?
J.T. I would say that. He is allowing exercises to arise, and even ordering them, that things should be in order.
Rem. The number twelve comes into that.
J.T. Yes, if love is working the effectiveness will be increased; all that followed the Lord came under divine teaching. And take those men mentioned at Troas; how varied the localities from which they came, as if the Spirit of God is stressing the effectiveness of Paul's work. I have heard of those going to Australia and having great success, but nowhere else, and one wonders; Paul had it everywhere.
Ques. Does "city by city, and village by village" stress the effectiveness of the service?
J.T. Read what is says, "*he* went through the country city by city, and village by village, preaching and announcing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God; and the twelve were with him, and certain women". So the service of God can even be carried
{447}
by those in military employment, like the centurion who was said to love his servant; a remarkable thing, they were generally very haughty and overbearing, but this man loved his servant; "And a certain centurion's bondman who was dear to him was ill and about to die; and having heard of Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, begging him that he might come and save his bondman". So Jesus went with them, acceding to the wishes of the Jews. He knew His man, so it says, "But already, when he was not far from the house, the centurion sent to him friends, saying to him, Lord, do not trouble thyself, for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter under my roof. Wherefore neither did I count myself worthy to come to thee. But say by a word and my servant shall be healed. For *I* also am a man placed under authority, having under myself soldiers, and I say to this one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my bondman, Do this, and he does it. And Jesus hearing this wondered at him, and turning to the crowd following him said, I say to you, Not even in Israel have I found so great faith". This is all to be kept in our minds in what we are saying.
Now as to what is in mind in the question as to workmanship and the systematic way of it, "*he* went through the country city by city, and village by village, preaching and announcing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God; *and the twelve were with him*", meaning they represent *love*. The centurion loved his servant, and I believe the thought of the number twelve is that it is so divisible and easily used to get the most out of the number: two, three, four, six or twelve; the number can be used in that remarkable way, and therefore is available to love.
Ques. To be effective in the service do we need to answer to the word that "the twelve were *with him*"?
J.T. There were others with Him too, but this is
{448}
to bring out that *they* were available at any time; then there was the kind of workmanship in "Mary who was called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out"; what a result; what a case; the terrible power of the devil; but they "had gone out"; the position had been rendered untenable, "from whom seven demons *had gone out*"; some circumstance had come into this woman's case that rendered the devil's position untenable.
Rem. What a fine witness to His power!
J.T. That is in mind, and she was not only used in this gospel, but to the saints in @John 20. She would not speak at a ministry meeting, but behave as a woman should; "Mary of Magdala comes bringing word to the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her", @John 20: 18.
Ques. Would you say some more as to the numeral twelve?
J.T. It is a sign of administrative ability; ability operating in love.
Ques. Would it enter into the making up of the full number of the twelve apostles in @Acts 1?
J.T. Just so; it is to be noticed that the Lord did not order the appointment of Matthias; it was by lot really; arranged by heaven; so "he was numbered with the eleven apostles", @Acts 1: 26. There was great evidence that the Lord approved it. So it says later, "But Peter, standing up with the eleven" -- @Acts 2: 14, so that the twelve were there, the great administrative number was there, and when Peter finished those there "said to Peter and the other apostles, What shall we do, brethren?" @Acts 2: 37. They had discernment to see what workers they were, "the Lord working with them", @Mark 16: 20.
Ques. As to this matter, why does Peter say, "from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up from us", @Acts 1: 22?
{449}
J.T. Peter's wisdom is seen in that, for he was the one who spoke. "Of the men who have assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us"; it shews that he was to be thoroughly in the thing; "beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up from us, one of these should be a witness with us of his resurrection"; this scripture should be well studied. The brethren should be approved.
Ques. Is the system to be dominated by love?
J.T. Well; the whole thing is this idea of love, "By love serve one another", @Galatians 5: 13; and "have love amongst yourselves", @John 13: 35.
Ques. Would the matters in @Luke 8 be a development of these things, especially love, seen in chapter 7?
J.T. Yes, as coming after chapter 7; it all enters into it.
Rem. That would apply to the "woman in the city, who was a sinner", @Luke 7.
J.T. Quite so; we have little time (a very systematic thing!), and we are to learn from it how to be systematic in serving.
Rem. The stress here is on the number twelve, but we may have less than that in a small place, perhaps three or four.
J.T. If love is there the principle holds; we get but little instruction, even by the apostles, as to it; but Christianity itself is not seen in the Old Testament or in the Apocalypse.
Ques. Would you tell us how these things work out in the small numbers?
J.T. Scripture contemplates "two of you", two persons of the assembly, not two apostles.
Ques. Does the reference in chapter 10 to the seventy mean expansion?
J.T. I suppose we have there the Lord shewing
{450}
the liberality of heaven in Himself, and how many men He could afford. In Gethsemane He made do with what He had, two here and there, for He was forsaken by them. In @1 Corinthians 15: 6 "he appeared to above five hundred brethren at once"; we wonder how they would be found, when we get only "about a hundred and twenty" names in @Acts 1: 15, well, we just have to accept the fact, that heaven acted liberally, though there is a shortage of men. Heaven's way means accuracy; it carries the thought into Peter's service, for he says, "And there went with me these six brethren also" -- @Acts 11: 12; he brought them to Cornelius's house; he discerned that he would be questioned; all these things should enter into our care-meetings, whom to use, what numbers, and what country we are dealing with.
Rem. There were more first born males in the children of Israel than Levites, @Numbers 3: 46.
J.T. There was a shortage of numbers.
Rem. I had an impression from C.A.C. as to them going on to the end.
J.T. I do not see how you work out shortness of numbers in the Levites, over the first born; it is very interesting, as every Levite is said to be a first born, @Hebrews 12: 23. The book of Numbers provides what is necessary; the name means "in the wilderness"; it was difficult times, and difficult work, and this applies to the work of the Levites, but they were helped there, and I think God is helping us. David reduced the age to twenty, instead of twenty-five or thirty, @1 Corinthians 23: 24. That means an apprentice could be used (that is one who may only have preached once, but he is not to get much, if anything, for it); still the work is done. In @Exodus 24 Aaron and his sons were not yet called priests, and "the youths of the children of Israel" had to carry on, @Exodus 24: 5.
Ques. Did Paul see potential value in Eutychus?
{451}
J.T. "His life is in him" (@Acts 20: 10), though he was only a boy; he is called that, as they brought him away alive; no multiplication of work as yet, but there were great potentialities.
Ques. Over against mere official status, would "and many others" (verse 3) leave scope for the exercise of love?
J.T. Very good and helpful.
Ques. Does Paul's word to Timothy apply, "do the work of an evangelist"? (@2 Timothy 4: 5).
J.T. It had to be done; quite so; and another thing as to him was the rekindling of "the gift of God which is in thee" -- @2 Timothy 1: 6, like John Mark, "for he is serviceable to me for ministry" -- @2 Timothy 4: 11; and rekindling is a great matter, if things are grown cold, and the brother is stirred up, then things are done well.
Ques. Is there a link between the number twelve and the administration of the assembly?
J.T. @Revelation 21 has more to say on twelve than any other chapter; it shews what is at the beginning of the millennial days; that is, the heavenly city is marked by great administration. The first eight verses of the chapter give very little of administration, but from verse 9 to the end is full of it, as if to say, the devil's work is more stressed than the work of God in the first part of the book, "a great red dragon ... his tail draws the third part of the stars of the heaven" -- @Revelation 12: 3 - 4, he has power up there; but chapter 21, especially from verse 9, alludes to the heavenly city coming down; the devil does not attack that.
Ques. Is the number twelve carried over into @Acts 20 in Paul's embrace of Eutychus (verse 10) and the disciples in verse 37?
J.T. Just so, and in chapter 19 we have the twelve disciples of John brought into Christianity; a good point, but unofficial. Now in @Acts 20 we see the
{452}
effectiveness of Paul's work, which is seen today; if it is not so, we had best not say much; but if so, like here, these seven men would be brought forward, and it all heads up to the Lord's supper, the point in mind, "And there accompanied him as far as Asia, Sopater son of Pyrrhus, a Berean; and of Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus, and Gaius and Timotheus of Derbe, and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus. These going before waited for us in Troas; but we sailed away from Philippi after the days of unleavened bread, and we came to them to Troas in five days, where we spent seven days. And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread, Paul discoursed to them, about to depart on the morrow. And he prolonged the discourse till midnight" -- verses 4 to 7. It is well worth carrying away with us, that this all leads up to the Lord's supper, and the thought of assembling; the word is here in verse 7, "we being *assembled* to break bread".
{453}
THE POWER OF THE SPIRIT
@Genesis 24: 1 - 6; @Genesis 61 - 65 (omitting last phrase); @Ephesians 3: 14 - 21
I read the verses in Ephesians, not to comment on them in detail, but that we should have in mind "the power which works in us", a phrase calculated to be found in such a scripture, for Ephesians must be regarded as the greatest of Paul's writings, and perhaps the greatest of the apostolic writings. We have to learn (one ventures to say) to place the apostle's writings in the first place in the holy book. They are written directly to the assembly. The gospels may be regarded as having a greater place, but from the standpoint of the divine way, Paul has the first place, and the other apostolic writers have their place following on in the order in which the New Testament has them. Those epistles written in prison should be regarded as superlative, and superlative in quality as well as in word. Paul's imprisonment was not only because of persecution, but was a requirement, and undoubtedly the Lord meant His servant to have a sabbath, not that he should enjoy the sabbath, but that his products should be refined, and so the prison epistles of Paul have the very first place in this sense, Ephesians above all, in which he tells us he is "less than the least of all saints" (@Ephesians 3: 8), the greatest moral statement one can think of, which should have a voice to anyone entering upon the service.
I have read from @Ephesians 3, not to comment upon it; it is too great, in one sense, for anyone to enlarge upon; its place is unequalled, written from Rome, from prison; it is a refining epistle. So I connect it with @Genesis 24, one of the most definite and complete chapters that the scriptures afford; I mean to say, of what I may call the *marital* chapters, for that is what it is, and it is a very long one. The personnel affords
{454}
such a matter for holy contemplation on this point, that one can hardly complete the chapter in the time.
We have now come, dear brethren, to the final time of the assembly service down here, and the feminine side of the service has been before us for a long time. In a word it is 'Christ and the assembly', as Paul says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly" -- @Ephesians 5: 32. I want to speak a few words to elevate the saints, our minds and our affections. The word I have quoted says, "according to the power which works in us". @Genesis 24 begins with Abraham, but it is calculated that he should make way for Isaac; as a type he may, and does, represent the Father, but types only go so far, and Abraham drops out in the chapter, and Isaac becomes the master of the servant, because the point is to bring out Christ and the assembly. So Abraham is old, indeed it is stressed in the patriarch, as it says, "And Abraham was old, and advanced in age; and Jehovah had blessed Abraham in all things. And Abraham said to his servant, the eldest of his house, who ruled over all that he had, Put thy hand, I pray thee, under my thigh, and I will make thee swear by Jehovah, the God of the heavens and the God of the earth, that thou take not a wife for my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I am dwelling; but thou shalt go to my land and to my kindred, and take a wife for my son Isaac. And the servant said to him, Perhaps the woman will not be willing to follow me to this land: must I, then, bring thy son again in any case to the land from which thou hast removed? And Abraham said to him, Beware that thou bring not my son thither again. Jehovah the God of the heavens, who took me out of my father's house, and out of the land of my nativity, and who has spoken to me, and who has sworn to me, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this land -- he will send
{455}
his angel before thee, that thou mayest take a wife for my son thence. And if the woman be not willing to follow thee, then thou shalt be quit of this my oath: only, bring not my son thither again. And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and swore unto him concerning that matter. And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed; now all the treasure of his master was under his hand" -- verses 1 to 10. Thus we have the two persons in mind, Abraham and his servant; not Eliezer as in chapter 15: 2, he is not called that here, he is too great for that. He is Abraham's servant here, and hence fits in with the greatness of the chapter. Hence we must be ready for great things. As I said the chapter deals with Christ and the assembly. Some bring in the Father and the Spirit in the Supper, but it really treats of Christ and the assembly. In speaking of the Lord's supper, it is to bring out that Abraham leads in the chapter, and the Lord's supper is at the end of it. We have to understand that the Lord's supper *is* the Lord's supper, and that it is a question of Christ and the assembly. And so it is the servant here; not Eliezer, but a great general position, having a person typifying the Deity, speaking with reverence. Abraham drops out, and the main theme is Christ and the assembly; and so the greatness of Abraham comes first, to give way to Isaac. The greatness of Abraham is stressed first in his age, and then in what he had, and then greatness in this servant and how he had all that Abraham had "under his hand"; he was "the eldest of his house, who ruled over all that he had". Presently Rebecca comes to mind, and as the servant proceeds in his work, he wonders at Rebecca; so we have, "And it came to pass before he had ended speaking, that behold, Rebecca came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother; and she had her pitcher upon
{456}
her shoulder. And the maiden was very fair in countenance; a virgin, and no man had known her. And she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up. And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray thee, sip a little water out of thy pitcher. And she said, Drink, my lord! And she hasted and let down her pitcher on her hand, and gave him to drink. And when she had given him enough to drink, she said, I will draw water for thy camels also, until they have drunk enough. And she hasted and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again to the well to draw water; and she drew for all his camels. And the man was astonished at her, remaining silent, to know whether Jehovah had made his journey prosperous or not" -- verses 15 to 21. He was wondering at her, for she shines peculiarly.
But I must speak of the power that carried her, this "power which works in us"; it is the nature of it, "the surpassing greatness" of God's power, @Ephesians 1: 19, the power by which Christ was raised from among the dead. So the camels must come in; there were ten of them, and what one would say here is, the impression left spiritually is, that one wonders at the peculiar kind of wealth attributed to Abraham and his house; what is it, but the power which works in us, working out the truth of Christ and the assembly? The "power which works in us" is superior to creature power, where there is graded power, which is not equal to resurrection power. We have to see what we are brought into, and what is available to us. It is this power, the wealth of Abraham, ultimately coming down to Isaac; one is pressed to lay it before the brethren; what the service of God is that we are going on with, what we are attached to; it leads us up to heaven. That is why I read @Ephesians 3; verse 14 reads, "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in the
{457}
heavens and on earth is named, in order that he may give you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man; that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts"; it is "*through faith*" because it is a faith system, "God's dispensation, which is in faith", @1 Timothy 1: 4; in Ephesians it is especially this; not what we see, but *faith*; so Paul says, "while we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen; for the things that are seen are for a time, but those that are not seen eternal" -- @2 Corinthians 4: 18; the power which works in us is in relation to that. I want the brethren to see what we are brought to; beset on all hands by what is around us, in the powers that be. God has almost reached His end, and one wonders whether we are alive to it: "Wherefore he says, Wake up, thou that sleepest, and arise up from among the dead, and the Christ shall shine upon thee" -- @Ephesians 5: 14; and that shining is to be "unto all generations of the age of ages. Amen". @Ephesians 3: 21. I just wonder if the brethren realize it, for it is no myth; these are verities, dear brethren, and we are about to be ushered into eternity, into the presence of Christ. The Spirit has been here all this time, but He is not taking us to heaven, Christ Himself is coming, the position is so great He has made us worthy, but we have to work these things out to verities, for working out this great matter of the assembly. How terrible for anyone to drop out of it; to even contemplate such a thing! What are you dropping out of, out of anything so great as the assembly; it is so great, it is the nearest to Deity, the nearest to God and to Christ; we are entitled to be there; sons of God; He has brought us near; "Joseph said to his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near" -- @Genesis 45: 4; so God Himself has brought us near, and the measure
{458}
of the nearness is as Christ is to the Father, for as He is, so are we.
To come again to my chapter; I am speaking of great things; I wish that I could speak with greater power and unction! This servant of Abraham's, the greatest in his house; it is the Spirit in Paul; and typically, the counterpart of Christ in this chapter of divine and eternal realities. What can one say in the midst of an eternal state of things (not millennial) when flesh and blood have passed away; "we are of his flesh, and of his bones" -- @Ephesians 5: 30; we shall be as He is in His body of glory, not simply in His body as raised; it is not here as in @Acts 1, but subsequent to that, as in @Philippians 3: 21, where it speaks of His body of glory, and we shall be changed into conformity to that; it is therefore suitable that we should come into this now, "in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God".
In speaking of the Holy Spirit, we are speaking of a divine Person. The three divine Persons have come into an economy; the second and the third have taken a relatively lower place than the Father. I am speaking of what is true, not merely abstractly in deity, but as having come into this place in the economy, They have come to do it. The Son is never said to have been sent from heaven as the Spirit was. It means His relative place. He is operating here, as seen in @Acts 13: 2, "the Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". He speaks there as a divine Person. I want our minds to be balanced; Christ is the truth, and the Spirit is the truth; God is working in us so that we should understand; we are so glorious; we are Sons of God, and of the assembly. The servant
{459}
wondered at Rebecca, "And the man was astonished at her, remaining silent, to know whether Jehovah had made his journey prosperous or not". We ought to learn to wonder at the assembly; what a vessel she is! -- "the mystery which has been hidden from ages and from generations, but has now been made manifest to his saints" -- @Colossians 1: 26; and we are part of her! yet we are humbled in so doing. What the assembly is in the mind of God! So you can see how this passage fits; the Spirit of God goes over the facts of the servant's mission, of Abraham's greatness, and Isaac's; it is a long chapter, but well worth going over. The more one goes over it, the more one finds. So the servant says, (verse 48) "And I stooped, and bowed down before Jehovah; and I blessed Jehovah, God of my master Abraham, who has led me the right way to take my master's brother's daughter for his son. And now, if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me; and if not, tell me; and I will turn to the right hand or to the left". Then verse 50, "And Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceeds from Jehovah: we cannot speak to thee bad or good"; they are subdued in their minds; the matter is from God, and that is all I can say in the presence of such great things, but to bow!
Now verse 61, "And Rebecca arose, and her maids, and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man". Her brother and her mother had found a way that would have kept her here ten days, but no! the servant says (verse 56), "Do not hinder me, seeing Jehovah has prospered my way: send me away, and I will go to my master" (that is Isaac). "And they said, Let us call the maiden and inquire at her mouth. And they called Rebecca and said to her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I will go. And they sent away Rebecca their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and his men". So that all is a
{460}
question of being sent; a question of the will of God. So Christ and the assembly is all a question of the will of God.
Well now for verse 61, "And Rebecca arose, and her maids, and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man. And the servant took Rebecca, and went away"; it is a question of the will of God, and of leadership and obedience too. Then verse 62, the well, "And Isaac had just returned from Beer-lahai-roi; for he was dwelling in the south country". Now we are coming to Isaac coming down, I would say. He is a man of leisure; not even coming in to a meal, but here a man of leisure, and one thinks of Christ, sitting on His Father's throne, not ruling over the nations, but coming from the well, a type of the Spirit; the camels speaking of the same thing, the power by which she takes the journey, and is about to finish it. It was the same well that Hagar had to do with, but here Christ is dealing with Israel's well. Verse 63 reads, "And Isaac had gone out to meditate in the fields toward the beginning of evening. And he lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold, camels were coming". Why should we be told this? It is not said that it is Rebecca he sees. There is a moral point in that, for it is not heaven yet, but on the way. "I will go", she had said, and now the camels came into view, *not* Rebecca. The Lord says, as it were, 'Look, what power is carrying you, what power is bringing you into fellowship!' Let us be challenged as to the power that holds us, these camels. Is she coming on a Presbyterian or a Church of England catechism? No, it is camels, as typical of the Spirit of God, and we each have to challenge our hearts as to the power that is carrying us. Isaac went out into the fields to meditate, "And he lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold, camels were coming. And Rebecca lifted up her eyes and saw Isaac, and she sprang off
{461}
the camel". We see how Christ is being occupied with the power that we are being carried on, but Rebecca is occupied with Christ; she knew the camels, there were ten of them, the servant had marvelled that she should give them all to drink, for they would each take so much! But she is now occupied with Christ; it is perfectly beautiful, and speaks of the service of God we are about to start on the morrow; it is still going on by "the power which works in us". "And the servant said, That is my master!" *Christ* is now the master; we are dealing with types, we must understand this. Christ is supreme at His supper; some may question it, but it is the truth. So the servant tells Isaac all that is in his heart. Well, dear brethren, I am speaking of "the power which works in us", and we are having part in it, and that we are about to come to the end of the journey. May the Lord bless His word!
{462}
THE LORD'S SUPPER A SIGN OF CHRISTIANITY
@Acts 2: 42 - 47; @Acts 20: 4 - 12
J.T. We can see in chapter 2 how the Lord's supper has a place from the outset of the dispensation. It became the subject of division and controversy, as is well known, and, no doubt, the Spirit intended the truth governing it should have a place from the very earliest. It had a place with the Lord Himself before He died. Matthew, Mark and Luke all give records of it, but it did not become the subject of doctrine till the Lord went to heaven, and the Spirit having come, we are told after Peter's address, "they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers. And fear was upon every soul, and many wonders and signs took place through the apostles¬ means. And all that believed were together, and had all things common, and sold their possessions and substance, and distributed them to all, according as any one might have need. And every day, being constantly in the temple with one accord, and breaking bread in the house, they received their food with gladness and simplicity of heart, praising God", -- verses 42 to 46, so there is the proof that the Lord's supper is placed among the brethren, and according to chapter 20, had a steady place, not only in their doctrine and their faith, but in the celebration of it. It had become a sign of Christianity. It had a place in the minds of the brethren, that is, the celebration of it. We all know how desecrated the thought became through the idolatry of Rome, and still remains so; but the Lord has revived the truth, and since then there has been almost steady controversy, which still remains; but the Lord is helping the brethren, and this will continue till the end. Chapter 20 of this book,
{463}
which we touched on yesterday, opens up the truth in a very full way, and the facts opened up in that chapter shew that the truth of the Lord's supper required progressive clarification. We have just the bare facts in the earlier chapters, that the breaking of bread was there, but later we have that Paul *discoursed* for a long time (a word that might darken our minds if we were not intelligent as to it), for there is the need for clarification; that is still necessary.
Ques. Does that bear on the breaking of bread being on "the first day of the week"?
J.T. I think that some progress had thus been made, and this is still open to the saints; we may have certain thoughts as to it to get adjusted even now. Paul must have been impressed with that fact, seeing that he discoursed till midnight.
Ques. Do we see the need for systematic teaching on the supper?
J.T. Yes, that is quite appropriate, for the book of the Acts is progressive. Luke began his second treatise by saying "all things which Jesus *began* both to do and to teach"; that is, the Lord Jesus had not finished doing them, so that the second treatise completes the matter, and besides we have Paul's communication as to it in 1 Corinthians.
Ques. Is the supper the rallying point for the saints?
J.T. Yes, and hence Paul says, "I speak as to intelligent persons" -- @1 Corinthians 10: 15; that we know how to apply it with intelligence; and another thing, it is marked in Paul's hands by the omission of certain things said in the gospels and adding other things; hence the position is particularly interesting and deserves observation, and above all, what Paul says, for he received them from the Lord, and delivered them to the saints at Corinth.
Ques. If Paul omitted certain things, should we do the same?
{464}
J.T. Exactly. If Paul were here now he might have to correct some of the things that we say. They did not seem to meet by any definite arrangement at Troas, but it was all in accord with the systematic movements implied in verse 2, "And having passed through those parts, and having exhorted them with much discourse, he came to Greece"; whether the discourse was as to the Lord's supper, we cannot say; "And having spent three months there, a treacherous plot against him having been set on foot by the Jews, as he was going to sail to Syria, the resolution was *adopted* of returning through Macedonia". That word "adopted" refers to the administrative way in which the apostle moved. Then we have these seven brothers from Europe and Western Asia, which we had yesterday, "And there accompanied him as far as Asia, Sopater son of Pyrrhus, a Berean; and of Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus, and Gaius and Timotheus of Derbe, and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus". There was evident deliberateness centring in Paul. And further, "These going before waited for us in Troas; but we sailed away from Philippi after the days of unleavened bread, and we came to them to Troas in five days, where we spent seven days. And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread, Paul discoursed to them, about to depart on the morrow". He was evidently moving in haste, yet with method, observing the time there might have been; so he remained seven days, then it says, "And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread, Paul discoursed to them, about to depart on the morrow. And he prolonged the discourse till midnight". It is quite clear things in his hands were spiritual and governed by right principles, for he was seven days there, and apparently seized the opportunity to celebrate the Lord's supper.
{465}
Ques. Why are the twelve mentioned in the three synoptic gospels?
J.T. The thought of administration enters into the Lord's supper through much controversy, which would arise, and witnesses would be needed. They would be authoritative witnesses if anything should arise, and so prevent it being a subject of constant controversy.
Ques. What is involved in the use of the word "discourse"?
J.T. It is used in contrast to the 'conversation' that came after the bread was broken; so we have "And he prolonged the discourse till midnight. And there were many lights in the upper room where we were assembled. And a certain youth, by name Eutychus, sitting at the window-opening, overpowered by deep sleep, while Paul discoursed very much at length, having been overpowered by the sleep, fell from the third storey down to the bottom, and was taken up dead. But Paul descending fell upon him, and enfolding him in his arms, said, Be not troubled, for his life is in him. And having gone up, and having broken the bread, and eaten, and having long spoken until daybreak, so he went away". The "long spoken" is 'conversed', but the conversational thought is somewhat different to the idea of "discourse". The Lord has greatly blessed such meetings as readings.
Ques. Is it unusual to have a word before the breaking of bread?
J.T. What I have said is the truth. The Lord foresaw much controversy over the supper. This long discourse is a kind of settlement of the matter, though no notes were taken. His discourse was at length, for the brethren must have been hazy.
Rem. And much adjustment was needed.
J.T. J.N.D. gave us much as to it.
{466}
Ques. Does the apostolic idea bring in control?
J.T. It would be Paul's control, for he has the last word.
Ques. What would this "treacherous plot" signify?
J.T. There have been many since on the same point. Some used to say that we broke bread in the land; the truth is, it is in the wilderness. The land is a spiritual idea.
Rem. Paul omits things, but he also adds things, "For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come". @1 Corinthians 11: 26.
J.T. Yes, it is to continue till He comes; some say that it may be until the millennium, but it is for the assembly in the wilderness.
Ques. What would Paul's cloak which he left behind at Troas signify? @2 Timothy 4: 13.
J.T. He speaks of the cloak and "the books" too; I connect them with the Collected Writings of J.N.D., yet that would not be enough. In the early days they used to break bread on ships, but that does not convey the idea of "all that *in every place*" (@1 Corinthians 2); that is a geographical place.
Rem. So that the discoursing is to us now, as it was to them then.
J.T. It stresses the local need, as at Troas. The word "assembled" refers to the local position; it includes all that were there.
Ques. Can we gather what would be involved for them in Paul's discourse "*to them*"?
J.T. I think it has the force of local teaching; it is a local position, as in Corinth; and it is always that, as far as I can see; it is not the universal position as we are assembled in a place. If it is for a fellowship meeting in London, it is *local*, not universal. @Acts 15 gives us the first and only universal gathering of the
{467}
assembly; the general church councils of Christendom had no place for the Spirit of God.
Ques. Does Paul reflect the Lord's mind as to the basic character of the order and truth of the Supper and its effect on the unity of the saints?
J.T. Yes; so he says, "thus I ordain in all the assemblies" -- @1 Corinthians 7: 17. The position at Jerusalem, such as is mentioned in @Acts 2, is metropolitan; it is the assembly in the singular; but in chapter 9: 31 it is in the plural. In chapter 18: 22 it says Paul "having gone up and saluted *the assembly*", that is the one at Jerusalem, as if the metropolitan idea was still there.
Ques. Would the references to "midnight" (verse 7), and to "daybreak" (verse 11), be instructive for us?
J.T. Yes, the discourse would break up the darkness there; those seven brethren would help the clarification of the saints.
Rem. Timothy was among them.
J.T. They all represent Paul's work.
Ques. Should the Berean help?
J.T. Very much. He would ask, and *insist* as to it, as to any point raised.
Ques. What do the references to the "first day of the week" and to the "assembling" mean for us?
J.T. They involve the displacement of what was still held, the sabbath, and the temple too. According to @Luke 24: 53, they "were continually in the temple praising and blessing God", but they never broke bread there; they broke bread "in the house" (@Acts 2: 46), which means *not* in the temple.
Ques. Did the saints need to be extricated from Judaism, even Paul himself?
J.T. Yes; even Paul had a vow; the seven disciples here would help to clarify the brethren.
Ques. Would the "breaking bread in the house"
{468}
be more a family idea, suggesting smaller companies?
J.T. Very beautiful that is to every heart who has been through the crises of the last forty or fifty years! Think of the number of loaves and glasses they had in the past! But only one is mentioned in scripture. There has been a gradual clearing of the matter. How clear things are now! Let us hold on to them, and see that we do not recede from it.
Rem. It is remarkable that it says "Paul descending fell upon him" (Eutychus).
J.T. Yes; he gave up the discourse for that purpose. The leading man in the ministry was so affected, and took a lead in the recovery of this boy. So the brethren want to be alive to what has taken place in the last fifty years, even in the collection.
Ques. Would this bear on the numbers of our young people today?
J.T. Yes; they are now allowed at the care meetings, and that helps them; but it was not always so. It has greatly augmented the increase of the gatherings. The Lord has greatly blessed the brethren generally, especially in these northern areas, and in New Zealand, and many parts, and He will still do so. He has saved us greatly from these devastating crises.
Rem. It says in @Acts 2: 47, "the Lord added to the assembly daily those that were to be saved".
J.T. Yes; "those that were to be saved", that is that saving kept pace with the gathering into the assembly.
Ques. So are we to know the steadiness of apostolic teaching in an ordered way?
J.T. So that in chapter 2, verse 42, it is protective; "And they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers". That means they were those that the Lord added to the assembly, not simply to meet their need, or what Moses had taught, but with a view to being taught by Paul.
{469}
Ques. Does that involve a further answering in us to the truth?
J.T. So Luke by the Spirit was laying down that Christianity was a progressive matter; then it was not complete, now it is. The authority of the apostles enters into all this, as we see in chapter 5: 4; and then there is this matter of the house (chapter 2: 46) that someone has already mentioned; the breaking of bread was never said to be in the temple; it is mentioned in verse 42 as a general fact, but in verse 46 it says, "And every day, being constantly in the temple with one accord, and breaking bread in the house", the note to "the temple"saying it was in the 'general buildings', not in the holiest; it was in the public buildings in contrast with the holy place; but it says they had the breaking of bread "*in the house*", to protect the thing itself, that it was a family matter.
Ques. Could we have help as to the four things that they persevered in? "The teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers"; what especially is the apostles¬ fellowship?
J.T. It is just that, as over against the general thought of fellowship; @1 John 1: 3 refers to it, "that which we have seen and heard we report to you, that *ye* also may have fellowship with us", the "with us" means the apostles, while the "ye" is the generality of the saints; "and our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ"; that is where the apostles¬ fellowship stood. It existed and continued in the holy writings; *now* we are all on the same footing.
Ques. Would "in the house" be John's line therefore, John being the family gospel?
J.T. It would; and it strengthens that thought that chapters 3 and 4 are Peter and John chapters, Peter, the apostolic side, and John, the family side.
Ques. Why is it called the "breaking of bread" and not the "Lord's supper"?
{470}
J.T. It means it is taken from the first part, the bread, but the name covers both parts; "we being assembled to break bread", the first element covers all as a formula.
Ques. Could we have help as to the Lord coming in at that point?
J.T. Yes; if He did. Conditions at Troas hardly permitted of that, and we do not have discourses like that now.
Ques. Does it mean that in @Acts 2: 46 they broke bread every day?
J.T. It has hardly developed into the first day of the week yet; "And every day, being constantly in the temple with one accord, and breaking bread in the house"; you mean that they actually did it every day; well, they may have done, but it is not the same as @Acts 20.
Rem. In @John 20 it is "the first day of the week".
J.T. It is to bring out the greatness of the assembly; it is what we had mentioned in prayer, what the Father has, and what the Son has.
Ques. Would "fear was upon every soul, and many wonders and signs took place through the apostles¬ means" (@Acts 2: 43), and having gone up in @Acts 20: 11 with the boy Eutychus alive, be both manifestations of divine power?
J.T. Power you mean in Paul and Eutychus, and looking for power and life in us; well, yes; Paul says, "Be not troubled, for his life is in him".
Rem. I meant power for the service of God.
J.T. The Lord says to John, "I am living to the ages of ages, and have the keys of death and of hades", @Revelation 1: 18. Surely that enters into it.
Ques. How would we approach our brethren in the systems to help them?
J.T. As to their being recovered, we do not see much from the preachings, but the work is going on,
{471}
as Paul says, "to the end that we may present every man perfect in Christ", @Colossians 1: 28. In the mind of God the work will be finished and we should be ready for it.
Rem. This boy would have a great place in the heart of Paul.
J.T. Well, "a living dog is better than a dead lion", @Ecclesiastes 9: 4.
Rem. It says, "they brought away the boy alive, and were no little comforted".
J.T. How affected they all would be especially the parents, as they took him away alive. You can see how the Lord would comfort them; it was a moral matter, rather than a physical one; how many are falling, and the mothers need comforting as to their boys, sitting in the window-openings!
Ques. Is the supper to recall the Lord personally?
J.T. Yes, in the memorial. Luke mentions it once; he is the only evangelist who does so, but Paul does so; he mentions it in relation to the cup too; this is very important, "in remembrance of me", or 'for a calling me to mind', is an outstanding point.
Ques. Why does Paul also connect it with the cup also?
J.T. To confirm the truth of the remembrance to us in the supper. The Roman Catholics have it, but the priests only have the cup. *We* have both; the Lord says, "Drink ye all of it", @Matthew 26: 27; the Roman Catholic priest says, No; it adds to their guilt and lying by so doing.
Ques. Would it be in order to give thanks to God for the cup?
J.T. We have not spoken of that yet. The cup is the second feature of the Lord's supper. The cup, we used to say, had the blood, and that was God's part, "the assembly of God, which he has purchased with the
{472}
blood of his own", @Acts 20: 28, that is Christ's blood. So Paul says, "that *the Lord Jesus*, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is *for you*" (which means it is only for the assembly): "this do in remembrance of me". And then "In like manner also the cup, after having supped" (that is the passover), "saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood: this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me" -- @1 Corinthians 11: 23 - 25. These are the words concerning the two emblems. The idea of God having part in it is not according to the wording of the Lord. Some say, why should the new covenant be referred to at all? There *is* a reference, and only a reference! It does *not* say we have part in the new covenant literally; we can only say it is in the drinking, not that we have part in the new covenant.
Ques. Does it not say in each case, "in remembrance of *me*"?
J.T. Well, it refers to Christ, as I see; not to the Father.
Rem. So the assembly has a double witness.
J.T. Just so.
Rem. We 'eulogise' the cup; the thing ascends in the thanksgiving.
J.T. Well.
Ques. Is "as often as ye shall eat" (verse 26) an additional feature?
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Do we have the thought of the Lord's coming to us, for we would love to have Him with us?
J.T. Yes; the whole matter is the Lord's, up to the point when we address the Father. We are said to be priests of Christ, as well as of God, in @Revelation 20: 6; it is our warrant to serve as priests at the Lord's supper. It gives us additional thoughts.
{473}
Ques. Would we refer to the sufferings of Christ at the supper?
J.T. I think it is right. Peter says, "the sufferings which belonged to Christ, and the glories after these" -- @1 Peter 1: 11; there is the question how much we should retain or eliminate in the supper. In the gospels we have the remission of sins mentioned, but not by Paul. We are obligated to keep to the words of Paul.
Ques. Does Paul stress the suitability of persons taking the supper?
J.T. Yes indeed; and he gives a strong warning if we disregard it; one is impressed with the place the supper has in this connection.
Ques. Would the sufferings of Christ be more connected with the passover?
J.T. Why should the Lord not have liberty to speak? It is *His* supper. Why not leave the wording of it to Him? "After he had suffered" and "before I suffer", we have both. "He presented himself living, after he had suffered", @Acts 1: 3; why not leave it at that? Isaac is so much stressed as a type, as we had yesterday. He stands related to Rebecca alone in @Genesis 24: 67; and in @Genesis 26: 8, he is seen dallying with her. So the Lord loves the thought of having us for Himself for a little while.
Rem. It is most helpful, not to get our thoughts in a rut!
J.T. Yes, to keep the truth loosely in our souls; not carelessly, but freely, like the twenty-fourth chapter of Genesis, which is a long chapter; we do not need to bind the truth in creeds.
Ques. Does the Song of Songs help us as to reciprocal affections?
J.T. I think it was intended for that. One has wondered why there is no mention of God in it, except "Jah" -- @Song of Songs 8: 6. It is a question of the bride and the bridegroom.
{474}
Rem. It is "*The* Song of Songs".
J.T. Yes, the only one for us, though "his songs were a thousand and five" -- @1 Kings 4: 32.
Rem. There is plenty of time for our occupation with the Lord Himself; we can dally with Him.
J.T. Yes, it is an English word that is not hard to be understood.
Ques. How do we begin in our thoughts as to the Supper? Is it in the light of @Luke 22?
J.T. I should say we begin with Paul; he is the last word. In @Luke 24: 30, the note says, "It has the sense of 'giving it into their hands', as a letter"; it shews the liberty that belongs to it. Chapter 24 shews what happened at Emmaus; He placed it in their hands, and vanished, as if to say, 'You will see me again, but it will be at Jerusalem', for it is a question of the assembly.
Rem. We hail Him as out of death.
J.T. Another thing comes up there. Paul gives us the appearings after the Lord arose in @1 Corinthians 15, and He appeared to him after He went to heaven. Luke speaks in @Acts 1 of His appearing *before* He ascended. "He appeared to *me* also", says Paul, @1 Corinthians 15: 8; that was after He had gone into heaven; and the position stands; He comes to *us*. Some say He can only do it by the Holy Spirit. We cannot restrict divine Persons. We know He comes, and we are satisfied.
