{1}
Pages 1 - 259-"Notes of Readings in New York" 1945 (Volume 165)
THINGS TO BE LAID HOLD OF
@Acts 3:11; @1 Timothy 6:12; @Philippians 3:11 - 14
I wish to speak of several things that, according to the passage of scripture I read, are to be *laid hold of*: if any have not laid hold of them, that they may do so; and those of us who have, that we may continue to hold them and explore them. The first is fellowship, the second is eternal life and the third is the calling on high of God.
Fellowship is involved in the passage I read from Acts. It has a distinctive place in that book and we read that the early converts *persevered* in it. The second chapter shows that there was a large number of converts; it was the firstfruits of the Spirit through apostolic preaching, Peter being the first to preach. According to Matthew he has the first place, "First, Simon". He had well nigh forfeited it, from outward appearances at least; but the Lord had laid hold of him when he was a fisherman and said He would make him a fisher of men, which he did. Peter as a disciple of Christ failed most seriously, but before he failed the Lord said "I have besought for thee". That is a very comforting thing. A failure is never to be excused, but if the Lord prays for us His prayer is heard, and He is said to be a great High Priest over the house of God, and we *have* Him: "having a great priest over the house of God, let us approach with a true heart", (@Hebrews 10:21.) Of course, He has us, but we have Him, and He is available as a Priest. He is a High Priest above and intercedes for us as Scripture says, "Who also intercedes for us", (@Romans 8:34.) The Holy Spirit also intercedes for us, and we are to intercede for one another. So that we can thank God for the wonderful
{2}
system of intercession we have, first what is in Christ, then in the Spirit and then in the saints. We are all thus wonderfully well off. But we are to avail ourselves of what there is, and having a great High Priest let us draw near; we can ask Him to help us, and He is ready to help us. He helped Peter; He said, "*I* have besought for thee that thy faith fail not", (@Luke 22:32.) So that Peter was secured for the service of God. The Lord had laid hold of him for it, and He would not let Him go; He secured Him. So that he stands up after the Holy Spirit came down from heaven and preached the first gospel recorded after the advent of the Spirit, with the greatest results of any that we know-three thousand persons They were genuinely affected, and we are told that they persevered in the leading Christian characteristics; they were real believers, convicted people who wanted to be saved, and Peter told them how to be saved. It is interesting to note the answer that he gave them as compared with the answer that Paul and Silas gave to the jailer. But Peter's converts, we are told, persevered in the apostles¬ teaching and fellowship and breaking of bread and prayers. That is the point I am thinking of in chapter 2.
In this chapter it is not three thousand, it is just one convert. If as much were made of each of the three thousand in chapter 2 as of this one, we should have, I may say, a whole Bible full of facts about them. But this single convert in chapter 3 has a great place. We do not get his name, but we do get what implies his name, that he was a persevering man. Peter and John were used of God for his conversion. God used the two greatest men on earth at that time to convert a man of no consequence whatever to the great men of the world of that day. He was a liability on the community; he sat at the gate of the temple asking alms. He was a liability and not a producer, and yet, as I said, heaven employed the two greatest men on earth at that time to convert this man, to secure him
{3}
for God. Peter says to him, 'I cannot help you on your own line'. There are those who want to come into christianity on their own terms, and to come into fellowship is under the Lord's control; the heavenly city has gates, and there are porters at the gates, and hence divine requirements must be met. Nor did this man get in on his own terms, on his own line. What was his line? Begging. Lameness marked him; begging marked him, his very look would imply the word 'beg'.
Peter says to him, "Look on us". They did not say what they might have said: We represent what is greatest in the universe; we represent God and Christ and the Spirit: salvation, eternal life, and the gift of the Spirit are available to all. They did not say these things to him. When the Lord Jesus began to preach He did not say these things. He said to His hearers, "The time is fulfilled and the kingdom of God has drawn nigh; repent and believe in the glad tidings", (@Mark 1:15) as much as to say, You will find out what is in it if you look into it. "Believe *in* the glad tidings", the Lord says: accept them as a whole and explore them. Peter and John did not tell this man everything; he is to deliver the message. Peter says, "Look on us.... Silver and gold I have not"; that is to say, 'I cannot deal with you on your own terms; I have no money and you are looking for money'. "Silver and gold I have not; but what I have, I give to thee", (@Acts 3:6).
A christian is not worth the name of christian if he has not something spiritual. Peter says 'Such as I have', not simply what God has or what Christ has, but what *I* have; he had something. He says, "In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene rise up and walk. And having taken hold of him by the right hand ..." He knew which hand to take; Peter uses his hand often; he was a fisherman. Now he takes hold of this man's hand, and the man
{4}
rose up and leaped and stood and walked and praised God. That is how this chapter presents the truth to us, and the verse I read is to show that this man was holding the persons whom God had used to bless him; he was *holding* them. You remember the man in the porch of Bethesda whom the Lord Jesus raised up: He said to him, "Take up thy couch and walk". The man went away with his couch and did not even know the Lord Jesus; he did not know where the Lord went, he could say very little about him. This man was different; he held Peter and John. You might say, perhaps John held him. He would if it were necessary, but it was not necessary; he represents an ardent convert, one who was genuinely converted, who is prepared to go in for all there is in the gospel and the consequences thereof. He was standing up holding these two men, and they were under fierce persecution. As the stormy blast of persecution struck them he stood by them, but in this verse it says he held them. He wanted to be identified with them in the fullest possible way. He was no mere nominal professor in fellowship; he was really in it and a contributor to the fellowship; he laid hold of it.
That is my first point. We are not worthy of the name of christian if we are not real christians. Think of this man after he arose and leaped and walked, with his ankle bones made strong, going off to a football match! It is impossible to think of him so inconsistent. Peter and John are my companions, he would say; the heavenly representatives, the servants of God. None of these other things are good enough for me, I belong to heaven; I want fellowship, I want the meetings and the Bible readings and the ministry. I belong to Christ, I am no earth-dweller. This man would not understand these things yet he would say, in effect, I am a genuine christian, I am thoroughly with these two men; I am holding Peter with my right hand and John with my left hand, as it were. He was a real testimony; he was the
{5}
cause of the persecution, but the religious authorities could not deny the power that raised that man.
Let us face these things as to what christianity is to us, as to whether or not we are shams. This man held the apostles. Think of the space the Spirit of God gives to one man! There were three thousand converts in the previous chapter but as we have said, the space given to them is very small indeed. As John says of the Lord, "There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if they were written one by one ... not even the world itself would contain the books written". So that there is very little said comparatively, of the three thousand, but this is said of them, that they "persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers". What a contrast that is to those who give up the breaking of bread, to those who tell their brethren, I am withdrawing! Withdrawing from what? Withdrawing from God and heaven. They might as well say, I am turning my back on God, because that is what they are doing. But this man's face is towards heaven. In a sense there was not a more interesting man in the whole city of Jerusalem than this man at that time. All the people saw him; what a testimony he was! He had been well known before; but the idea of the truth and the fellowship is that whereas he had been the subject of sin, now he is the subject of the work of God. He was true to the position locally and to the responsibility attaching to it; he held Peter and held John, meaning that he was thoroughly in fellowship; as Ruth said to Naomi, "Thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God; where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried".
These two men represented Jesus Christ, the despised, the rejected One, and this man says, They are my companions. The point now is whether *we* are availing ourselves of this fellowship, holding to it. What kind of a fellowship is it? The first letter to the Corinthians gives
{6}
us its characteristics, as also John's first epistle. It is the fellowship of God's Son. Jesus Christ our Lord. Are you going to leave that fellowship? There is no greater folly than that. It is the fellowship of God's Son and God has called you into it. Think of the privilege and protection of it, the joy and the life of it; the fellowship of God's Son and the fellowship of the brethren! Can I afford to be without the brethren? Can I afford to make little of them if I am professedly one of them? If I do, the Lord is stronger than I; and He is jealous if I am making little of His fellowship, that into which I am called.
The next thing is eternal life as spoken of in @1 Timothy 6. Now the subject of eternal life is one of the most important in the Scriptures. It is spoken of very early- the tree of life is an allusion to it. The tree of life was not guarded at the outset, nor was the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; but after Adam and Eve transgressed they were driven out of the garden and the Cherubim and a flaming sword were set towards the east of the garden of Eden to guard the way to the tree of life, lest they should return and eat of the tree of life and live forever in their sins. It would be a disaster. God says, It must not be. Let no-one think he can have eternal life on those lines. Adam and Eve were driven out from the garden and from the tree of life; they could never get back as they were. Man can only be recovered by death, and the Lord Jesus has come into this works to resolve the great question of good and evil; He dies and brought life and incorruptibility to light through the gospel.
John makes much of that in saying that God so loved the world. It seems as though when John got to that theme in the chapter, he said I will stop here; I must stop here and dwell on this wonderful theme of love. Verse 14 of chapter 3 is a wonderful text: "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, thus must the Son
{7}
of man be lifted up, that every one who believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal". That is the first thing-"as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness". In the wilderness people were dying all around; their carcasses were strewn there because of man's will; they had refused the pleasant land. The gospel of heaven was preached to them, the gospel of the land, and their hearts became hardened. They hardened them. Let no one here be on that line of hardening his heart; "Harden not your hearts", it says in @Hebrews 4: It is within your range to harden your heart; the devil helps by worldliness, by earthly mindedness, so that the heart becomes stony; the meetings of the brethren thus become affected if attended in a perfunctory way. You are responsible for it if your heart becomes hardened. That was how it stood with the children of Israel, and so God says to them, 'Not one of those persons who have seen My signs in Egypt shall enter into My land except two men, Caleb and Joshua'. Two men out of six hundred thousand! Those who died in the wilderness did not get the dignified name of 'bodies'; it says "their carcasses" were strewn there. That is the impression of heaven, the reproach of the name of carcasses for those who fell in their lawlessness, in disregard of the gospel of God in the Wilderness.
But now God says, I will make a way of life; they are not all to die in the wilderness, the children are going in. One generation passes away and another comes; "These shall go away", says the Lord, "into eternal punishment, and the righteous into eternal life", (@Matthew 25:46.) Which way will you go? As to the generation that follows, God says in mercy, the children shall go in; there is a promise to the children. And God says, I will lift up this brazen serpent; the word 'serpent' meaning that God is dealing with the evil at its source. So with the city whose situation was good but its water bad, Elisha deals with the source. He says, "Bring me a new cruse, and put salt in
{8}
it", (@2 Kings 2:20 - 22) and he casts it in at the source of the waters, and they were healed. God says, I must judge sin at its source; so He told Moses to make a serpent of brass and put it on a pole. Everyone could see that serpent of brass from the uttermost limits of the camp; it was on a pole, "lifted up", as Jesus was. Three times the Lord says in John that He would be lifted up -- what for? He was lifted up as Jesus to bear sins. "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, thus must the Son of man be lifted up, that every one who believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal" (@John 3:14 - 16).
This matter of eternal life as set out in Timothy is not simply an objective matter that you believe and have it objectively; but it is within your range. As Paul wrote to Timothy, "Lay hold of eternal life", (@1 Timothy 6:12) John says eternal life is in Christ Jesus, it is in the Son; that is to say, it is in a sure position, but it is not so put here. In this setting you may, as it were, put your hand out and take it. Of course this is a spiritual transaction. Why should I be spiritually dead when eternal life is within reach? In verse 19 of the same chapter the apostle says, "Lay hold of what is really life". These are most important matters, dear brethren that I am bringing before you, as to fellowship, and as to eternal life, and the purposes of God. Let us be real, let us be transparent. We read in Revelation of those that had gained the victory over the beast standing on a sea of glass, having harps of God. Why did they have harps and sing? Because they had overcome; they had overcome the beast and his image and the number of his name. They were men of energy, and they have harps and sing the song of Moses and the song of the Lamb, @Revelation 15:2, 3. They are standing on the sea of glass triumphantly, they are victorious. God is pressing upon His people the
{9}
reality of the present moment: we are coming to the very limit of the dispensation, we are going to heaven in a moment, and He wants to take us up as those that please Him. Enoch had the testimony that he pleased God, and we all need to find out whether we are walking according to God and for his pleasure as we are about to be translated.
Well now, there is the third point in mind, "the calling on high of God". In (@Philippians 3:11 - 14) the apostle says: "if any way I arrive at the resurrection from among the dead. Not that I have already obtained the prize, or am already perfected; but I pursue, if also I may get possession of it, seeing that also I have been taken possession of by Christ Jesus. Brethren *I* do not count to have got possession myself; but one thing -- forgetting the things behind, and stretching out to the things before, I pursue, looking towards the goal, for the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus". This requires the greatest effort of all -- that is the idea, it is energy exercised with a definite purpose. It is something before me that I see and earnestly want to reach. That is the language of this passage. The point to be attained is the resurrection from among the dead. You say I can hardly take in how a man can reach or attain to the resurrection from among the dead; one must die before he can reach that; but Paul is speaking of what is attainable while he was still alive in his body. If we do not understand it, let us ask the Lord who gives understanding in all things. What did Paul have in his mind when he tells us that he died daily? "Daily I die", he says, "by your boasting which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord", (@1 Corinthians 15:31.) And again he says that in their tribulation in Asia, "We were excessively pressed beyond our power, so as to despair even of living. But we ourselves had the sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not have our trust in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead; who has delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver; in
{10}
whom we confide that he will also deliver", (@2 Corinthians 1: 8 - 10.) Think of the man who is speaking to us. He tells us, "I know a man in Christ". I wonder if we all know a man in Christ? Do I know a man in Christ? I just put that question simply. It is not in the second or third person, it must be myself. There is no other way of knowing a man in Christ but by knowing him to be yourself; it is *conscious* knowledge, see note on @2 Corinthians 12:2. It is a subjective condition, and you can only be understood subjectively. He said, "I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago, (whether in the body, I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows;) such a one caught up to the third heaven ... caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable things said which it is not allowed to man to utter". (@2 Corinthians 12:2 - 4.) It was indeed an extraordinary experience, but Paul for God's wise purpose was privileged to be the man to have it. And he says, I know that man.
And then he speaks in the passage before us here of laying hold of the resurrection, attaining to it, "if any way I arrive at the resurrection from among the dead". He means laying hold of it. The early christians understood what ecstasy meant. They set before us conditions that are possible, that is on the principle of laying hold of them, and it is what you get there; "if any way I arrive at the resurrection from among the dead;" that I might sense, even if but for a moment, what passing out of death into life is. I cannot define it to you, nor can anybody define it to you; in the same sense, you cannot define love, you have to realise it yourself and show it. It implies definiteness of purpose -- of laying oneself out for something to be supremely desired. So the apostle goes on, "Not that I have already obtained the prize ... but I pursue, if also I may get possession of it, seeing that also I have been taken possession of by Christ Jesus". The apostle's thought was to lay hold "of the calling on high
{11}
of God in Christ Jesus" not as a matter of light simply, but the apprehension and realisation of it in a spiritual way. The athletic figure expressed in stretching out, pursuing, looking towards the goal speaks strikingly of the reality of the apostle's experience. The goal when reached involved the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus. He saw Christ as He is now. He saw the Lord Jesus as He is in heaven. He says If I have known Christ after the flesh, I do not know him thus anymore; this is Christ up there, and we are to see Him up there now, apprehend Him as there. John says, "What we shall be has not yet been manifested; we know that if it is manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is". John comes near to Paul in this statement.
The great apostle, however, is admitting in Philippians that he had not come *practically* to the heavenly position of Christ to his own satisfaction; but he had had a glimpse of it; he says, "Have I not seen Jesus our Lord?" He had appeared to him, and Paul says, in effect, I would like to apprehend Him more clearly. He was not satisfied even with what he knew; there was more, so he goes on, "Brethren, *I* do not count to have got possession myself; but one thing -- forgetting the things behind, and stretching out to the things before, I pursue, looking towards the goal, for the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus" This is how he leaves us. With him this exercise would be continuous; he was like an athlete, indeed he uses that very symbol. Do I exercise myself like a man getting up in the morning and taking physical exercise? Paul sees the goal clearly, but he says, I am not at it, as still here it is a question of spiritual attainment as well as of light. No one who has not the Holy Spirit can understand this; the calling of God is not theirs, but it is ours in title, and the apostle Paul is telling us how we may attain to it. We want to get into that race. He says, there is a goal I am aiming at, but I have not reached it yet. Then he speaks of "the
{12}
prize"; the goal is the athletic mark, the goal is not the prize, the prize is mine as I reach the goal. The goal is the point fixed in the race; the prize is "the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus". What a wonderful thought! The apostle tells us later in this chapter that the Lord Jesus is coming to transform out bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto His body of glory. That literally involves the prize. To reach that now is full christianity, the great objective for the believer. It calls for putting out the hand in the way of energy and aiming at things. If you do not reach them -- keep on. It is continual exercise that brings about the result -- "the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus".
{13}
LISTENING TO CHRIST
@Luke 10:39
In Mary is seeing a person who has a sound mind, and she is using it; she is sitting at the feet of Jesus, hearing His word. That is what I want you to recognise. You can use your mind in no better way than listening to Christ. We are living in a day of many books; it is the printing age; but books have been used to shut out Christ from the mind. The mind must certainly be fed, but God has given us a right mind, and that mind must be ministered to. But how ministered to? I think you see it in Mary. Supposing you had come to Mary with a novel as she sat at the feet of Jesus, what would she have thought of you? She would have said to you, No product of man's mind can minister to mine, you cannot feed my mind with that; you may feed the swine with that. The prodigal in the far country "he longed to fill his belly with the husks which the swine were eating", but he was not satisfied. Mary was not going to feed upon that; she had a divinely given mind, it was a right one, and she would feed it on Christ. It was not simply that He was saying something to her. She was listening to what he was saying; if He spoke to Martha, she heard it; or if He spoke to Lazarus she heard it. You want to hear every word of Christ, not only what He has to say to you. It is a question of the mind; the divinely given mind has to be ministered to, and the Lord Jesus has spoken, and is speaking, and the thing for us is to listen to what He is saying. There are many voices in the world; there is the pulpit, and the platform, and the press; but if you have a right mind, you will listen alone to Christ. What does Mary learn from Christ? Do you think the Lord would limit anything -- do you think He would hold anything back from one who listened to Him? No; it was the delight of His heart to speak in her hearing all that was in His mind.
{14}
Oh, beloved, think of the mind of Christ! -- think of the infinite richness of the mind, coming out from the Father, freighted with all the Father's affections in the one hand, and with all the Father's thoughts on the other hand! She was listening to what He was saying. He came out from God to make known what was in the mind of God; He was opening up that, and Mary is singled out by the Spirit as the example of a right-minded person, and the proof of it is that she listened to Christ. That is simple christianity -- to listen to Christ.
May we then be like Mary -- restful. I would remind you of the beautiful touch in @John 11. Of Mary it is said, She "sat in the house"; she had a habit of being quiet. Whilst Martha rushed out to meet the Lord, Mary remained till He called for her: "The teacher is come and calls thee". May the Lord give us that restfulness of spirit, and then to listen to what He is saying.
{15}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD (1)
@Romans 1:1 - 7; @Romans 5:1 - 5, 20, 21; @Exodus 19:1 - 6
J.T. It is thought well to look into the subject of the kingdom of God. It may seem odd that in connection with the kingdom of God we should read from a book that mentions it formally only once -- in chapter 14. References to the kingdom in the epistles as compared with the gospels are very few, but this apparent difficulty is because the epistles treat directly of the kingdom of God as it is in its present form, and that the thing *exists*, whereas the gospels contemplate it as in the future; that is yet to come. The Lord taught the disciples to pray, saying "... thy kingdom come", @Luke 11:3; and He preached that the kingdom of the heavens was at hand, @Matthew 4:17 Later however, He told the Jews that the kingdom of God was in the midst of them, @Luke 17:21; but this alluded to His own presence there. But the epistles, as was remarked, contemplate it as existent in the saints, Christ being in heaven and the Holy Spirit being on earth. That is the reason, it is thought, for the paucity of the mention of the kingdom in the epistles: that it actually exists, not only in Christ but also in the saints; not in name only but in substance and character, Christ being in heaven and the Holy Spirit being on earth. In no scripture is it more treated of than in Romans, and that is why these three scriptures in that epistle were read. Chapter 1 brings in the King Himself; that is, from the standpoint of His relations with David. In this sense it corresponds with Matthew, for Matthew begins with Him in this relation: "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham". (@Matthew 1:1). And when we come to the genealogy David is mentioned as "the king". Romans speaks of Christ's identification with David: "... come of David's seed according to flesh, marked out Son of God in power, according to the
{16}
Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection of the dead", verses 3, 4. So that His kingship is implied -- the Son is King -- which is according to @Psalm 2; and then the epistle treats of the principles of the kingdom. In chapter 14 the kingdom of God is mentioned to bring out its characteristics -- "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit". In the early part of the book the principles of the kingdom are in mind. Much more is in mind than indicated in what has been read, so that we may need another reading on this book. It is thought now that practicalness of the thing should be seen, and that is worked out in the early part both as to sins and sin; how the principles of the kingdom are resolved -- how sin and righteousness are resolved -- making way for the Holy Spirit. And we shall do well, I think, to confine ourselves as much as possible to the initial thoughts indicated, especially as to the principles; for it is in these that we are defective.
A.N.W. Will you link that with the verse in Exodus?
J.T. The working out of the kingdom in Exodus is, in principle the same as it is in Romans. The kingdom is assumed to be there in chapter 19. It is indeed assumed in chapter 15 where we have the celebration of victory in the overthrow of the Egyptians. Jehovah is formally alluded to as King there, but the song involves the kingdom; the effect of it is in what God had done. He was a Man of war and what He had done is brought out. War is waged. It needed to be waged, so as to reach the ground of the kingdom. We are out of Egypt, and then the kingdom is seen in the song, and in chapter 19 God says, "Ye have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, and how I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself"; and then He speaks of what His proposals are: much as to principle in the covenant and what follows, involving obedience. The whole point in the initial features is the question of
{17}
obedience; and that greatly enters into our circumstances in this day and generally too.
D.R. You spoke of the help it might be to the young to consider this subject. Is it not remarkable that they are only three months out of Egypt when God proposes this to Israel?
J.T. That brings up the question of time, which is carefully observed in the types; whereas, in the New Testament time is not a prime matter; that is, the formal mention of it. It is remarkable how few actual dates are given; so that the idea would be that we are to know that the things mentioned have happened; not when a certain thing happened, but that it has happened. In Matthew and Luke, following the Old Testament, there are dates relative to the birth of the Lord and the beginning of His ministry, these being based on the lives of certain officials, but in the other gospels and the Acts and epistles there is very little said as to time.
R.W.S. Do I understand there is a state amongst us, which at this time requires this ministry of the kingdom?
J.T. Well, it has been inferred that there is such a state -- a state of disobedience, especially in the young, and in some of the sisters. But that will have to come up in time. You can see in the types how formally it was stated. The time is given; the third month after they came out of Egypt. They had departed from Rephidim, that is, after the incoming of the Spirit typically. They came to the wilderness of Sinai, which is to be heard of later, because the law is given there. They encamped in the wilderness, meaning they are taking up a position suitable for the moment. "And Israel encamped there before the mountain", (@Exodus 19: 2.) These things are to be noted. "And Moses went up to God, and Jehovah called to him out of the mountain, saying. Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel: Ye have seen what I have done to the Egyptians,
{18}
and how I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself. And now, if ye will hearken to my voice indeed and keep my covenant, then shall ye be my own possession out of all the peoples -- for all the earth is mine -- and ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation. These are the words which thou shall speak to the children of Israel", verses 3 - 6. Then, of course, we know what follows. The people profess to be obedient and God goes on with them on that principle. So it is always: if He is to go on with us there must be something in the nature of a covenant or agreement, or, as it were, a vow, a profession of fealty to God. I think all this is very important to keep before us.
C.A.M. You referred earlier to the King Himself, as seen in @Romans 1; there is an expression in 1 Timothy, "King of the ages", alluding to God Himself. How would you connect that with the subject in hand?
J.T. I expect that will need to be in the last reading!
C.A.M. That is a long way ahead.
J.T. Do you not think yourself it should be put off?
C.A.M. Well that impresses me with the fact that the passage is a very wonderful feature of our subject.
J.T. Quite so; but the reference you make to king-ship in @Romans 1 is to be carried forward, because of the relation with David; "... come of David's seed according to flesh", meaning the line is there from that point of view. The line is to be set up in this Person. And then it says, "... marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead". The King is equal to the position. He is a divine Person, but a divine Person in sonship; in that relation He is King. But it is a question now of the kingdom in its present form and, therefore, it is not Jesus Christ our King, but Jesus Christ "our Lord". There are those who own Him to be that; not simply that God says He is that, but He is owned to be that -- our Lord. That is the profession every one of us should
{19}
make, and when we are converted we do make it. We confess "Jesus as Lord".
A.R. In @Acts 2 Peter says God has made Him Lord and Christ.
J.T. That is what God has done, and then the Spirit has come down. "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which ye behold and hear", (@Acts 2:33.) That is the establishment of the kingdom here on earth, because the Person here on earth is equally divine. He is equal with the Lord in heaven.
C.N. The disciples asked the Lord, "Is it at this time that thou restorest the kingdom to Israel?" His answer was, "It is not yours to know times or seasons, which the Father has placed in his own authority; but ye will receive power, the Holy Spirit having come upon you". Does that indicate how the kingdom is set up at the present time?
J.T. Yes. The stress is laid, as you have often observed, on the Spirit. The disciples wanted to know about the kingdom, whether it should be restored to Israel. They would be thinking just of what had been before; that is, in David and others. But the Lord's word is, as seen here, "It is not yours to know times or seasons, which the Father has placed in his own authority; but ye will receive power, the Holy Spirit having come upon you", (@Acts 1:7,8.) That is the point. They might have questioned the Lord and said. Well, we want to know definitely. We often hear such questions in readings, whereas it is not always wise to break things up. The Lord did not break up the subject that they introduced. He said that it is the Father's matter. He could have said to them. You are thinking of yourselves and your own kingdom; whereas there is something else. It is a universal matter; the kingdom *of God*,  not the kingdom of Israel. That is what is before us now.
{20}
A.N.W. In that way, is "Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness" over against David's seed "according to flesh"? Is that how it stands in @Romans 1?
J.T. Just so. It brings in holiness; no doubt to lay the basis for the truth of the Son of God. He was "the holy one of God", according to Peter's confession of Him in @John 6, which implies that He was the High Priest. And now it is the Spirit of holiness, which involves the service of God, opened up in Hebrews.
A.R. In @Exodus 19 it is a kingdom of priests.
J.T. Just so. That was God's thought. He told Moses to say to Pharaoh, "Let my son go, that he may serve me", showing how these thoughts were in God's heart, but we do not get everything at once. Things have to be deferred often, and that enters into what the Lord said to the disciples in @Acts 1, but He added, "But ye will receive power, the Holy Spirit having come upon you, and ye shall be my witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth", verse 8. The point is "my witnesses"; not your kingdom, nor the kingdom restored to Israel, but what the Lord Jesus will do; what He is to say; what is to be said about Him. Therefore, our epistle reads, "Paul, bondman of Jesus Christ, a called apostle, separated to God's glad tidings, (which he had before promised by his prophets in holy writings,) concerning his Son" -- concerning Jesus; that is the point, and the disciples should start with that.
Question. Would the features of the kingdom come to light now in persons who are subject to the Spirit?
J.T. Yes; but that will come up in the first passage read in chapter 5. Before it we must consider the question as to obedience, "... for obedience of faith among all the nations, among whom are *ye* also the called of Jesus Christ" -- the *kind* of obedience, the
{21}
obedience of *faith;*  not what will accrue from the millennial testimony. That will be a question of sight, but now it is obedience of faith.
A.B.P. Do the principles of the kingdom apply to our every sphere and relationship of life?
J.T. I think so; that, I hope, will come out. As we open up the hortatory part of the epistle I think we shall see that the various spheres of responsibility are in mind. There is one thing one might say, and that is that the household position is not raised much in Romans, although the basis for it is there.
A.N.W. How does the kingdom authority stand in relation to assembly authority?
J.T. I would say that really belongs to Corinthians. I believe we shall find that that is the way the truth stands there -- how the kingdom affects the assembly. The assembly is the prominent thought. The kingdom is subservient to that, as we shall see in the Corinthian epistles. We hardly get the assembly in this epistle, except in the end where it is spoken of as a mystery. The assembly is just touched on. Otherwise it is only seen in chapter 12; as in the sense of "one body in Christ"; it is not exactly the body of Christ; the "one body" is seen later.
F.S.C. Would there be a difference between what Paul preached in Damascus and what he preached in Rome? He preached in Damascus directly that Jesus is the Son of God.
J.T. He was not under commission then, although in Galatians he says, "God ... was pleased to reveal his Son in me, that I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations", chapter 1:16. That agrees with what he preached at Damascus, but you can hardly say he was under commission until he and Barnabas set out from Antioch as seen in @Acts 13. But as we have said, his preaching in Damascus was in accord with his epistle to the Romans.
{22}
J.T.Jr. Is he a model subject of the kingdom in that he alludes to his bondmanship?
J.T. Just so. It shows it marked himself. The word 'bondman' conveys not simply a servant, but a slave.
A.A.T. Obedience of faith in Romans: I can understand that in connection with the initial work of God in a soul, but do you apply it all through one's life?
J.T. Certainly. Faith must run right through until the time of sight comes, which is after we are raised from the dead; when we are raised from the dead literally. Even resurrection in a spiritual sense is on the principle of faith in Colossians: "raised ... through faith of the working of God", (@Colossians 2:12.) So that the time of faith does not cease until we are raised from the dead literally. It is a faith period, and so in the beginning of Acts it is said that the disciples saw the Lord go up: "And having said these things he was taken up, they beholding him, and a cloud received him out of their sight", verse 9. That is the beginning of the faith period. It is not sight any more; I mean literal sight: "they beholding him"; He is taken out of their sight. Now He is seen by faith. It is on the principle of faith by the Spirit.
J.W. Do you think @Romans 16 gives a list of persons marked by obedience of faith? Paul says, "For your obedience has reached to all", verse 19.
J.T. Yes. And so here his apostleship was for "obedience of faith among all the nations, among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ", (@Romans 1:5, 6.) This implied that the Romans had faith. They are addressed as already having faith, and hence in the kingdom. Now, you are quoting chapter 16: "For your obedience has reached to all". That was a prime point; the thing existed that he was preaching. He is, therefore, simply opening up what exists in the principles of the kingdom.
D.R. What place has the Spirit in relation to this
{23}
obedience? The Spirit is given to all that obey Him. What relation has that with the kingdom?
J.T. That leads to chapter 5. If the brethren are clear we will pass on to that chapter: "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us", verse 5. It is a present thing. But it has to be understood. The epistle is to enlarge on what already existed. The kingdom was a real thing at Rome, but every item of it is enlarged on in this epistle.
A.R. "No one can say. Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit", (@1 Corinthians 12:3.) Is that the same idea?
J.T. That is the same idea only it is connected with the assembly in Corinthians.
F.H.L. Are you considering this thought of obedience as to the King Himself? @Psalm 45 brings out evidences of this.
J.T. Quite so. "He is thy Lord, and worship thou him". We are not only to be subject to Him, but to worship Him.
F.H.L. I was wondering if these features of obedience of the bondman take character from the Head of the kingdom. Are we to carry that in mind throughout?
J.T. I am sure that is true. Headship is worked out of what is exemplary. The Lord Himself was a bondman, and we learn bondmanship from Him, but I would say it is in the sense in which He is exemplary of the divine traits. So that it says, for instance, in chapter 15: "But we ought, we that are strong, to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves. Let each one of us please his neighbour with a view to what is good, to edification. For the Christ also did not please himself; but according as it is written. The reproaches of them that reproach thee have fallen upon me", verses 1 - 3. That is the way we arrive at headship -- what is exemplary in Christ, in me. Viewed as Man He is the subject One. He exemplifies subjection. He leads in it.
{24}
D.R. Is Peter speaking of this feature of the kingdom when he says the saints are elect by sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, @1 Peter 1:2?
J.T. Quite so; it supports what we are saying. Now, before we get to the idea of the Spirit in chapter 5, we have to touch a little on righteousness, as leading in the principles of the kingdom; how the matter of righteousness is worked out. In the kingdom we have the solution of moral things and righteousness stands first as we see in chapter 14, as already noted. It is introduced in Genesis, and it is carried through here in Abraham and David. They are exemplary of this point and hence the whole matter of the gospel comes up in chapters 3 and 4, because it is a question of the solution of things; how the thing is verified in the kingdom and is enforced too, in power. It is seen by example; seen in Abraham and David, and now in the Roman Christians. They themselves are examples of it.
C.A.M. Would it be right to ask now about the moral questions you alluded to -- the matter of sins and sin?
J.T. Yes; they are involved in the principles of the kingdom. We have already touched on righteousness. We have it in chapter 1. Paul says there, "I am not ashamed of the glad tidings; for it is God's power to salvation, to every one that believes, both to Jew first and to Greek: for righteousness of God is revealed therein, on the principle of faith, to faith: according as it is written. But the just shall live by faith", verses 16,17. Here the great principle of faith is brought up, known and witnessed to in the Old Testament. It is brought forward from Habakkuk: "The just shall live by his faith", (@Habakkuk 2:4.) Salvation is bound up with righteousness by faith, all working out in the glad tidings. Righteousness is revealed in the glad tidings. Wrath of God is also *revealed* -- not in the glad tidings, but from heaven. We have to stop to think of those things. Chapter 2 is the
{25}
question of *man*. That has to be touched on. "Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, every one who judgest, for in that in which thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the same things", verse 1. In this chapter we have some light as to man; the race, not the Jews. It is, "O man". They were given up to judging one another. The Greeks, for instance, became critics of the whole race and others were barbarians. All bears on the subject of the kingdom. This question of man is a matter of importance, because we have to preach it. We belong to the human race. We are not Jews. We are apt to be as natural men, given to judgment of one another; hateful and hating one another. The kingdom of God meets these conditions. The next thing is the question of righteousness; how every man is brought in guilty; the matter is solved in part in every one being brought in guilty.
A.B.P. Do the glad tidings bring in a totally different character of righteousness, the righteousness of God being something entirely new, in the glad tidings?
J.T. Yes. And so the point of righteousness taken up in chapter 3 is after the Jew is brought in. We have, "If thou art named a Jew", chapter 2:17. And in verse 29 we are told who the true Jew is. And in chapter 3 we have the enquiry, "What then is the superiority of the Jew?" That is a question to be touched on, too. It is important because the Jew has been thrust into peculiar prominence among the nations lately. In chapter 3 he is with every man brought in guilty before God. This makes way for the gospel, thus it is said, "But now without law righteousness of God is manifested, borne witness to by the law and the prophets; righteousness of God by faith of Jesus Christ towards all, and upon all those who believe", (@Romans 3:21, 22.) So that this is the prime fundamental of the gospel -- how this is effected. It is being resolved -- the question of this kind of righteousness.
{26}
R.W.S. Why is it 'of'? It is not by faith *in* Jesus Christ, but by faith *of* Jesus Christ.
J.T. It is that kind of faith; the believer being in that. The faith is linked up with Jesus Christ. It is through faith in His blood. That is, the blood is an object of faith.
C.A.M. In that way, our side of the faith question is dealt with more in the next chapter, is it not?
J.T. That is right, because in Abraham and David we come to the thing worked out, but in chapter 3 it is set out from God's side, but the element of faith must be interwoven in the matter.
C.A.M. Would you say another word as to the righteousness of God? It is one of the main thoughts that God has resolved this question of righteousness Himself.
J.T. That is right. It begins in verse 21. It can be said in the millennium that a person acquires righteousness and salvation just through Christ, without saying anything about the faith of Jesus Christ. That word 'of' and the faith connected with it is a feature of our dispensation. It makes much of our dispensation that this is stressed. This book especially brings that out; what this dispensation is, and how different it is even from the coming one. You have these 'ofs' and 'ins' to stress the element of faith, hardly mentioned in the Old Testament, but it is there, and now it is mentioned constantly in these chapters.
C.N. In the early chapters of Acts the teachings of the apostles constantly refer to the position of the Lord Jesus Christ and the things that were received and done in His name and by His name. Is that helpful?
J.T. Just so. "... The faith which is by him", for instance.
A.R. It is faith in the blood; the fact that God has accepted the blood of Christ is the basis of all?
J.T. Well, yes; and then, where the blood is. Therefore, the types help us. It is not only the blood but
{27}
where it is. And, therefore, we have the word 'mercy-seat' alluding to the position of the ark in the tabernacle. We are directed, in the reference to the mercy-seat, back to Exodus, and that God had in His mind the position of the blood; not simply that Christ shed it when the spear-pierced His side, but the blood was put in a certain place. The tabernacle helps us in that sense. The blood was shed at the cross without any thought where it was, but from God's side the thing must be in a certain place. As it were, that precious blood will not be allowed to be spilled on the earth.
A.N.W. You have led us along from chapters 1, 2 and 3. Is it at that point God comes in and resorts to His own rights in mercy?
J.T. Yes. In Exodus God is saying that He has taken account of what men of faith, as seen in Genesis, did toward Him; what they did in the way of offerings and worship. But in Exodus He is saying. All are to know that I have My own thoughts about these matters, and these must henceforth govern My service, hence the elaborate instructions of the typical books. In these the blood of the offerings is placed in a certain position. This entered into the service of the priesthood. In the early services in Exodus the blood of the sacrifices was put in vessels, as in chapters 12 and 24. This evidently implied a general principle. Thus when our Lord's precious blood was shed this principle would apply; heaven cared for it. The priestly instruction of the New Testament takes infinite care of it -- "precious blood ... the blood of Christ".
A.R. I always thought that @Romans 3:25 linked on with @Leviticus 16 -- the day of atonement.
J.T. It *does* link with it; it is the antitype of it. The blood was sprinkled upon the mercy-seat and seven times before the mercy-seat -- sprinkled on it and before it.
A.R. There could be no gospel preaching without the blood being sprinkled before God.
{28}
J.T. That is how the importance of the types comes in and how important it is to read them. We come to the mercy-seat here and it is in the resolution of this question of righteousness. So we have, "... for the shewing forth of his righteousness, in respect of the passing by the sins that had taken place before, through the forbearance of God", verse 25. These words are all to be noted carefully. "For the shewing forth of his righteousness in the present time, so that he should be just, and justify him that is of the faith of Jesus". There you have the 'of' again, showing faith is stressed, but the kind of faith, and how righteousness is linked with it. It says in the end of chapter 4, referring to the types, "Now it was not written on his account alone that it was reckoned to him, but on ours also, to whom, believing on him who has raised from among the dead Jesus our Lord, who has been delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification, it will be reckoned", verse 23 - 25. Not only do we have the mercy-seat but the resurrection of Jesus. We must come to that for the resolution of righteousness. It is a question of imputation; that is, this kind of righteousness -- imputed righteousness. It is imputed to us, it says, at the end of verse 24; that is, by believing. The apostle is stressing that: "To whom, believing on him who has raised from among the dead Jesus our Lord, who has been delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification, it will be reckoned".
A.R. Would you say a word about being raised for our justification?
J T It is to touch us, I think; as if wholly for us. Of course, it will be applied later to others, but it is for our justification.
D.P. Would it be right to say that every tenet of the truth that you have been speaking of should be held in the mind of the believer and carried forward?
J.T. Yes. Carrying forward the truth, as learned, is most important. How shall we ever learn this book if
{29}
we do not? It is cumulative. We have to come to that side here to get the word 'our'. It is a very precious thing to have it, too.
J.T.Jr. Do we not have to learn the constitution of the kingdom in that way?
J.T. That is a good word to bring in at this time. I suppose it applies to any kingdom, but here we are not alluding to what happened in the revolution in this country when a nation was born in a day. The kingdom is already established here. It is known and realised to be established. But its principles and moral bearing are being unfolded here. So that we will suppose that refugees from eastern Europe land in this country (as they once did, in hundreds of thousands) and seek citizenship. The officials would raise the question as to the constitution. If they are to be citizens here, they must be instructed in the constitution of this country. That is the idea in this epistle. Believers are obligated to become instructed in the kingdom of God -- the varied features of it.
A.B.P. Is that the setting in @Exodus 19?
J.T. Yes. When Israel set themselves down before the mount they virtually said. We are here now to learn and obey, and God says, I am ready to teach you. And we know how much there is to be learned in that book.
J.A.P. Where does the law -- the ten commandments -- come in, in connection with the constitution?
J.T. They come in immediately. "But now without law righteousness of God is manifested". That is stated in @Romans 3. You do not need the law for justification, but the chapter does not open up what the law is. We learn that later. But we do not need it for justification. The early part of the chapter, however, tells that the Jews had a great advantage in being entrusted with the oracles of God, and verse 20 says that, "by law is knowledge of sin". We shall need all this when we come to chapter 7. It will come up there in full; but we must
{30}
bear in mind that justification is without the law, as we have said.
A.B.P. Speaking practically, when we commit ourselves to fellowship and break bread, are we, in a sense, committing ourselves to covenant?
J.T. I think that is the way it worked out in the types. The people undertook to carry out what God would say. He made His proposals to them in the passage read in @Exodus 19; what great advantages there would be for them: a kingdom of priests; a holy nation. But then they were brought to God; Jehovah says, 'I brought you to Myself'; but the mediator brings them out of the camp to meet God. He brought them out to meet with God; that is, as it were, officially. Here there was formal distance. But at first Jehovah says He had borne them on eagles¬ wings and brought them to Himself. That is another matter. But as brought to Him through the mediator there was awe and distance.
R.M. John says, "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father", (@Revelation 1:5, 6).
J.T. That is another thing. He has made us a kingdom. It is not *the* kingdom there. We have also other expressions such as that. That is not what we are dealing with. That is not the kingdom of God. It is what we are. He has made us a kingdom. But there is a good deal in that that has to be learned. What do you say about it?
R.M. What you say helps me; we are the kingdom there.
J.T. "And made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father". It is not a kingdom of priests. In chapter 5:10 you have 'kings'. The point in chapter 1 is that He has made us a kingdom, priests to His God. That would mean that we are able to deal with things on the principle of authority. This would enter into our care meetings.
{31}
J.S. Do the first four chapters of Romans clear the position so that we can be built up in the faith system?
J.T. The question of righteousness through faith is brought out in chapters 3 and 4, and then the consequences in the blessed possession of the Spirit. He recapitulates, you might say, in the beginning of the chapter. That word 'therefore' is to be noted. "Therefore *having been justified*". It is a settled matter. "Therefore having been justified on the principle of faith, we have peace towards God through our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom we have also access by faith into this favour in which we stand, and we boast in hope of the glory of God. And not only that, but we also boast in tribulations, knowing that tribulation works endurance; and endurance, experience; and experience, hope; and hope does not make ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us", verses 1 - 5. That is where all the "Amens" will come in, in this subject. All the "Amens" to God's overtures will be through the Spirit. He will work in our hearts, so that we might celebrate, which is what they did in @Exodus 15: "Jehovah is a man of war; ... Thy right hand, Jehovah, is become glorious in power".
R.W.S. Is it right to say that obedience and righteousness are principles received into the soul by faith? Faith takes them on as light, but when it comes to the love of God it requires more than faith -- a divine Person.
J.T. Yes. The Holy Spirit. That is the greatest thing we can have before us. He is not greater than Christ, but as great. Abstractly, divine Persons are equal. The Lord received the authority above and the power is in the Spirit down here where it is needed.
A.R. The Holy Spirit operating in our hearts keeps them subject.
D.R. Is it the heart with the love of God shed abroad in it by the Holy Spirit that God speaks of in
{32}
Deuteronomy? "Oh that there were such a heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments continually, that it might be well with them and with their sons for ever!" chapter 5:29.
J.T. Yes. He purposed such a heart for them, and He says in Ezekiel that He is going to give it to them. That is the thing here. The power is the Holy Spirit in it, the love of God shed abroad there by the Spirit. That is the kind of heart the Christian has. It implies new birth, as seen in @John 3.
R.W.S. Is the love of God another item in the kingdom?
J.T. That is what is meant, involving joy in the Holy Spirit. It is what the believer needs in his heart to make him a real man according to God, in view of the assembly.
C.A.M. When it speaks of the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, is it right to look at that as objective, or subjective, or both?
J.T. It is subjective; but what is stressed is what is *in* your heart. The Holy Spirit has put it there. It is a wonderful fact that God is so caring for us that He has deputed such a Person, as a Person in the Deity, to put that love in our hearts.
C.A.M. It is so marvellous that I asked the question on that account. The formation in the Christian at this stage seems hardly equal to the immensity of the thing.
J.T. God is giving us the greatest thing where it is needed, and it is needed that we speak of it thus in connection with the closing verses that we read -- the last two verses of this chapter. It requires the Spirit to touch our hearts so that we might apprehend the idea of the throne, that grace is on the throne; not the Spirit on the throne, but grace; not a person, but a thing, an element. That is worthy of consideration. We have come to the end of our subject for this time, but that is the idea in these two verses, that grace is on the throne.
C.A.M. If you find a person who does not have the
{33}
Spirit or any features of the Spirit, he has no peace with God in his soul.
J.T. He needs grace; he needs to understand that grace reigns. It is not judgment that is on the throne; it is not even mercy on the throne; it is grace. It is an element in God and in the saints too; but it is an element that the Holy Spirit operates in here that overcomes every possible difficulty in the exercised human mind and conscience.
A.N.W. Grace is allied with righteousness. Grace reigns through righteousness. That is wonderful!
E.McK. Is it peculiar to the Spirit's day?
J.T. It is. We are not dealing with the millennium. We are dealing with the present dispensation, and God would have us honour it and see how magnificent it is. Grace is on the throne; not righteousness. Righteousness is an accompanying thing, as just remarked. It makes it effective. Without it you could not have grace reigning.
Question. Would you say that this last verse is a reference to the kingdom of heaven as referred to in the gospels?
J.T. Well, we will come to that. The kingdom of heaven is a term proper to Matthew. It is a question of the rule of heaven. This is not just that. This is the rule of grace. We are not under law, but under grace. That is what this book tells us.
A.R. It does not speak about grace reigning in the millennium.
J.T. No; quite so.
T.M. Does grace bring about the propitiousness of the present moment?
J.T. Yes. That is a rich suggestion.
R.W.S. The abundance of these matters you mentioned -- the love of God shed abroad in our hearts, and then the over-abounding of grace -- is it not to indicate to us that these kingdom blessings are not rationed or limited for us?
{34}
J.T. That is right. I think we really learn the Christian outlook properly in Paul, and thus we are to follow Paul: "Paul and his company". We want that thought in our minds. We are not ignoring Peter nor the eleven, but the Spirit notes Paul and his company. That is. God has helped on to his line at this juncture in the testimony. This epistle contemplates all that preceded it through the twelve, but now Paul has taken the matter on, and we get completeness. He completes the word of God.
J.A.P. Does the Lord Jesus exemplify what you are saying as to the use of words? It says of Him, "And all bore witness to him, and wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth" (@Luke 4:22).
J.T. Yes. It is not simply 'words', but "words of *grace*" That is the point there.
J.H.E. Would John help? "For the law was given by Moses: grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ", (@John 1:17).
J.T. Just so; grace by itself is what we need *first*. Truth, of course, is necessary. Truth is never said to be on the throne, nor mercy, nor righteousness. It is grace. One wonders how much it is understood.
R.W.S. Would you just distinguish between grace and mercy? I get a sense that I do not deserve mercy. I do not merit it, but still that would apply to grace too, would it not?
J.T. We have to distinguish between them. They are not synonyms. Mercy is *sovereign*. The idea of sovereign grace is hardly scriptural. Mercy is the word that should be used in dealing with sovereignty on these lines. "But according to his own mercy he saved us", (@Titus 3:5.) "Saved by grace" is *how* the thing is done, but it is according to His mercy. That is. God acts sovereignly. You have no merits at all; you have no claims at all. Your conduct renders you utterly unfit for any clemency on God's part. Grace comes in there as operational. Grace can take you up, whatever your
{35}
conduct has been. Grace can take you up and bring you into the divine thought. Grace is operational; mercy is hardly that. Grace can work notwithstanding the worst conduct or conditions that anyone can have. So with Paul; he was an insolent overbearing man, but mercy was shown him and in due course grace became operational in his case. It is a longer story. Grace involves a longer story and, therefore, it is largely the theme of the gospel.
A.R. Are the acts of the good Samaritan grace?
J.T. I would think so. That is on the service side; and he had what was needed.
A.R. He came to where he was.
J.T. Just so; he had *what was needed* to meet his case.
A.B.P. Does it not say, "He that shewed him mercy", @Luke 10:37?
J.T. Well, that must be there as the motive underlying the action. That is an element that must be there in the operations of grace.
D.R. The Scripture says, "... who before was a blasphemer and persecutor, and an insolent overbearing man: but mercy was shewn me because I did it ignorantly, in unbelief. But the grace of our Lord surpassingly over-abounded with faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus", (@1 Timothy 1:13, 14).
J.T. That helps us greatly.
C.A.M. Would it be right to say that one principal thought in relation to mercy is the terrible condition of need, and grace emphasises the gloriousness and blessing in view of which it will operate?
J.T. Yes. It is a slower process. Grace undertakes to do what mercy proposes -- *in spite of* the adverse conditions.
R.D.G. Was it not really grace in which David moved when he said, "Is there yet any that is left of the house of Saul, that I may shew him kindness for Jonathan's sake?" (@2 Samuel 9: 1).
{36}
J.T. Quite so. Grace effected all.
A.N.W. Mercy seems to be linked with a seat; there is a mercy-seat, but grace seems to have a throne in mind. Grace reigns.
J.T. Yes. The throne lends authority.
E.McK. Do the operations come out in @Luke 4, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me", verse 18?
J.T. Yes. It shows how the anointed One would work. Grace involves application -- how need is met. Mercy is behind it. The anointing represents grace. It is the operational side that has to be borne in mind. The gospels are full of it -- how the thing was done; *in spite of adverse conditions* the need is met.
J.H.E. Paul sums his case up: "But by God's grace I am what I am", (@1 Corinthians 15:10).
J.T. That shows what we are saying, that grace is the operational side
{37}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD (2)
@Romans 6:14 - 18; @Romans 7:1 - 9, 22 - 25; @Romans 8:1 - 11
J.T. In considering our subject last time we ended with chapter 5 of this book. It was remarked that the principles of the kingdom then under review related to sins; this time the subject of *sin*, a root principle, is before us. At the close of our last reading we were particularly occupied with the reign of grace. "So also grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord", chapter 5: 21. The use of the word 'reign' was noted; authority is the principle of reigning. And now our first verse today, chapter 6:14, says, "For sin shall not have dominion over *you*, for ye are not under law but under grace". So that we are taught negatively here; that is, what does *not* have dominion over us; what does *not* reign over us.
A.A.T. Where does the kingdom of God fit into this?
J.T. Well, it is used negatively; sin has no authority over us; it "shall not have dominion over *you*, for ye are not under law but under grace". The later scriptures read will deal with the subject in that sense -- that we are set free, having power in the Spirit. The negative and the positive agree in that sense. In chapter 8 we shall thus see how deliverance from the dominion of sin is worked out.
A.N.W. "Alive to God in Christ Jesus", suggests the supremacy of God on the positive side.
A.P.T. Do I understand you to say that sin is a principle operating?
J.T. Just so -- a root principle.
A.P.T. Perhaps you would help us to see it more clearly.
J.T. Well, it is seen earlier in the chapter. Verse 1 says, "What then shall we say? Should we continue in sin that grace may abound? Far be the thought. We
{38}
who have died to sin, how shall we still live in it?" All this relates to baptism. So it goes on: "Are you ignorant that we, as many as have been baptised unto Christ Jesus, have been baptised unto his death? We have been buried therefore with him by baptism unto death, in order that, even as Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we are become identified with him in the likeness of his death, so also we shall be of his resurrection; knowing this, that our old man has been crucified with him, that the body of sin might be annulled, that we should no longer serve sin. For he that has died is justified from sin", verses 1 - 7. I think the matter is clearly laid down there, baptism coming into view. The believer is not regarded as a Christian until he is baptised. "He that believes and is baptised shall be saved", (@Mark 16:16) -- not *shall be*, or has been, but is baptised; that is, he is actually baptised, and he is on the basis therefore of salvation. But here the salvation involves "from sin".
C.A.M. The fact that he uses the words "our old man", in verse 6, and the idea of "the body of sin" would confirm what you said as to sin being a principle, it is bigger than any man, is it not?
J.T. Yes: it is bigger, involving our old man, the operations being in the old man; our old man is crucified with Christ. There is only one; it is a great moral thought, including all men.
A.R. It would involve freedom from the body; we are free from this body, which we are carrying about with us all the time.
J.T. Yes, "the body of sin": "So also *ye*, reckon yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body to obey its lusts. Neither yield your members instruments of unrighteousness to sin, but yield yourselves to God as alive from among the dead, and your members instruments of
{39}
righteousness to God". The body of sin is regarded as annulled; the *body* of it would be the totality of it; that is, the root principle that is before us -- how it is dealt with and how thus we can be dear in our bodies of it. We are not to let it reign in our mortal bodies, but "yield yourselves to God as alive from among the dead, and your members instruments of righteousness to God".
J.T.Jr. Does that put the responsibility on us? "*Let not* sin therefore reign in your mortal body", and, "*Neither yield* your members instruments of unrighteousness to sin". It is our responsibility, is it not? In verse 14 it is something else, that sin shall not have dominion over you.
J.T. That is how the truth stands, so that the believer's body is cleared. These are the basic facts by which we come into the truth in chapter 7, and into liberty; the Spirit supporting all this in our souls.
A.R. Is this what is going on inside of us; the battle is inside?
J.T. We shall see that more fully in chapter 7.
A.N.W. Is not the principle more outside? Would not the idea be seen perhaps in the control that Pharaoh had; I disown that authority and yield myself to God?
J.T. Yes. Sin in chapter 6 is objective; that is, something that we have to contend with externally. We are to reckon ourselves dead to it. It is not sin in us, but a system to which we regard ourselves dead.
W.F.K. Is the thought that we should be "translated ... into the kingdom of the Son of his love", @Colossians 1:13?
J.T. Well that comes into our subject and will, God willing be considered later on. Now we are dealing with the principles of the kingdom. The kingdom of the Son of God's love is a Colossian idea, but this epistle precedes that.
C.A.M. Would you say that this chapter of Romans is more on the line of doctrine, the next chapter being more experience? I allude to your statement about the idea of
{40}
sin in this chapter being objective. Is there not a certain line of things where a doctrine presented to us brings a freedom of soul?
J.T. Quite so; that is alluded to in verse 17: "But thanks be to God, that ye were bondmen of sin, but have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into which ye were instructed". Notice, it is not exactly divine Persons here yet; it is the teaching, involving the principles of the kingdom. Defect lies with most of us in the absence of these. It is quite right to speak of a Person controlling you, and many such thoughts, but the *doctrine* is intended to affect our minds and *stay with us* all the time, as you might say; a constitutional thing by which we are automatically controlled as we understand it and are subject to it.
F.S.C. Is baptism to be held in our minds in the reckoning?
J.T. Quite so; the thing has *happened*, the believer "is baptised". "He that believes and is baptised shall be saved". The thing is there to affect you, and then the consequences. The teaching includes the idea of baptism, so that we become constitutionally automatic in dealing with these matters; there are negative principles and there are positive principles. The great negative principle is in verse 14: "For sin shall not have dominion over *you*". That does not mean that it will not if it has opportunity. "Shall not" means that you are authoritative in the thing. You say. It must not be; that principle does not apply *now*. That is the idea.
W.W.M. Is that the reason why the word "reckon" is used here? It says, "Reckon yourselves ... alive to God in Christ Jesus". You keep that in your mind?
J.T. That is it. So that when the thing comes up, you are ready for it any time. You have the thing in your mind. This epistle is intended to affect us constitutionally so that the truth taught becomes automatic.
A.P.T. The expression, "Far be the thought" is used
{41}
in verse 2, and again in verse 15. Does that confirm what you are stressing, that our minds are always ready to refuse any principle operating against the truth?
J.T. Yes. Let it be far away from you; it is foreign to you; hence, when you are tempted, the temptation is foreign, a foreign element.
J.S. You cannot go back into Egypt, in that sense.
J.T. Just so, you are out of it. You are in the wilderness where you are governed by other things. When we come to Sinai we are governed by the code involving the service of God, but we have hardly come to that yet; although in chapter 7 it is said that we should "serve in newness of spirit, and not in oldness of letter", verse 6. That involves Sinai. Chapter 7 really involves Sinai, but this chapter is more the lusts ministered to in Egypt.
W.R. Would it imply the co-ordination of the faculties to refuse sin in the world, and to accept what is positive as of God?
J.T. Quite so; so that you come "over the border". When you come over the Canadian border you are no longer under Canadian rule. A Canadian law may be as good as an American law, but sin is absolutely bad, and righteousness is absolutely good. It is a question of sin and righteousness, and sin has no dominion over the believer. "Shall not" means you have authority yourself against it.
A.N.W. And while it is a mental process, the obeying is from your heart. Your heart is involved -- "obeyed from the heart", verse 17.
J.T. That would mean that your affections go out to God, answering to the kingdom of God. Affection has play, and works up to the King Himself, for the "love of God is shed abroad in our hearts", chapter 5: 5. We get here, "Ye ... have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into which ye were instructed", verse 17.
T.E.H. Two freedoms follow: the first freedom you
{42}
come into is that you become bondmen of righteousness, and the second is that you become bondmen to God.
J.T. Yes. "But now, having got your freedom from sin, and having become bondmen to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end eternal life", verse 22. What you come into is wonderful. The possibility is wonderful, everlasting life is involved in it. That is really all we have time to look into in chapter 6. It is a question of how we come into the kingdom by teaching, by the principles of the kingdom: that we arrive at bondmanship to God; also arrive at eternal life. These thoughts are just touched. And then chapter 7 comes into its place, in which the Sinaitic principles are seen as bearing on the subject before us. The point made early in the chapter is the death of the first husband. "Are ye ignorant, brethren" -- now we are supposed to know law. "Are ye ignorant, brethren (for I speak to those knowing law,) that law rules over a man as long as he lives?" Anyone can see this is a question of principle that we are to be governed by; the matter of a man's death and what it means: "For the married woman is bound by law to her husband so long as he is alive; but if the husband should die, she is clear from the law of the husband: so then, the husband being alive, she shall be called an adulteress if she be to another man; but if the husband should die, she is free from the law, so as not to be an adulteress, though she be to another man. So that, my brethren, ye also have been made dead to the law by the body of the Christ, to be to another, who has been raised up from among the dead, in order that we might bear fruit to God", verses 2 - 4. So we are distinctly progressing here in this matter of deliverance from the first husband.
A.R. Is that why Moses¬ wife called him a "bloody husband"?
J.T. Yes. It is implied as anti-typical of the Lord Jesus, as enforcing circumcision-He is thus a bloody
{43}
Husband to us. We have to include that in our instruction, but there are things in Romans, which you just touch and leave. You do not bring in the whole matter because one word is used. Therefore, the Lord has to be regarded as having His rights now, that we are to be to another, that is, to our Moses. Circumcision is fully seen in Colossians as applied to us.
W.W.M. Would you say a word about being made dead to the law by the body of Christ? How does that operate?
J.T. "So that, my brethren, ye also have been made dead to the law by the body of the Christ, to be to another". That is, the truth of Christ's death has acted on you; how the law as to the death of a husband bears in that way -- an illustration of the Spirit's way of using Scripture. The woman is free because her husband is dead; she comes to know that it is so. But it is transferred now to the body of Christ; that the dead man by whom we become delivered from the law is Christ, as having died.
R.W.S. Is your first point that the kingdom resolves the principle of sin, and now the principle of the law is resolved? The one is evil, but is the law right? Chapter 7 says that law rules over a man as long as he lives.
J.T. We shall see how it works out. We are told that the law is holy and just and good. It has authority, but we are absolved from it through the death of the first husband. The first husband was really the legal system at Jerusalem, for the early Christians; they were relieved from that obligation so as to serve in newness of spirit. But that was the knowledge of Christ having died but now alive. I think we have to carry the idea of Christianity in our minds to see how it works out; how it was in the early days amongst Jewish Christians; how they became intelligent in what they were doing by the knowledge of Christ having died, risen again and having gone into
{44}
heaven. Thus the saints were free to enter on the service of God, which was initially inaugurated in Jerusalem.
A.R. Is it like the youths in @Exodus 24 offering up the bullocks?
J.T. That is right; they served as priests; for the moment they were the priests. The system, in principle, was set up there, plenty of blood being applied. But we are now dealing with the death of the first husband -- how this is effected in "the body of the Christ ... who has been raised up from among the dead, in order that we might bear fruit to God". The law has been ended for us in Christ's death and resurrection, so that we should bear fruit to God, and serve Him in newness of spirit. Affection comes in powerfully in the service: we "serve in newness of spirit, and not in oldness of letter". The question of affection comes in now in the new husband; that is how the Jewish Christians came into it; the teaching of the twelve apostles would enlarge their minds as to the whole matter of Sinai, how they were absolved from it in the risen Man -- Christ now in heaven.
J.T.Jr. Would you say Peter and John in @John 20 were really clear in their minds as to the resurrection? It says they believed and went home, but Mary's mixed condition would allude to what might go on in us for a long time. She wanted to find the Lord where He had been laid; she thought they had taken Him away. She did not arrive at the new Husband in this sense that He was living.
J.T. Just so, but Peter and John had gone home, however; they did not find the service of God there; nor did Mary immediately find it, but she was on the way to it when she said, Rabboni; it showed she had gained from the teaching, and had gained in her heart too, and therefore the Lord takes her up and the whole matter became opened up now. But Romans does not lead us into the service of God fully. The apostle touches the
{45}
the principle of it, but moves on to something else, so that we should be generally founded as to the kingdom. @John 20 goes further than Romans.
W.W.M. Would something of what we have here now enter into the mind of the Ethiopian eunuch when Philip preached to him Jesus, and he wanted to be baptised; he wanted to be identified with the Lord's death?
J.T. "His life is taken from the earth", (@Acts 8:33); that is the word there, quoted from @Isaiah 53. Well, where is He? The Spirit shows you immediately that you can go to Him quickly; that is, Philip is raptured. Jethro says to his daughters. Where is he? They had left him outside. @Exodus 2. The idea of rapture lies in the Spirit. In @Acts 8 we are coming to the new order of things in Cornelius and the rapture of Philip is a suggestion of Christianity -- what we come into. We get in chapter 10 the thought of ecstasy. We have to learn these thoughts to come into Christianity, but, as we have said, Romans is generally foundational.
A.R. In chapter 7 it is "serve in newness of spirit", not the full thought; is that the idea?
J.T. Yes; "not in oldness of letter". If you were in Jerusalem in those days you would see how the letter was killing people; they were refusing Christ and dying morally, whereas the believers were coming into life, living to God in the Spirit.
D.P. When a difficulty arises these principles of which you are speaking begin to work in the believer automatically?
J.T. They do, so that when we come together to break bread we do not have to open the Bible for everything; I mean to say, when we come to the service of God, we have things in our minds. "I speak as to intelligent persons", the apostle says. Some of us are not intelligent. We therefore need to see how others act -- there are some intelligent persons; we want to see what they do, always
{46}
bearing in mind that the Lord gives understanding in all things.
A.A.T. It says, "... in order that we might bear fruit to God", chapter 7:4. Does that relate to the service?
J.T. I think it is more general. We are to bear fruit in every good work. It is to be worked out later on. In this epistle things are touched and the Spirit moves on to something else; because Romans is especially the foundational epistle and there is a great deal of ground to cover. Thus we get basic truth into our souls, and therefore when you reach a kingdom man you have a man that can tell you something. We want to be kingdom men first; then assembly men, and then heavenly men. Of course, every feature of the truth is normally developed in its relation to the others.
F.H.L. Did you say the legal system was dead in the death of Christ for the Jewish believers?
J.T. Yes; and so the Lord's Supper was affected. In it Christ is Husband to the saints instead of the law. Paul doctrinised it. He said that he received it from the Lord; he got it doctrinally more than the twelve did. In the first letter to the Corinthians, he tells us, "For I received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said. This is my body, which is for you: this do in remembrance of me. In like manner also the cup, after having supped, saying. This cup is the new covenant in my blood: this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me", chapter 11:23 - 25. Compared with the gospels, the wording in 1 Corinthians is much reduced.
R.W.S. What you say helps, because when you go back in the light of Christianity the matter of the body of Christ is a marital thought.
J.T. Yes, but not developed. So that in reading Romans we must not bring everything into it, but go on
{47}
to other features. Of course, we may refer to Colossians and Ephesians, as occasion may require, to complete any subject.
A.N.W. "To be to another", and then to "bear fruit to God": we might go on to speak of the Lord's supper and the service of God, but what is said in verse 2 is just enough for the purpose in mind.
C.A.M. Touching on it in that way serves its purpose; it takes the believer out of himself, do you not think? It is very comforting and assuring that the immense thing involved in the verse is outside ourselves.
J.T. Quite so; deliverance from the law. The word deliverance had a great place fifty years ago. The brethren got hold of it, I believe. Mr. Raven was used largely to give the idea. Deliverance was a thing by itself, but it is not so much used now. I think we prefer to deal with it progressively, so that death comes in at the end of our chapter. We have already had the thought of "dead to the law by the body of the Christ, to be to another, who has been raised up from among the dead". The marital thought in the Lord's supper is suggested there, leading up to the service of God. But it would not do to bring it all in there. We touch on it, and then we go on to the inward condition we are in; how the law worked, as in Paul, "when we were in the flesh". Ultimately he says, "O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me out of this body of death?" It is "this body of death" now; it is not the law, nor the first husband, nor the "body of the Christ", it is this body of death. And then he thanks God. "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord"; so we learn to give thanks. It is in this sense that we come really into deliverance. We learn to give thanks to God for what we have come to thus far. The Spirit is essential to this, and hence the victorious eighth chapter following.
A.B.P. What is the distinction between the body of sin and the body of death?
{48}
J.T. This body of death is in verse 24: "O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me out of this body of death?" The body of sin is in verse 6 of chapter 6: "Our old man has been crucified with him, that the body of sin might be annulled". There it is the great general thought of sin viewed as a system. There is only one old man. Each one of us is not viewed in that way. The old man is sinful, and we are crucified with Christ as of it, "that the body of sin might be annulled". That is the totality of sin. "The body of sin" is the totality of it. It is not the idea of a person, but the body of sin.
A.B.P. And then "this body of death": do these references to the body suggest that the thing is worked out in our bodies?
J.T. That is the idea.
A.N.W. In verse 6 it is collective, whereas the verse you are dealing with now in chapter 7 is individual.
J.T. That is right; each one of us in his own body has experienced the thing, but chapter 6 is a general thought of sin viewed as a system. Our old man has been crucified with Him that the body of sin might be annulled.
A.B.P. Therefore it is the working of this thing in my body culminating in death. Chapter 7 is an experimental advance on chapter 6?
J.T. Yes. You experience the bondage attached to it, how the truth has worked in you. It has occasioned a state of darkness and death in your soul, and it is a necessary thing that it should be so, that you might judge the whole sinful state thoroughly. The subject begins in verse 5 of chapter 7. "For when we were in the flesh the passions of sins, which were by the law, wrought in our members to bring forth fruit to death; but now we are clear from the law, having died in that in which we were held, so that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in oldness of letter. What shall we say then?" verses 5 - 7. Now this brings us to the real crux of the matter.
{49}
What shall we say? "Is the law sin? Far be the thought". The exercise that has now to be gone through implies that the knowledge entering into it has really become a trouble to me for the moment; until the exercise is completed, I am suffering. And we all have to learn as Abraham. A horror of great darkness came over him. We have got to go through the experience. And then the wail in verse 24, "O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me out of this body of death?" And then the thanksgiving, which is itself part of the deliverance. You did not know the blessing was so near, but it breaks in on you, and the Spirit of God comes to your aid in it, so there is a decision reached in your soul. "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then I myself with the mind serve God's law; but with the flesh sin's law". That is, the believer with his mind acts authoritatively, and this makes room for the Spirit who is seen operating in chapter 8. "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and of death".
F.S.C. Would you bring in the man that was all leprous and became clean?
J.T. That would be a sort of type of it. The Lord had to touch him. "I will; be thou cleansed". Is that your thought?
F.S.C. I was thinking about Leviticus and the one who was leprous all over.
J.T. You get concrete examples worked out in the Lord's own personal ministry in the gospels. The cleansed leper is suggestive. He was made clean at once. The Lord had to touch him to do that, showing that He went through the thing, @Luke 5:13. He identified Himself with the leper.
T.E.H. When I begin to give thanks in the way in which this chapter ends, would there be an indication that the Spirit's gracious work has had its way in my soul?
J.T. Yes. Light has had its way in your soul
{50}
gradually, and at the darkest moment it breaks through in volume, so you begin to give thanks instead of being worried and troubled, and that introduces you into the glorious facts depicted in chapter 8, that is where the Spirit has scope instead of the flesh.
A.R. @Genesis 15 is very important instruction. Before the sun had gone down Abram got an indication about the 400 years ahead.
J.T. Yes. That 400 years had to be gone through by Israel, but Abram went through the horror immediately.
A.P.T. Is chapter 6 more objective knowledge and chapter 7 more conscious knowledge -- what you learn in yourself?
J.T. I would say that; experimental knowledge, but involving great inward suffering. The state in your soul becomes almost intolerable, but light breaks through. And then you begin to give thanks instead of groaning.
J.H.H. I was wondering whether Jonah would be a type of it? "The bars of the earth closed upon me for ever: but thou hast brought up my life from the pit, O Jehovah my God", chapter 2:6. It breaks in suddenly.
J.T. I do not know whether we could visualise what it was to be in the belly of that fish. What an awful thing it must have been! But in chapter 2, what a change! The fish vomits him out on dry land. You can understand the change in the man's mind; to look around and see and feel solid earth. He anticipated his deliverance in the fish's belly as we see in chapter 2; he would sacrifice unto Jehovah with the voice of thanksgiving and pay his vows.
A.P.T. Jonah said, "But thou hast brought up my life from the pit, O Jehovah my God. When my soul fainted within me, I remembered Jehovah; and my prayer came in unto thee, into thy holy temple. They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy. But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving; I will pay that which I have vowed. Salvation is
{51}
of Jehovah. And Jehovah commanded the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land". That is beautiful. ..
T.E.H. Mr. Raven alluded to this matter, saying that it is like coming through a long dark tunnel and discovering at the bend a burst of light.
J.T. Yes, indeed; would that it might take place in our souls! Most of us know very little in our souls of this burst of light; it changes our outlook and feeling.
A.B.P. Did Ananias help Saul into it?
J.T. I think he did. He says. Brother Saul, and also, Saul brother. That must have been light to his soul. But then there was a good deal following on that in his soul experience.
A.B.P. I wondered if through those three days and three nights of darkness, being shut up to himself, he may have reached this point where he cried out, and then the light came in. His eyes were opened and he got the light of what the Lord had in mind for him.
J.T. He tells us about himself later. Ananias had said to him, "And now why lingerest thou? Arise and get baptised, and have thy sins washed away, calling on his name", (@Acts 22:16). His sins must have been a burden to him; showing he needed the teaching of baptism.
A.P.T. "I thank God", (@Romans 7:25). We do not want to leave Him out, do we?
J.T. No; "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord". That leads us to chapter 8, as already said. "There is then now no condemnation to those in Christ Jesus. For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and of death. For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh. God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh, in order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but
{52}
according to Spirit", verses 1 - 5. Now the matter of sin in the flesh is settled; it is dealt with; it is condemned.
W.F.K. Would you bring in @Numbers 21 -- the totality of the flesh dealt with?
J.T. Yes, in the serpent of brass, and in the springing well; that is a type of what we are considering in chapter 8.
A.R. The idea of not being condemned as in Christ Jesus is very comforting. Would you say a little about that? "There is then now no condemnation to those in Christ Jesus".
J.T. We must not go too far in the truth of "in Christ Jesus", although it is in the chapter; it is worked out in Colossians and Ephesians. It is brought in here to show the grandness of the position we are brought into. It is in Christ Jesus; it is the new status that we have; that God has brought us into.
W.R. Would the close of chapter 7 be power working internally in the believer, and would the features of chapter 8 be seen externally, in our ways and walk, as in the good of deliverance?
J.T. Yes. Chapter 8 begins with "the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus". Notice it is "those in Christ Jesus" in verse 1; it is status, it is our position. But then the operative power is the Spirit of life. It is a new order of things, but it is not fully developed in this chapter. We need Colossians or Ephesians for this: the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus -- not only "the power of his life", in chapter 5. There is a "law" attached to the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, also liberating power.
J.A.P. Is this the answer to verse 14 of chapter 6: "Sin shall not have dominion over you"?
J.T. Just so; you are liberated now; you have left the question of sin far behind; that is far behind you now; sin's dominion over you is foreign to you now. That is the way it is worked out experimentally, and you come into a new order of things where there is another law, a
{53}
new law -- the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. Notice the "in Christ Jesus"; the law is there, and I am conscious of its workings. It brings out the greatness of the new order of things, although it is not developed fully. The Spirit is much mentioned but the system involved awaits Colossians and Ephesians because the assembly is not yet brought into it.
D.P. In passing through the exercise of @Romans 7, are not certain marks left on the believer that can be identified?
J.T. That he is that kind of a man, you mean? Abraham corresponds. The "horror of great darkness", of which we have spoken, would leave a distinctive effect. He would never forget that experience and it would leave a mark on him. In most of us the experience of @Romans 7 is shallow and extended, but it is essential to reality and spiritual fibre. God in faithfulness to us places us in circumstances in which the reality of the bondage of the law through sin is forced upon us. This leads us to the wretchedness of which verse 24 speaks. The liberating light of the gospel affords the relief expressed in the thanksgiving of verse 25, and the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus establishes us in this.
T.E.H. Would you help me as to the vicarious burial of Jesus? Would that in any way help me to understand this matter of the new man coming out?
J.T. There is an exercise connected with it. The Lord, I need not say, did not need the experience of the three days and three nights. It is for us, and baptism leads us into it. We are baptised unto Christ's death, (@Romans 6:4); but Romans does not say we are raised with Him, only we shall be. Colossians, however, says, "... buried with him in baptism, in which ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God", chapter 2:12. We must therefore go to Colossians for the complete thought of death and resurrection with Christ including the three days in the grave. The Lord said to
{54}
the thief, "To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise", (@Luke 23:43). But that was in a disembodied condition, and did not include the Lord's resurrection.
A.N.W. I think the remark about the three days illuminates the lengthy period of the forty days; I think that is a fact to be well noted.
J.T. The experiences that are spoken of in Scripture in their length and variety are remarkable; as, for instance, the periods of uncleanness required in @Leviticus 12 at the birth of children, and the uncleanness occasioned by certain contacts mentioned in @Numbers 19. These are all intended to affect us and help us in our experiences.
A.B.P. In the opening of @Romans 7 it says, "Law rules over a man as long as he lives. For the married woman is bound by law to her husband so long as he is alive" -- might that link on with the period of exercise we go through in apprehending the meaning of the holding power of death suggested in the three days and three nights in which the Lord was in the grave?
J.T. Yes; no doubt it would especially be understood by the early Christians out of Judaism. Coming into the truth of Romans would affect them in this way. The Lord had showed Himself to them at certain times, and these appearances involved increased liberation for them. The domination of the first husband, the law, would be felt earlier to some extent.
A.B.P. It would seem a considerable time to Abigail after she had seen David until Nabal died.
A.P.T. In this section there are interesting links bearing on all this: "... even as Christ has been raised up from among the dead", chapter 6:4; "Christ having been raised up from among the dead dies no more", chapter 6: 9; "Christ ... who has been raised up from among the dead, in order that we might bear fruit to God", chapter 7:4; "But if the Spirit of him that has raised up Jesus from among the dead dwell in you, he that has raised up Christ from among the dead shall quicken your mortal
{55}
bodies also on account of his Spirit which dwells in you", chapter 8: 11.
F.S.C. What is the difference between "raised up from among the dead" and the statement in chapter 1, "resurrection of the dead"?
J.T. By the resurrection of the dead the Lord is declared to be Son of God in power. But raised up from among the dead is an additional thing that He has come up from among the dead, having left them behind. The word up is to be applied as the New Translation shows.
A.N.W. Here it is a matter of favour -- raised from the dead by the glory of the Father; an act of power, of course, but also an act of pleasure.
A.Pf. The Lord says, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up", (@John 2:19).
J.T. That specially brings out His deity. The Father did it here -- @Romans 6:4. But the Lord raised Himself, which is a great thought as to His Person. He can and will raise all the dead, but He raised Himself.
{56}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD (3)
@Romans 12:1 - 3; @Romans 13:1 - 5; @Romans 14:1 - 18
J.T. At our last reading we were engaged with chapter 6 of Romans, the truth based on baptism; and then chapter 7 dealing with deliverance from the law, making way for the service of God; and then in chapter 8 the principles there accompanying the truth of the Holy Spirit, righteousness being fulfilled in the saints as walking not after the flesh but after the Spirit. The succeeding three chapters, as is well known, have the character of a parenthesis and hardly bear on our subject. They refer to the reconciliation of God's ways with Israel culminating in the gospel extending to the nations and the ultimate restoration in blessing of His ancient people. Now it is thought that we might complete the consideration of our subject in so far as it enters into Romans, touching on the hortatory part of the epistle; first as to the believer's body and what hinges on it in relation to the kingdom; and then the authorities in chapter 13; and finally, chapter 14, kingdom principles as applied to the weak brother. It is only in this fourteenth chapter, as we have seen, that the kingdom of God is formally mentioned in this epistle. It is not meat and drink but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit, the negative statement there being an allusion to what might stumble a weak brother. We can well afford to deny ourselves of anything that would be of that character seeing that we are well off in the possession of the Spirit in the kingdom as making up for any self-denial. The subject of the believer's body, therefore, should come first in our inquiry, and obviously it is a very important one, especially as so much physical demand is now made on the believer; governments claiming it even to the use of the blood that the believer may be able to give for the relief of others.
{57}
A.P.T. Would it link on with the prophetic reference: "Thou hast prepared me a body", (@Hebrews 10:5)?
J.T. It would. The truth governing our bodies must stand in relation to the Lord's body. It was especially prepared but, nevertheless, in it is seen the standard for us for we are enjoined to walk even as He walked, which involves much as to our bodies. Almost everything we do involves our bodies. In our chapter the first divine claim is to present them to God, which would be following on what the Lord did. In becoming Man He devoted Himself to God in the body prepared; devoted Himself even unto death.
A.A.T. In the Lord's supper the loaf speaks of His body, does it not?
J.T. Quite so. We had that on the last occasion, that we "have been made dead to the law by the body of the Christ, to be to another, who has been raised up from among the dead, in order that we might bear fruit to God", (@Romans 7:4). That enters into what we have in chapter 12.
A.B.P. After the angel finished speaking to Mary, @Luke 1, she said, "Behold the bondmaid of the Lord; be it to me according to thy word", verse 38. Would that be an example of one who is presenting her body?
J.T. Yes, and for the most exalted purpose. She was blessed among women. Her body was kept guarded infinitely by God during the time of His operation in the holy conception and birth of the Lord Jesus: "The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and power of the Highest overshadow thee, wherefore the holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God", verse 35.
W.F.K. Must there be a work of God in a body before it is presented? It says, "... present your bodies ... holy".
J.T. It is to the believers in Rome that this exhortation is given: "I beseech you therefore, brethren",
{58}
(they are brethren; the subjects of the work of God in Rome) "by the compassions of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service", chapter 12:1. It is obvious that there must be a work of God there.
H.G.H. Does the "intelligent service" have reference to our place in relation to the kingdom?
J.T. The kingdom, as we have been looking at it, and as it is seen here, is in relation to our pathway down here, only involving a system, which the kingdom implies. The kingdom of God is a moral thought; not yet the kingdom of the heavens, but the kingdom of God, which ought to be connected with the Holy Spirit down here. The kingdom of the heavens, as we hope to see on later occasions, is connected with Christ in heaven; so that the working out of the kingdom in the individual, in his body, is seen here leading up to the thought of the one body. It is said in verse 4, "For, as in one body we have many members, but all the members have not the same office; thus we, being many, are one body in Christ, and each one members one of the other", verses 4,5. The individual walk of the Christian is in mind, but it is a question whether there is any such walk except in the sense of the Christian being identified with the idea of a system, whether it be the kingdom of God or the body of Christ. I mean to say, we cannot be regarded as so many unattached units. The believer is morally attached.
A.R. Is that the idea of the "intelligent service"?
J.T. That is the idea. The same kind of expression is used in Corinthians in regard of the Lord's supper. "I speak as to intelligent persons: do ye judge what I say", (@1 Corinthians 10:15). This is the same idea only it is the body in relation to the kingdom; but the same words are used in verse 4 as we get in @1 Corinthians 10, as we already read: "For, as in one body we have many members, but all the members have not the same office; thus we, being many, are one body in Christ, and each one members one
{59}
of the other". It is one body in Christ. It is not exactly one body as in Colossians and Ephesians; it is just the initial idea, which is peculiar to this book. Initial ideas are left so as to be used later; but 'one body in Christ' lifts us out of the idea of the 'friendly societies', so called, which would not be in Christ. Christians are a body just as the Freemasons would call themselves a body, only Christians are 'one body in Christ' and formation and intelligence necessarily enter into that. Hence, we cannot be regarded as unattached units. We are attached, in Christ, both in the kingdom and in the body.
A.N.W. Would baptism not imply that as to the kingdom?
J.T. Exactly. It is in relation to the kingdom. Christians are baptised, not in batches, but severally. The Ethiopian eunuch said, "Behold water; what hinders my being baptised?" (@Acts 8:36). Philip went down with him into the water and that would link him on with the evangelist.
A.R. Would it be right to say the kingdom regulates the service of God?
J.T. Well, we have the idea of the service of God in chapter 7 of our epistle, but I do not think we should connect it exactly with the kingdom. Of course, the kingdom is the widest collective thought, but the service of God implies priesthood; that is, the minister of the sanctuary. This epistle really only gives us initial ideas and then we move on to something else. If we are intelligent we shall do so -- move on to something else, because the subject is wide and we cannot treat any of the subjects in this epistle fully. But we have the basic thought; we can build on it.
R.R.T. It says, "... to present your bodies a living sacrifice": would the thought be in the living sacrifice -- that it is to be a continuous matter with us?
J.T. Just so. God made man living. He breathed
{60}
into man's nostrils and man became a living soul; now we are made to live through the gospel, by the Spirit. According to chapters 5 and 6 we are made to live "The end eternal life", chapter 6:22, means that we live for ever, which is a great and blessed thought.
A.A.T. Why is the apostle bringing in the compassions of God just at this point?
J.T. To affect us. He is beseeching. That is. God condescends to come down to beseech us. God is graciously considering us and would influence us by the compassions, which according to the early part of the epistle He has shown. We have the idea of beseeching by things. Paul says, "Daily I die, by your boasting which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord", (@1 Corinthians 15:31). The idea is of God appealing to us.
R.R.T. Is it not an appeal, too, in the way that it is put here? "Present your bodies" -- as though the Spirit of God, in the apostle, would recognise that we have that which may be considered as our own, and it is a question now as to what we will do with it, whether we will present it or not.
J.T. Just so. I think the individual side is somewhat stressed in the collective singular, as in (@John 14:1): "Let not your heart" -- not your hearts. Here each one presents his body. Although the word service is employed, the thought here is hardly on the level of the service in the sanctuary. There is an allusion in @Hebrews 13:15 to what we present: "the sacrifice of praise"; and in @1 Peter 2:5, "to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ". These are rather higher than that in our chapter -- the presentation of our bodies. But it is remarkable that they are to be presented a living sacrifice; not sacrifices, but "a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service".
C.A.M. The fact that the word sacrifice is used, would you say, means that our bodies are now actuated
{61}
by another life? Death must come in in some sense.
J.T. Quite so. While our bodies are, of course, physical, the power of presentation is in another life. Chapter 8:10 says, "If Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness". Much may be done in the sense of service, which may not enter into what is formally collective in the assembly. The disciples inquired from the Lord, "Where wilt thou that we go and prepare, that thou mayest eat the passover?" (@Mark 14:12). What they did was on the principle of sacrifice. The man that bore the pitcher of water would be on that principle. He was the leader. But all that preceded the service, which began as the Lord placed Himself at table, the apostles with Him.
D.P. Would it be right to say that the enemy has made man's body a battleground and God took the issue up with him? And the fact now that man is able to present his body a living sacrifice is victory, in man, by God.
J.T. Quite so. God attains victory in man. He begins at the bottom -- in the believer's body. I would say that Peter gives us the proper level of the service of God; in his first epistle we are said to be priests, "to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ". I think that is somewhat beyond @Romans 12. The body of the believer hardly rises to the level of the spiritual sacrifice, but still it is a sacrifice.
R.W.S. Is the renewed mind, which comes in in the next verse, a little in advance of the thought of the body? It speaks of being transformed by the renewing of the mind.
J.T. Well, that would show that the whole man is in view, and the renewal begins with the mind. It is, of course, a faculty or member of the man. It is closely allied with the spirit of a man. Man is a tripartite being: spirit, soul and body. The spirit is the highest feature
{62}
and the mind is allied closely with it and, therefore, I would say it enters into the service of God directly because we are said to "have the mind of Christ". That is, our renewed mind is really the mind of Christ which the Spirit uses.
H.G.H. Why do you think the body is referred to before the mind?
J.T. I think it is to build up the subject. God began with man's body, but he was lifeless. God breathed into him and that made him a living soul; and we read later that the spirit returns to God who gave it. In animals it does not, although they have spirits too, in some sense, but the animal's spirit does not return to God. It goes down with him, whereas man's spirit goes to God who gave it. He is in this sense constituted a spiritual being. He has received his spirit from God. It is the highest part of him. It is himself, really. He may become disembodied, which would be the severance, for the moment, of the physical side, but the man is there and it is in that spirit that, as a believer, he worships God.
A.N.W. Would you say that the body in the chapter referred to is an offset in totality to the members mentioned in @Romans 3, severally? Certain members of the man are mentioned there, but now we have the totality of the body committed to God.
J.T. Yes. The contrast in chapter 12 is striking. The renewal of the mind, spoken of in chapter 12, adds much to the subject before us as qualifying the believer for the higher levels of Colossians and Ephesians.
A.I. Would the truth be carried forward in the believer presenting his body in this way? The truth of the kingdom would be maintained in the body of the believer.
J.T. It would. It is a question of God in Romans. It is not so much Christ or His body. The main point is what accrues to God. It is God's service. God's fruit and God's righteousness. Therefore, the kingdom of
{63}
God is prominent and, of course, the body of the believer becomes the vehicle of that, in an outer sense, but the mind is more than that. It is allied with the spirit which returns to God. It goes up to God. The intelligent service of the believer is to be noted. It is over against the meaningless customs of the heathen, and much of Judaism. The unconverted man could not have that. It could be seen only in a Christian. And it is said. Be not conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God, verse 2. The mind is the controlling thought therefore, and subject, as it were, to the spirit of the believer; but it is the controlling thought -- proving, testing out things. You thus know where you are For in result, according to (@1 Corinthians 2:16), "we have the mind of Christ", meaning the thinking faculty of Christ. We can think and judge and discern according to Christ.
A.N.W. "Intelligent service" implies the mind, does it not?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. The word 'intelligent' carries that thought.
A.A.T. Have we not to control the mind?
J.T. "I myself with the mind ..." chapter 7:25. That is another thing; that is the person. "I myself with the mind serve God's law". That is the ego which God holds responsible.
A.I. Why does transformation come in first before the renewing of the mind?
J.T. The word conformed is used as regards the world, and then, "Be transformed by the renewing of your mind", as if you must have the mind before there can be a transformation. The Lord will transform our bodies presently, @Philippians 3:21. That will be His will, but this is our mind; our mind is to be employed in the transformation.
R.R.T. Would we have an example of this in Saul of
{64}
Tarsus? He said he thought that he ought to do many things, but then when the light shone on him on the way to Damascus, he said, "What shall I do, lord?" Would that indicate at least the initial stages of this transforming of the mind?
J.T. I am sure that is so. That was before he got the Spirit, showing that the work of the Spirit in the believer, the new birth, carries with it something that can be employed and that will respond to God in some sense.
A.R. Why is e bringing in the will of God? "The god and acceptable and perfect will of God".
J.T. We can understand that I think. We are dealing with the kingdom of God and it turns through Romans: the gospel of God concerning His son. It is God right through, as we have been saying.
E.E.H. Would the thought of numbering the tribes in the early chapters of Numbers correspond in any way with this service here?
J.T. It would. The nearest approach to that would be in the body. "We, being many, are one body". The position was that that the tabernacle was in the centre. The first idea in numbers is the encampment and then the decampment. I think the body in verse 4 corresponds: "For, as in one body we have many members, but all the members have not the same office; thus we, being many, are one body in Christ, and each one members one of the other". That is the basic idea of Numbers in the type.
The position in numbers is that persons were taken from twenty years old and above. That is, we are regarded as Christians in the full sense, having the spirit. And then each pitches by the standard of his father's house, which is a family thought, and then the tribes, and then the camp which would be subdivided: Judah had three; Reuben had three; Ephraim had three and Dan had three. There were four threes. The whole number, therefore, was seen in the type. There were encampments and then decampments, the latter having in
{65}
mind movements from place to place; but the tabernacle, as in camp, was the centre always.
A.B.P. Is there a moral sequence in the description of the will of God? It is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God. Do we realise that sequence experimentally?
J.T. Through it, I believe, you reach restfulness -- that is, in the acceptable will of God. You are not irritable, as they soon began to be in the camp of Israel. They complained in the fringes of the camp; but as you accept the will of God, you are restful. In fact, you are satisfied with your allotment. For instance, Judah had the eastern position; he faced the sun rising. The members of that camp would also be favoured as having the first place. The sun rose on them. Hope would be inspired in their hearts. And then Reuben had the southern aspect. He also would get favourable circumstances, tending to warmth; Ephraim less favourable because of the west, the setting sun, tending to disappointment; and Dan the north, cold winds and their accompaniments. But I should say that the acceptableness of the will of God would satisfy all. There would never be a rebellion, such as @Numbers 16 records, if all were satisfied with their positions. They complained against Moses and Aaron.
C.A.M. That would bring in the operation of the mind as seen in verse 3. Korah and his company had high, ambitious thoughts; they were "men of renown".
J.T. Think of how Paul was affected himself: "For I say, through the grace which has been given to me", verse 3; That is, he was furnished for all the heavy tax upon him in the service. He is speaking to us as himself having reached the thought of grace which satisfies, which makes us restful. "For I say, through the grace which has been given to me, to every one that is among you, not to have high thoughts above what he should think; but to think so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith".
{66}
C.A.M. That would suggest that Judah would not have undue thoughts about himself.
J.T. Quite so. It would have saved Korah, Dathan and Abiram if they were content with what they had. In rebelling against Moses and Aaron they claimed priesthood and apostleship. But such men would claim everything. They were not satisfied with their lot; whereas this chapter would make us satisfied.
R.R.T. In verse 2 Paul says, "that ye may prove", and then in verse 3 he says, "For I say, through the grace which has been given to me". Would that indicate that he for himself had proved it?
J.T. That is just it. He could speak with authority in this sense to the brethren anywhere, especially the Corinthians and the Romans.
R.R.T. And now he wants them to prove it.
J.T. Just so. He says, "By God's grace I am what I am", (@1 Corinthians 15:10). You could not get a better man anywhere than Paul, or a more satisfied man. He was poured out as a libation on the sacrifice and ministration of the faith of the Philippian saints, and rejoiced in it.
D.P. Why does the apostle base his appeal on the compassions rather than the power of God?
J.T. "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the compassions of God". It is a striking appeal. The allusion is to what had come out in the rich unfolding of the gospel seen in this epistle. Of course, the power of God is stressed in Romans also, as seen in chapter 1:16, but the compassions of God are in special accord with the basic gospel epistle, corresponding with the gospel of Luke. The third measurement of the river in @Ezekiel 47 brought the prophet to the loins, and in the fourth measurement he reached waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed through. That suggests the realm of God. Compassions may be connected with the loins.
{67}
R.W.S. While each presents his body, yet "a measure of faith" is discriminating. Would you say something about that? "As God has dealt to each a measure of faith".
J.T. It is not exactly the gifts that are spoken of in Ephesians or 1 Corinthians. It is a measure of faith here. That is to say, one of the basic things in the economy is faith. Our side of the position is faith. We come into it by faith, and we are in it by measure too; so that each one has not the same faith. Here you are supposed to have faith according to measure.
J.A.P. Was Caleb a man like that? He says, at the age of eighty-five years, "I am as strong this day as I was on the day that Moses sent me", that is to search out the land. His body was preserved and his faith too.
J.T. Yes. He had a measure, which is a very important thing -- what measure of faith a man has. We all have not the same measure. It is not exactly gift, the power for service, but faith.
A.N.W. Would you just distinguish between the grace measure and the faith measure? Both are referred to in that verse: "For I say, through the grace which has been given to me", and then at the end, "As God has dealt to each a measure of faith". Do these run along collaterally?
J.T. The word measure applied to faith is very noticeable. I do not know that grace is put that way. "For I say, through the grace which has been given to me". And in verse 6, "But having different gifts, according to the grace that has been given to us". And, as to faith, "to every one that is among you, not to have high thoughts above what he should think; but to think so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith". That is, as to faith, you are to know your measure. But in verse 3 Paul is dealing with grace as something he experienced himself. I do not know that it is measured. I think it is that God acts on that principle. In verse 6 and in @Ephesians 4:7 grace, connected with measure,
{68}
refers to gift. It is operational. Paul had it. He says, as we already remarked, "By God's grace I am what I am". You could hardly say what that was in the sense of measure. It is a great operational thought of God, and Paul was the subject of it; and it is in the power of that that he exhorts as to the measure of faith. So that the believers in Rome should know each other in these respects, and it is a great point now that we should know each other in the same sense, because there is much ability for service. And we can thank God for it; but the time will come when we shall be tested as to our faith. We may have more ability or gift than we have faith.
A.N.W. In @Ephesians 4, as noted, the apostle says, "But to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ", (@Ephesians 4:7).
J.T. That is another thing, as we have been saying. I do not think it is just what we have here. This is a great operational thought of God, and Paul is the subject of it, but to each one of us has been given grace, which is gift, but not in the sense of specific gift. He is going to deal with specific gifts later in @Ephesians 4, and these come from beyond the heavens. The Lord Jesus is said to have passed beyond all the heavens and has given gifts to men; in relation to men; and these gifts are specified. But every believer has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. The question of gift has to be distinguished in all this; specific gift or powers which are to be used in the service of God.
R.W.S. And this verse justifies a brother in not accepting a service which the brethren might ask him to take on and which he feels he is not equal to. It says, "think so as to be wise", verse 3. The thought is to have a sober judgment.
J.T. Quite so. There is the idea of travel, too, which would enter into that. If you are invited to the Pacific coast you would have to travel six thousand miles for a
{69}
few days of service. Well, you have to be sober as to that, to be balanced. We must consider that the Lord is in charge of His services. He is Prince of the prince of the Levites, and He would reckon costs. I am only referring to the matter in a general way. You are referring to the matter in a general way. You are referring to the thought that you have to think soberly, including measure. If we are not in balance we are out of accord with the universe. Thus we have to be balanced in what we are doing.
C.A.M. Paul could travel with Illyricum as an objective, (@Romans 15:19,20).
J.T. He thought of going to Spain and he would go via Rome, but we do not know if he went there. He had already gone from Jerusalem and round about to Illyricum, which would be near the Adriatic. In that territory he had "fully preached the glad tidings of the Christ". That implied measure.
A.P.T. It says in @Acts 16 that he attempted to go to Bithynia, but the Spirit changed his course.
J.T. Yes. He had assayed to go there but the Spirit of Jesus suffered him not. There is balance. The Spirit of Jesus: the feelingness of the Lord Jesus was in the service.
R.W.S. Does the divine system, as it operates, enable one to judge this in himself? Without taking counsel or speaking to the brethren, he comes to a sober judgment in himself.
J.T. Quite so, although it is quite right to take counsel. I would say that Apollos took counsel with Paul, or Paul took counsel with Apollos as to a certain service. He wanted Apollos to go to Corinth, but Apollos had decided he would not at the time go; but Paul wished him to go, and I should think Apollos was right, (@1 Corinthians 16:12).
A.A.T. I understand gift is universal, and if it is, why could not Paul be of service anywhere?
{70}
J.T. You have to weigh carefully what you say when referring to universality. Paul had gift and as we have just heard, the Spirit at a certain time would not allow him to speak the word in Asia. God could use Paul in China if He wished to, but there is no evidence that any of the apostles went there, so that we have to be careful about that; because the fact that I have gift does not mean I should go to China. There are other things that have to be thought of, such as Levitical order and principles, and the Lord holds these things in His hands. He is the Prince of the princes of the Levites, and we have to serve under His orders.
H.G.H. Would you say grace would help us in that? Paul says, "But by God's grace I am what I am; and his grace, which was towards me, has not been vain", (@1 Corinthians 15:10).
J.T. He tells us how successful he was in his service and he finished his course, too. He could go up to heaven with flying colours, so to speak; I am only using a figure: "For thus shall the entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ be richly furnished unto you", (@2 Peter 1:11). That is the idea. In effect Paul said, I have laboured under Levitical principles and nevertheless I have finished my course. God could have kept Paul alive in service for a thousand years but that is not the divine way. He had only one Paul, but still we cannot say that he remained in service a longer period than others.
J.T.Jr. Does Timothy show how the thing operates? He was well known in his own locality, Lystra and Derbe, and Paul took him afield for further labours.
J.T. Yes. He was well recommended by the brethren, and Paul took him on that ground. He proved afterwards how useful he was to him; but what we are saying is very important, because God is using the brethren. He is opening up services, but we must
{71}
observe principles: and our Eleazar, who is the Prince of the princes of the Levites. That implies that there are influences above us that we should not despise, but rather value as divine provisions. Apollos did not despise Paul, but yet he did not at a particular time go to Corinth. The fact is it was in favour of Paul that he did not go to Corinth; he would not countenance any rivals of the apostle and some of them were there.
A.P.T. The verse we have been dwelling on says, "To every one that is among you ..." and then, "... above what he should think". Are the every one and the he abstract, or do they refer to the brothers in Rome only?
J.T. Well, the instruction here, of course, would come to us now. It is a question of applying it to yourself.
A.P.T. It follows on in a similar way in verse 6, "... having different gifts", etc. Is this instruction to all or only the servants of God?
J.T. It says, "But having different gifts, according to the grace which has been given to us, whether it be prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith; or service, let us occupy ourselves in service; or he that teaches, in teaching", verses 6,7. That is, it may be a plural or a singular. "Let us" and then, "he that teaches". Therefore, it applies at any time to whom it may apply. When gift is mentioned, those in particular service are in mind. It is a question of each of us now looking into the matter and seeing how things are going with us generally, and whether we are fitting in according to the principles governing our service.
R.W.S. The powers that be, chapter 13, might limit Levitical service, especially in view of conditions as they exist now, but this chapter teaches that one thinks a particular matter over himself and weighs it as to whether he is balanced as pursuing his service.
J.T. Yes. Chapter 12 affords guidance for normal
{72}
Levitical work and therefore it applies to us all -- brothers and sisters.
J.H.H. "And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life. And he went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpah, and judged Israel in all those places", (@1 Samuel 7:16). Would that be a well-balanced circuit?
J.T. Yes. And he came back to his house. That is another good thought, showing how those who serve ought to have houses, or at least, bases to which they can return. Paul and Barnabas, for instance, returned to Antioch and remained quite a while with the brethren, although they had already finished one bit of work, showing the Levitical work is in parts. It is let out, as it were, by the great Head. You finish the bit you get and return to where you came from, and get another bit.
J.H.H. I think that is a principle.
J.T. We have to understand the principle, and then make an application of it. To get the right principle as to any work is very important.
R.R.T. In relation to Samuel it is said, "And all Israel, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, knew that Samuel was established a prophet of Jehovah", (@1 Samuel 3:20). He covered the whole territory in that way.
J.T. "And Jehovah was with him, and let none of his words fall to the ground", verse 19.
R.R.T. So that God in His provision for us would take account of the territory, and we in outlying districts can look to God in faith that the whole territory will be provided for.
J.T. Quite so, in our prayers; because all have not gift, ability to serve men in that way, but ability to serve God in prayer. That does not need gift; we can cover, by prayer, the whole area of the service.
T.E.H. The Lord Jesus said, @Luke 10:2, that we should pray to the Lord of the harvest, on account of it being great, suggesting the Lord needs servants.
{73}
J.T. If the harvest is white it ought to be reaped; that is the reaping time.
D.P. The principles of circulation that are set out in @Ecclesiastes 1 can be seen working now in the Spirit's day: the sun arising and hasting to its place where it ariseth, the wind returning again to its circuits, etc. Although the service of God is limited today, yet these principles that are set out in the chapter referred to are universal in their operation.
J.T. Of course. @Psalm 19 contemplates the heavens and the course of the sun and the constellations. These, of course, stand, and places afield, to which we were referring, stand too, as under God's government. The field alluded to in @Matthew 13:44 -- He bought "that field" -- may allude to some specific part of the earth rather than to it all. The Lord had in mind where the assembly is to be found. We can show that historically, if we follow the lines of the gospel. The apostles did not go east; they came west and the work still goes on in the west.
T.E.H. Would @Ruth 2:8,9 help us on that? "And Boaz said to Ruth, Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not to glean in another field, neither go from here, but keep here with my maidens. Let thine eyes be on the field which is being reaped".
J.T. That is in conformity with what we are saying. Let us find out where the Lord is working and continue there. But we must proceed with our subject -- the kingdom of God in Romans. Chapter 13 is a well-known passage that applies to the present time; kingdom principles in Christians in non-combatant military service. This chapter has a great place in regard to them. It is not that we belong to the kingdoms of this world. We do not. We are strangers and foreigners as regards that. But there are certainly principles of the kingdom which have great importance in relation to the powers that be, as to how we obey them, and what spirit we show; whether we are like Christ in the service we may be
{74}
rendering. So that what we get is, "Let every soul be subject", which would point to the soul of a Christian. It is the soul of a Christian, and what it implies. It is a feeling part; it is the compassionate part of a Christian. "Let every soul be subject to the authorities that are above him. For there is no authority except from God; and those that exist are set up by God. So that he that sets himself in opposition to the authority resists the ordinance of God; and they who thus resist shall bring sentence of guilt on themselves", verses 1, 2. And then it says, "For rulers are not a terror to a good work, but to an evil one ... for it is God's minister to thee for good". That is, to the Christian. And it further says, "Wherefore it is necessary to be subject, not only on account of wrath, but also on account of conscience", verse 5. Conscience comes in under the principles of the kingdom -- the conscience in its relation with the powers that be.
J.T.Jr. Verse 2 would be that if we do set ourselves against the authorities, it would be an act of our wills. The will would be in activity to what God had set up.
J.T. The ordinances of God; that is, not Levitical ordinances -- it is another department. It is the ordinances of God in which He uses the powers that be. They may not be converted men. We have to get ordinances as regards Levitical work from the Lord as Priest. But now we are dealing with another department of God, that is, governments which God has ordained for the present government of the nations; and it is a most important thing to bear in mind, that we are to be subject because of conscience. The word "soul" is used in verse 1, but "conscience" in verse 5.
J.S. It is not a question here of whether the authorities be good or bad.
J.T. It is no question of that at all. It might even be a Nero.
A.R. God speaks about Nebuchadnezzar as "My servant". Is that the idea?
{75}
J.T. Just so.
J.A.P. What is the difference between @Matthew 17, where the Lord Jesus suggests that the sons are free, and the attitude that we are to show here?
J.T. Well, the sons are free. It was a question of the temple tax, not a national or political tax, but a temple tax. It was imposed on Jews, and the Lord raises the question with Peter as to whether the sons should be subject to that. Those who received it asked Peter if the Lord paid this tax. Peter replied that He did. The Lord knew what had happened, but He waited until Peter came into the house before He mentioned the matter to him. It involved the family of God and the Lord wished Peter to be instructed as to it. The saints of God are His sons, and they belong to heaven. Therefore, He says to Peter, "The kings of the earth, from whom do they receive custom or tribute? from their own sons or from strangers? Peter says to him. From strangers. Jesus said to him. Then are the sons free", (@Matthew 17:25,26). He further says, "But that we may not be an offence to them, go to the sea and cast a hook, and take the first fish that comes up, and when thou hast opened its mouth thou wilt find a stater; take that and give it to them for me and thee". It is enough for two people to pay the tax. He says. Go and give it to them for me and thee. But that was "that we may not be an offence". It was not due. Heaven would not collect it; the true house of God would not collect it from His sons. That is the point there. There is the idea of the family, and what the Lord teaches there is most precious, especially in Matthew. Matthew treats of the assembly, and the assembly is formed of sons, and that characterizes the assembly in our relations with God; we are immune from temple taxes there. God is not imposing them. If you ask for fellowship, if you want to come into fellowship with Christians, you need only to wash your robes. You do not have to pay taxes. You can enter by the
{76}
gates and partake of the tree of life. You have rights there, which are most precious.
W.F.K. "Pay then what is Caesar's to Caesar, and what is God's to God", (@Matthew 22:21). That would apply here.
J.T. Just so. So that our word in chapter 13 will be effective if the brethren, especially the young men, will see that the authorities have rights in their own departments. We would not let them come into this meeting to take part, but in their own department they are God's ministers. As we see in @Zechariah 6, the four chariots having red, black, white and grisled horses are the four spirits of the heavens which stand before God -- that is, the four gentile monarchies, but they do not belong to the assembly. But at the same time, this instruction appeals to the brethren; to their souls in verse 1, and then in verse 5 to their consciences.
R.R.T. I would like to ask one question about verse 5. An unconverted person might be subject on account of wrath. If he is not subject wrath may come upon him; but does the apostle here indicate a higher standard than that for us? We are not subject only on account of wrath, but also on account of conscience.
J.T. Yes. The brethren should see that in this matter of subjection to the government in these military affairs, conscience enters into it; not only does it bear towards God as to His rights in the Christian, but also His rights in the authorities. Then, as regards chapter 14 the matter of the weak brother's faith comes up: we have already been speaking of the measure of faith, but there is hardly any measure here, but faith is weak and consideration must be extended to such.
A.B.P. Would it be right to say that faith is given by God? Does chapter 12 support the statement that faith is the gift of God?
J.T. Yes. Only that when you say that, you ought to add something as to the way it comes. Faith comes by
{77}
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. We have a moral element in the thing, and the means by which it comes is the word of God, which, I think, is very important, that you are governed by the word of God. "Faith then is by a report, but the report by God's word", (@Romans 10:17).
A.B.P. It is an element which God gives in that sense, through this moral process, but then as given, are we responsible to enlarge it through using it?
J.T. Surely. The apostles said to the Lord, "Increase our faith". But then He said, "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say to this mountain. Be transported hence there, and it shall transport itself". But at the same time we have the idea of growth in faith. The Thessalonians¬ faith increased exceedingly, (@2 Thessalonians 1:3).
A.P.T. Verse 1 speaks of "the faith"; is that the understanding of the truth as set forth in this book so far?
J.T. "The faith" means Christian faith, involving what is believed as instructions or principles. The brother contemplated here is weak in it, but he has it.
A.P.T. He is hardly able to stand -- as a board of the tabernacle. He is weak in it. He needs someone to stand beside him.
J.T. Yes, but he is "in the faith", and that implies that he is a real Christian. There are many you meet that seem to be interested in the truth, but you are not sure whether they are real Christians. This man is a real Christian. He is weak in it, but he is in it. As we sometimes say, the ocean is in the basket and the basket in the ocean. It is only a little bit of it, but he is in it.
A.P.T. The teaching is to help him on kingdom lines.
J.T. The teaching helps him; and your conduct, too, for example, helps him especially as you eat and drink. You are a rich man spiritually; you have the Spirit of God; you are instructed in the truth of the kingdom of God, and hence you can afford to bear with his scruples
{78}
and be deprived of certain things for his sake. You do not want to submit to him if he is a prohibitionist or some other extreme legalist.
{79}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD (4)
@1 Corinthians 1:10 - 16; @1 Corinthians 4:17 - 21; @1 Corinthians 5:1 - 13
J.T. So far in the pursuit of our subject, which is the kingdom of God, we have considered Romans. It is now thought that we should look into 1 Corinthians so as to see how the kingdom affects the assembly as such. It will be found here that the relation of the kingdom and the assembly is very definite -- the one bearing on the other; that is, the kingdom bearing on the assembly and the assembly bearing on the kingdom. The idea of the kingdom is more general. In any given country the kingdom includes the whole realm, whereas the idea of the assembly would be represented by the administrative capital; if we keep these things in mind we shall proceed more smoothly. We will see how the kingdom will assist us in functioning in the assembly and, on the other hand, that the assembly will help us in functioning in the kingdom. It will be noticed that the kingdom is referred to in this section, and it is said to be "in power". In Romans in a similar way it is said to be "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit". But the idea of power evidently is the leading thought in this section, and it is in view of conditions that existed in Corinth -- that had got out of hand. Lawless conditions had arisen and they had to be dealt with in authority, with a rod; at least, that was what the apostle suggested. Therefore, when such conditions arise, what is needed is what is represented in the word rod; that is, chastisement, or, in some sense, punishment; not exactly penalty, but that which effects subjection and restraint. The judgment rendered on the incestuous man, chapter 5, is representative of that principle. Before that we have stated the evil of division among the brethren in Corinth. It is the first complaint the apostle has; indeed, in which he uses the word exhort in dealing with it. "Now I exhort you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all say the same thing, and
{80}
that there be not among you divisions; but that ye be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same opinion", chapter 1: 10. The name of the Lord Jesus being brought in here is an allusion to the kingdom; that by which His administrative authority is wielded here below; hence, we have in Matthew, gathering together to the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them", chapter 18:20. His authority and all else in the sense of administration is carried on in His name; His name taking the place of Himself. He is in heaven personally, but His name here represents Himself, the Spirit in us supporting it.
A.A.T. Is @Matthew 18 kingdom truth?
J.T. That is just what it is. The passage has been often quoted and spoken of, but to illustrate that it is kingdom truth, we have only to refer to the opening part of the chapter. It is said, "In that hour the disciples came to Jesus saying. Who then is greatest in the kingdom of the heavens? And Jesus having called a little child to him, set it in their midst, and said. Verily I say to you, Unless ye are converted and become as little children, ye will not at all enter into the kingdom of the heavens. Whoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, he is the greatest in the kingdom of the heavens; and whosoever shall receive one such little child in my name, receives me", verses 1 - 5.
W.R. You spoke of the administrative capital of any realm. What did you have in mind?
J.T. Spiritually, that is the assembly. The assembly as down here is the administrative representation of the Lord in heaven; therefore, the word is, "If also he will not listen to the assembly, let him be to thee as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer". He is lawless.
C.A.M. We often speak of Matthew's gospel as being the assembly gospel. Would it be right to say that the assembly is really in a kingdom setting?
{81}
J.T. It is; just as we have been saying about the idea of the capital. Jerusalem, for instance, was the administrative centre of the kingdom of Israel.
C.A.M. I was glad of your allusion to Matthew's gospel, because the two great thoughts come into it.
A.N.W. Could you make a practical suggestion as to how the assembly bears on the kingdom? It is dear as far as I can see that the kingdom bears on the assembly, but you made the remark that the assembly bears on the kingdom.
J.T. I think it is illustrated in this case of discipline in Corinth. It is an administrative procedure; therefore, the question of evidence comes up at once. In the administration of authority in the assembly bearing on the whole kingdom, the question of evidence immediately comes up, as in chapter 5. "It is universally reported", it says, alluding to the necessity for evidence in the administrative function of the assembly which affects the whole kingdom. And in chapter 1 we have a like suggestion as to the house of Chloe. The report on which the apostle went was said to have come from that house. "For it has been shewn to me concerning you, my brethren, by those of the house of Chloe, that there are strifes among you", verse 11. There is, therefore, stressed in this section the necessity for evidence in carrying out assembly administration in the way of discipline, or whatever else it may be, but especially as to discipline.
A.P.T. Is the capital movable?
J.T. In a way it is, because it is pretty much illustrated in Samuel's circuit. He judged Israel on the principle of a circuit. Names of the places where he judged Israel are given. The centre of authority now would be the nearest local assembly.
A.R. Is that why Matthew speaks of Jerusalem as the city of the great King? It is also spoken of in Matthew as the holy city.
{82}
J.T. That shows how the truth was held, and that those who arose from the dead after the Lord was raised, entered into the holy city and appeared unto many. They would be there in testimony.
E.McK. What is stressed in the expression "universally reported", chapter 5:1?
J.T. I think Paul had in his mind that the sad conditions that had come about in Corinth were known among the brethren generally. What helps in that, I think, is that in the second letter he says, "known and read of all men", chapter 3:2. The writing in the hearts of the Corinthians corresponded with the writing in Paul s heart. Paul had the saints in Corinth in his heart and he brought the thought of Corinth out wherever he had opportunity. Wherever he had opportunity, he brought it forward; so that all men, meaning all the saints, had an opportunity of reading and knowing conditions at Corinth. They were good conditions at the tune of the second letter, but in this epistle what is reported would be of a sorrowful nature, but the saints would be concerned about Corinth; as if God would have it to be so, that one meeting is so prominent in the economy of God here below that the brethren are talking about it. And it often happens from our own observation that certain sections of the world are before the brethren. Something has happened that occasions concern and the brethren are praying about it.
A.N.W. Are you stating that the universality of the report was in the assembly?
J.T. I would think so. It would be a public matter. We have to judge from the context who would talk about it, although the worldlings in Corinth itself might speak of the conduct there, but I would think it was the concern of the brethren through common report among them. Paul would not attach importance to others than those who were really brethren.
A.A.T. I am wondering about the extent of the
{83}
concern the assembly at Ephesus or the assembly at Colosse might have had about the exercises at Corinth. Could they interfere? Could the saints at Ephesus adjust the difficulties at Corinth?
J.T. We should go by what we have before us now. It would be a question of common report. If there is such report, then there is good ground for brethren to interfere, not in the sense of correction or setting things right; that belongs primarily to the local brethren, but in the sense of the general truth of the body of Christ and the unity of the Spirit; it is a universal matter. There is only one assembly in the full thought, and if there is anything wrong in a place, it is the concern of all. So that I think what is just before us helps. Paul is dealing with something that was wrong in Corinth and being reported commonly, it became of universal concern. You might say. What have they to do with it? But they have to do with it, because each of us is concerned about things being right. We love the Lord; we love the brethren; we want to see things right for the Lord's sake and for the sake of the truth and the brethren; and pray about them.
A.R. There were gifts at Corinth. Was there the gift of government?
J.T. That is another point. Government is a gift and, of course, the gift is universal. It can be applied anywhere. It can be applied wherever it is needed, just as an evangelical gift can be used. I think that is important to keep before us.
A.A.T. I just want to get clear as to how far brethren who are not local can adjust, or try to adjust, difficulties in a nearby meeting.
J.T. That is important, because it is just in that sense that Paul speaks here. Paul certainly was not in Corinth. He was outside. He had been resident at Corinth but had left it, nevertheless he certainly had a hand in what was going on in Corinth now.
{84}
A.A.T. But he was an apostle.
J.T. Quite so; we have none now; and yet if there is a brother who has the gift of government, for instance, he has power; more power than the ordinary, and that ought to be used. There are many other things that can be said too, as to what can be done in the way of prayer and taking counsel, advice, etc. I would like to be clear about what is in your mind. I should not like to say anything that is not fair. You had better tell us something more if you think there is anything going on that is not according to the mind of God.
A.A.T. I would like to get dear just how far outside brethren can give judgment on a local matter.
J.T. It cannot be final, but yet we are to have a judgment -- at least a general judgment of what is current in the assembly. Wherever a thing happens, it is a concern to us all and then, of course, to the adjacent brethren. For instance, in the types measurements are taken; according to @Deuteronomy 21, where anything serious happens, measurements are taken to the cities round about, and the nearest city is particularly involved. That chapter has important instruction in the matter we have before us.
F.S.C. Paul speaks about his spirit being gathered together with the Corinthians, chapter 5:4. Do not the spirits of the brethren have an effect on the adjoining gatherings?
J.T. Quite so. After all, there is only one body; "There is one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling", (@Ephesians 4:4).
E.A.L. It might seem that while it is recognised that gift is universal the difficulty sometimes is that a certain area might not recognise this principle, or discriminate against particular ones. Paul would be recognised anywhere in virtue of his ministry.
J.T. As an apostle he would be. We have to analyse what we are saying as to the accuracy of it. Paul, of
{85}
course, was an apostle as our brother says, and he speaks with authority here, but at the same time he is concerned about the accuracy of the information that was being circulated; besides, the state of the assembly at Corinth stood in the way of the Spirit -- it hindered the administration of discipline, hence the apostle's reproof here: "And ye are puffed up, and ye have not rather mourned, in order that he that has done this deed might be taken away out of the midst of you. For I, as absent in body but present in spirit, have already judged as present, to deliver, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ (ye and my spirit being gathered together, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ), him that has so wrought this: to deliver him, I say, being such, to Satan for destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus", verses 2 - 5. The word being is interpolated there to give the sense, but the fact stressed is that the matter is really so. That is what he means by being such. I thought I would mention that, because evidence and accuracy are regarded by the apostle as so important, especially in cases involving discipline. Therefore, Paul asserts here that the man is really guilty. So we ought to be sure that whatever is given as a cause of discipline in a local gathering is really so. If there is any question about it brethren elsewhere are right in inquiring.
W.R. "For I, as absent in body but present in spirit, have already judged as present". It would seem that Paul covered the whole situation in his soul.
J.T. He stressed this point: "being such". It was not in his mind a matter of doubt, it is a principle that he is keeping before us.
F.N.W. Is not the gift of government set there by God to reflect back on Himself in the way of glory? Do you think what might enable a locality to receive outside help would be to ask. Is it for the glory of God?
J.T. Yes, and the general principle of unity must enter into it, for after all, in the full sense there is only
{86}
one assembly, as we have said: "There is one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all", (@Ephesians 4:4 - 6).
R.W.S. You alluded to the words: "that there be not among you divisions; but that ye be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same opinion". Does "the same opinion" go farther? Is that a stronger idea than "the same mind"?
J.T. The exhortation is to exclude divisions of judgment. The word mind is now being compared with the word opinion: the latter word conveys what is active, what is arrived at in the mind. The mind is basic, involving the faculty of thought. The brethren ought not, characteristically, to have different opinions. (@Philippians 2:1 - 4), although having the same end in view, has stronger and finer feelings than the exhortations before us.
A.N.W. Referring to verse 5 of chapter 5 again, you would not deny that the power of delivering such a one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh was exclusively an apostolic act. Is that not entirely an apostolic act?
J.T. It is, but it synchronises with another action, which has to be borne in mind: "Remove the wicked person from amongst yourselves", verse 13. That is the same thing; only the first is apostolic action, including Christ's power -- "with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ". It is a question of divine power. We have already remarked that in this section the idea of the kingdom of God is power. That is the word used. And that is the point that is made in the delivering of the person to Satan. Paul had determined to do that, but it was in accord with the dispensation, for the man's ultimate salvation was in view. At the same time Paul did not do it by himself; the judgment was also the action
{87}
of the assembly. The removal was by them -- "from amongst yourselves".
A.N.W. What I wanted to get further help on was our brother's point. You spoke of having a judgment. Paul said that he had judged. I wondered whether that is allowable for each one of us, so that we may have unified judgment about the matter. But if I am outside of the locality how do I operate to make my judgment known where the case is questioned? I think that is the exercise.
J.T. That brings up the question of the body. The unity lies in the assembly and normally there is an influence bearing on that going on all the time, and if we are at all assembly brothers and sisters we will have an ear for tidings affecting the saints, so that the Spirit of God says, of a great work at Antioch, "The report concerning them reached the ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem", (@Acts 11:22). We have the idea of assembly ears; and everyone of us, if he loves the Lord and loves the assembly and loves the brethren, ought to have ears for such reports. The apostle refers here to a report of sin in Corinth that was common, and it was right for the brethren to inquire about it, for it was in the assembly. The next thing would be. Can I help? That is what Paul was doing.
R.W.S. Division and disorder at the Lord's supper were not sufficient in themselves to cause the saints to sit on the judgment seat, so to say. Did the Lord have to allow conditions to go as far as this to make the saints judicially minded at Corinth?
J.T. It would seem so. In chapter 6 they are told that even if they had to adjust ordinary matters among them it should be done by those little esteemed in the assembly. That does not mean that that person is the least thought of. It means that he is at least of the assembly. Chapter 6 is that the person is of the assembly and hence he is capable of judgment. He is "little
{88}
esteemed", but still he is esteemed; he belongs to the assembly and, therefore, is destined to judge the world, and even angels; he is qualified to judge. That places matters that seem ordinary on a high level. It were well if we were all more concerned about these matters and prayed about them, and if we have any advice to give let it be done in a comely way; for we are told that "in the multitude of counsellors there is safety", (@Proverbs 11:14). And yet, there is the importance of the local idea in the assembly, especially as to discipline, for the case before us shows that they are to act -- to remove the wicked person from amongst themselves.
A.N.W. What would you suggest would be a comely way to give advice? Privately?
J.T. Take the house of Chloe. We do not know who it was; whether it was the sister herself or one of her children, or one of her servants. I would say it is illustrated in the types. We usually can find something in the types to help us, and so there was a matter that had to be accepted as information in regard to Nabal, the husband of Abigail. Nabal misbehaved. He rudely insulted David. One of Nabal's servants came and told Abigail. He did it in a comely way. That is as good an illustration as you can get of the house of Chloe. Let us look at it. It is said in (@1 Samuel 25), "And one of Nabal's young men told Abigail, Nabal's wife, saying. Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to bless our master; and he has insulted them. And the men were very good to us, and we were not hurt, neither missed we anything, as long as we companied with them, when we were in the fields. They were a wall to us both by night and day, all the while we were with them feeding the sheep. And now know and consider what thou wilt do, for evil is determined against our master, and against all his household; and he is such a son of Belial, that one cannot speak to him", verses 14 - 17. That is what I would consider a messenger who can give information in
{89}
regard to assembly matters; indeed Abigail is a type of the assembly.
E.McK. The house of Chloe would be a right or godly house. Evidence from such a house could be relied upon.
J.T. It would look as if Paul meant that, and knew she was reliable.
A.R. A local meeting is not independent by itself.
J.T. No. That is most important. We are not formed on the principle of what is called Congregationalism. That means that each assembly is independent of all the others. That is not of God at all, but it is what Congregationalism means; whereas the epistle to the Corinthians shows that whilst there are local assemblies, they are all inter-dependent and should in a comely way help each other.
W.F.K. In the type all Israel stoned Achan with stones.
J.T. And so the man that blasphemed in the camp -- those who heard him laid their hands upon his head and all the congregation stoned him. (@Leviticus 24:14).
A.P.T. In @Revelation 2 the message to the angel in Thyatira is, "All the assemblies shall know that I am he that searches the reins and the hearts", verse 23. Would that indicate that no local assembly is inviolate in this sense?
J.T. Yes. They are all to know what the Lord does. And here Paul is saying that they all do know this matter at Corinth. I think that is important.
A.P.T. What our brother suggested is in my mind as to whether a local company is inviolate in itself. I think that is where we need help, as to how far we can go, as our brother is raising the exercise.
J.T. We cannot claim to be independent because if my house is on fire all the neighbouring houses are in danger. They cannot sit there and do nothing.
J.T.Jr. Would not the sequel of the issues at Glanton
{90}
and Bethesda be that the saints should know what happened at those points and be clear in their souls as to the issues?
J.T. Just so. Bethesda opened the door to evil, and it was the concern of every brother in fellowship to see into that.
J.C. What has been brought forward is something in which there had not been any judgment arrived at Would the same principle apply after the judgment had been arrived at in the local assembly?
J.T. Well then, another question arises; Was the judgment arrived at correct?
J.C. I just wanted to know if the same principle would apply.
J.T. It would apply, because that is just what happened at Bethesda. Bethesda was in the city of Bristol and Plymouth was one hundred or more miles away. Well, Bethesda being in Bristol opened its door to evil in Plymouth; the action was taken, and hence it became the concern of all the saints: that door must be closed. That is what I was thinking as to what is before us now; whether the present judgment arrived at is correct. If it is not right it is damaging to the whole assembly. That is the principle of it.
J.C. I just wanted to get clear on that point.
J.T. I am sure we would be all thankful to get your mind, because I know our brother is referring to what you are referring to, and we are all here and we are linked up with each other, and we want to help each other, because that is the idea of these meetings You say the judgment was rendered: well, was that judgment right?
J.C. I just wanted to know if the same principle applied if the actual judgment was arrived at, and as long as that is clear I leave it.
A.N.W. Having gone so far, would you mind saying a word more as to what you were stressing as to a certain
{91}
matter being dealt with by a few, professedly in the Lord's name, and whether that might be a wrong action and need to be nullified?
J.T. That very thing happened with most sorrowful and extended results fifty-five years ago: what was called the Bexhill action. In a small meeting in a town called Bexhill, a letter of commendation from Greenwich was refused: the action was wrong, but the claim that was made was that the assembly had acted and, therefore, the saints generally must bow. But that was wrong. How can we bow to what is wrong? But many accepted it and became lost to the testimony. In this way an assumed assembly action may become an instrument of the enemy.
R.W.S. In @Leviticus 4 it says, "And if the whole assembly of Israel sin inadvertently", verse 13. Could that be applied, as a type, to assembly judgments which might be wrong today?
J.T. Certainly. Inadvertently means the assembly has committed itself to an action that is not right, but they did not know about it. When it is brought to their attention they have to deal with it because they had sinned.
R.W.S. I wondered if the inadvertence would give credit for a right desire but sin was actually committed.
J.T. It is a sin nevertheless. If a thing is not right it is not right, and we are to pursue righteousness, (@2 Timothy 2:22).
D.P. In @2 Samuel 20 when Sheba rebelled against David and Joab was sapping the walls and the wise woman there went to all the people in the city and had a judgment about Sheba and dealt with him -- would that bear on what you are saying?
J.T. Quite so; that is quite apropos of what we are saying. Joab was intending to destroy the city, and it was a question of her wisdom. The woman by her wisdom delivered the city. That is the point -- if there is
{92}
anyone in the nation like that. Of course, she happened to be in the city itself, but even if she were not, and if she were able to give the word of wisdom that would deliver the city, why should it not be acted upon?
A.R. Paul says, "... with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ", (@1 Corinthians 1:2). In every place. There should be the same gate, as it were, in each local assembly.
J.T. That is important to bring up, because the constitution of the assembly is indicated in the opening of the letter. You are quoting the beginning of the letter to Corinth. "... with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours". That is universal; the universal link between us. At the same time, the apostle did not direct all the gatherings to put the man away. He directed only the local gathering at Corinth to do it. The word in chapter 5 is, "Remove the wicked person from amongst yourselves", verse 13. That was only directed to Corinth, and the other meetings, of course, would fall in with that, because it was manifestly right. Suppose it was rumoured that the man in question was innocent; I mean, that the removal was not just. That would be another matter, and Paul was very particular about that, to show that it was just.
E.W.S. What should my attitude be in relation to a man that I might think is innocent and have evidence that he is innocent? Do I abstractly accept the judgment or do I say I do not think the judgment was right?
J.T. Certainly if the man is innocent, he is innocent. That is the fact, but then others may think differently, and it therefore becomes a question of acting wisely so as to get them to see what you see; that is, what is right. Therefore, the question of evidence must come into it. This section of 1 Corinthians raises the whole question of evidence; the truth or falsehood of anything that is alleged.
{93}
A.T.D. Nabal's young man so spoke that Abigail hasted. Would you say that that has a bearing on the whole matter?
J.T. Just so. The thing was done; carried through.
E.W.S. Our hearts and our actions should be in accord with each other. We should be acting and speaking outwardly in relation to what our convictions are inwardly.
J.T. Our acting and speaking should agree with what is spoken of in the book of Revelation as a sea of glass. That is a transparent position. If my mind is contrary to my actions then I am not transparent. Therefore, the matter of evidence has to be gone into, and let it all be on a transparent basis, because after all we are brethren. We are of the assembly, we have the Spirit, and if there is anything that is to be known, well, let it be known simply. Let us be on the principle of transparency and confidence. There is no reason why we should not tell each other of what affects the assembly; if necessary make inquiry as to any specially important matter, and look into the facts. I suppose that is what you have in mind. Is it not possible to obtain the truth?
E.W.S. If one has a right exercise in relation to what has taken place in another place; if we are clear and steadfast and open in what we have to say, we may become a rallying point for what is right.
F.N.W. A few years ago there was ministry that was helpful in this area relating to the movements of Elijah and Elisha. You stressed at that time that it was necessary to be in the place in which a particular thing happened to obtain correct information. Is that related to this matter of evidence?
J.T. That is right too, but it does not carry fully. You can get information otherwise. You can get accurate information otherwise than by being in the place; I mean, by competent witnesses. We should have the truth, because there is so much that become
{94}
current in a matter of the kind now in mind that you cannot be sure of what you hear. Things are said that you marvel how they can be said, because of want of facts. The principle is: "In the mouth of two or three witnesses ...". The importance of witnesses is immense. That point is developed in @Matthew 18 also. "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every matter be established", (@2 Corinthians 13:1).
R.W.S. Would you say something about assembly action that does not go so far as removing the wicked person from amongst us?
J.T. That is another matter. That is to say, whether it be two stripes or five stripes. The Scriptures contemplate graded evil, so many "stripes" are administered according to the gravity of the case, @Luke 12:47,48. Now, your question is whether matters involving discipline must always require withdrawal. No. For instance, in @2 Thessalonians 3:6, the saints are enjoined to shrink from a person. In chapter 5 here we are not to mix or eat with a wicked person, but in @2 Thessalonians 3:14 a case is contemplated where we are not to treat him as an enemy but exhort him as a brother, although to shrink from him on account of a certain course; if he is behaving badly, that is, if he fails to work or earn his living. His conduct is objectionable but yet he is not withdrawn from. I think that is an evidence of what you are saying. There are different cases. We have shrinking from a person in 2 Thessalonians and then in @Romans 16:17,18 withdrawing from those that are causing division, contrary to right doctrine, turning away from them; and then in @1 Corinthians 5, a man put away for open wickedness.
A.N.W. In our chapter where the apostle says, as you have emphasised, "being such", is he by that statement putting the onus on Corinth to prove that he is that before they act?
J.T. Well, he is implying that he is such as is alleged;
{95}
and inferentially in every case of discipline the guilt should be clearly established.
A.P.F. One more question on the subject. Are we to accept the judgment of a local company in withdrawing from a person even if we think it is not right?
J.T. Well, it would be a question of the facts you are dealing with.
A.P.F. I am not referring to such a severe judgment as the apostle Paul speaks of here, but we sometimes hear that certain brethren have withdrawn from such-and-such a person. Perhaps it is a small company, very few and weak. We accept that judgment as being right, and yet others have serious misgivings.
J.T. As I said, the question is of facts. If there is serious cause for doubt there should be investigation. Will may be at work. Therefore, the question is whether we can arrive at the truth. I am certain that as depending on the Lord we can arrive at the truth in every case. It is necessary to do it. If there is evidence that the person withdrawn from is innocent or partially innocent, there should be diligent investigation, @Deuteronomy 13:14; but if he is withdrawn from rightly, it is our responsibility to bow to the action.
J.C. I like what you said about care being exercised by those outside the locality. How do you think that should be done? Should they inquire of those who are responsible or any in the assembly before they pronounce a judgment on it themselves? Do you think that would be the correct way -- to go and ascertain the facts as far as they can before they have a judgment themselves?
J.T. I should not like to assume that the brethren were wrong in what they have done unless there was some evidence that they were wrong; so that we ought to have confidence in one another, that what we do is done for the Lord's sake and for His name. But if something comes to your notice that is questionable, then, of course,
{96}
the thing would be to inquire from the brethren.
J.C. If something comes to your notice that would seem irregular, the next thing would be to contact the brethren involved and ascertain the facts from them so that you can form a proper judgment.
J.T. I would say that fully, assuming that their testimony is adequate and without prejudice.
A.A.T. I was going to ask about this brother at Corinth -- they were not unanimous about his case, were they?
J.T. No, they were not. Paul says, "This rebuke which has been inflicted by the many"; many of the brethren were in it, but some were not. That is to be noticed too, because if the thing is to be done the brethren ought to know that it is to be done, and it should be done even if some are dissenting, otherwise we should never arrive at a judgment, or discipline in some cases. We cannot assume to get unanimity. You go by the facts of the case, and act before God as to them. He will support what is right.
J.A.P. Some of the facts that enter into a case might not be brought out, such as the state of the person. There may be facts of failure, but what is the state of the person? Is that not important?
J.T. What state the person is in is very important.
J.T.Jr. Would Timothy's position in Corinth be such that he could minister as God gave him the word? Although it might not carry the opinion of the local brethren, yet he had to minister what God gave him.
J.T. That is what you get here -- Timothy and his ministry in Corinth -- what he might say in the way of advice and what he might minister in Corinth. It is said, "For this reason I have sent to you Timotheus, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ, according as I teach everywhere in every assembly. But some have
{97}
been puffed up, as if I were not coming to you; but I will come quickly to you, if the Lord will; and I will know, not the word of those that are puffed up, but the power", (@1 Corinthians 4:17 - 19). If Timothy is in Corinth, what is his status? and if he ministers, what is the importance of his ministry? Is that what you have in mind?
J.T.Jr. Yes, exactly. If he were there on the basis of a Levite, he would necessarily minister what God gave him, not what the people would expect him to give.
J.T. Yes. That is a principle governing Levitical service. Timothy had a place locally at Corinth in measure, as Paul would have. Paul sent him for that purpose; so that they might learn in him Paul's ways as they are in Christ.
A.R. It would have a universal bearing. It is the same truth wherever he goes.
J.T. Quite so. The idea of catholicity is important. If a principle is right in one place, it is right everywhere. It was thought that the kingdom in its relation to the assembly is one of the most important matters that could come before us, and I hope the Lord will help in what has been said. But there is much more that really needs to be said as to this matter of evidence, because there is such a proneness amongst us to say things trivially and loosely, and they turn out to be not the truth, and people repeat them and thus keep the brethren in a ferment.
W.F.K. You could not take up a matter unless there are witnesses.
J.T. We need witnesses in all questionable cases. "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every matter be established". Therefore, if anything is said and brethren have their attention called to it and it is shown that it is not true, then to continue in it is wickedness and destructive of the fellowship.
J.A.P. Is Paul specific in his words here? He says, "If any one called brother be fornicator, or avaricious, or idolater, or abusive, or a drunkard, or rapacious ..."
{98}
chapter 5:11. Those people have not committed just one act; they are constitutionally marked by the things stated.
J.T. Yes.
C.A.M. Would you say that what Paul stands for authoritatively, and what the household of Chloe and Timothy represent, are in principle existent today? If I understand it, Timothy stands for a characteristic personage that goes right on to the end of assembly history, so that that element would be present with us today, would it not?
J.T. I believe that is right.
C.A.M. I mean men of God. We are not without them.
J.T. That would bring up the question of who the person is, and whether he has Timothy's characteristics.
A.P.T. Timothy's commendation is that he cared with genuine feeling how the saints got on -- not went back!
F.N.W. You would be governed by what Paul says to Timothy in the first epistle. "I testify before God and Christ Jesus and the elect angels, that thou keep these things without prejudice, doing nothing by favour", chapter 5:21.
J.T. Yes. Timothy and Titus have a peculiar place and it is important to discover just what they do represent; what can be spoken of now as carrying their features through.
W.R. Would you say that it is really the qualities of a priestly judgment functioning in cases of difficulty? It is not judgment in a cold, callous way.
J.T. The true priest is a reliable man. In the law of leprosy, which enters into what we have been speaking of -- assembly administration -- the priest is supposed to be always there. It does not say; he is there. He is supposed to be there.
Rem. All of these things of which we have been
{99}
speaking, if operating in the assembly, would have decided effect on the kingdom.
J.T. That is true, because the kingdom comes in especially in these disciplinary matters. The kingdom comes in with authority. The kingdom and the assembly act and react upon each other. To use a figure, the kingdom is like the policeman. That is the idea. The kingdom implies power. The kingdom of God is in power; one in it characteristically can deal with a man even if he is unsubdued. You can deal with him.
Question. Does that imply the name of the Lord Jesus? It is said, "No one can say. Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit", (@1 Corinthians 12:3).
J.T. The power for maintaining order and discipline in the assembly lies in the Holy Spirit. The idea of enforcing the thought of the assembly is in the power of the Spirit, kingdom-wise, and that exists in persons.
A.P.T. At the end of @1 Kings 3 it says, "And all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged; and they feared the king, for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him, to do justice", verse 28. I wondered whether Solomon would suggest the way administration is carried on?
J.T. He established his qualification to rule by the wisdom he showed in that judgment. He said, "Bring me a sword", he would use it. He had power to use it, and that implies what we have been saying as to the kingdom. In the kingdom of God power is combined with wisdom, and that is illustrated in Solomon's reign.
{100}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD (5)
@2 Corinthians 2: 1 - 11; @2 Corinthians 7:6 - 11; @2 Corinthians 13:1 - 10; @Leviticus 4: 13 - 21
J.T. The brethren are aware that our subject at these readings this season is the kingdom of God. We have looked through Romans with the quest of understanding as to it, and at our last reading we had 1 Corinthians to see how the kingdom relates to the assembly. We looked at the earlier chapters, and it is suggested, as has been spoken of amongst us, that we should look at the second epistle to the Corinthians at this time. We can only be very cursory, for many books have yet to be looked into. At our last reading, as already remarked, we looked at the first letter to Corinth, and we were led to consider the matter of evidence in relation to assembly administrations-first, the evidence of the house of Chloe which reported that there was division among the saints in Corinth, chapter 1:11; and then in regard of chapter 5, the incestuous man whom Paul would have put away from among them. These two scriptures occupied most of our time, particularly because they had reference to current things amongst us. It was thought that the assembly was losing its place in administrative matters. The Lord helped at Corinth and the judicial action was carried out according to the apostle's direction, that in the power of our Lord Jesus Christ with Paul's spirit, and the Corinthians themselves in assembly, they should deliver the guilty man to Satan for the destruction of the flesh. Our present epistle shows that that judgment was carried out. Chapter 7, in the passage we read, shows how it was carried out. Verse 11 says, "For, behold, this same thing, your being grieved according to God, how much diligence it wrought in you, but what excusing of yourselves", meaning that they were ashamed of themselves because of the tolerance of evil amongst them, which now had been dealt with. Then
{101}
the apostle goes on, "But what indignation, but what fear, but what ardent desire, but what zeal, but what vengeance: in every way ye have proved yourselves to be pure in the matter". This shows, as was remarked, that the matter of judgment which was ordered by the apostle was carried out, and it would seem, with righteous severity. Now, what appears in our first scripture read, chapter 2:1 - 11, is that whilst they carried out the judgment rightly, they were failing in recognising the work of God in the man when it began to take effect. It is said in chapter 2:6, "Sufficient to such a one is this rebuke which has been inflicted by the many; so that on the contrary ye should rather shew grace and encourage, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with excessive grief". It seems that there are important lessons for us in this, first, as to tolerance of evil; how serious it is, and yet at the same time the saints were puffed up while allowing it, according to what the apostle says in chapter 5 of the first letter; and then, after the discipline had become effective in bringing about repentance, the evidence of the work of God, the Corinthians were tardy in recognizing what God had effected. This is a matter of extreme importance for us; that we should not be slow in recognising the work of grace in whomsoever it may be.
J.T.Jr. Does the first verse of chapter 2 show how the apostle himself was feeling in regard to things? "But I have judged this with myself, not to come back to you in grief". That is, he was viewing the thing as it affected God and he was not going to act apart from that.
J.T. I suppose he had in mind that he would come back as a herald. He speaks of himself in his first letter to Timothy with this in mind, "For God is one, and the mediator of God and men one, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, the testimony to be rendered in its own times; to which *I* have been appointed
{102}
a herald and apostle, (I speak the truth, I do not lie,) a teacher of the nations in faith and truth", (@1 Timothy 2:5 - 7). I suppose he would like to resume his service in that way at Corinth if he did come back; that he should not come back in grief which would tend to produce despondency, the very opposite of the effect of grace. I suppose he wished to come back in that way. Apparently that state of things had been brought about in his own soul, for he speaks of it in chapter 7, and it is important, I am sure, that we should, in approaching the saints, come in that way; that is, in buoyancy and power. I suppose that is what he had in mind, and therefore he, in order to pave the way, sent Timothy, a man like himself in spirit, who cared for the saints as to how they got on; whom, he says, he had sent to show them his ways, to set out his ways before them as they were in Christ.
A.R. Is that why Paul speaks so much about encouragement? He speaks about the God of encouragement.
J.T. Yes; I am sure it is an important thing that we should not be among the brethren, especially seeking to minister to them, in any gloomy or critical way. That cannot reflect the traits of the gospel.
R.W.S. Paul says in the first epistle, chapter 16:10, "Now if Timotheus come, see that he may be with you without fear; for he works the work of the Lord, even as I". Does that bear on what you have said as to Timothy being at Corinth and the instruction as to how they were to treat him, as possibly a timid man, as we have thought?
J.T. Yes. The same thing is seen in regard of Titus in (@2 Corinthians 7:13), "For this reason we have been encouraged. And we the rather rejoiced in our encouragement more abundantly by reason of the joy of Titus, because his spirit has been refreshed by you all". And then again he says, "Because if I boasted to him anything about you, I have not been put to shame; but as we have spoken to you all things in truth, so also our boasting
{103}
to Titus has been the truth; and his affections are more abundantly towards you, calling to mind the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling ye received him. I rejoice that in everything I am confident as to you". I thought that would correspond with what was said about Titus by Paul himself, that the spirit of buoyancy replaced the spirit of grief. The state at Corinth was an occasion for grief, but the occasion had passed, seeing the evil had been judged, so that there was joy in these ministers.
A.N.W. All that would be based upon the statement in chapter 2:7 -- that the brother who had been put away was liable to be swallowed up with excessive grief.
J.T. The occasion of it was the restoring effect of the work of God at Corinth. And I think what that suggests is that, outside of divine Persons, the work of God is morally the greatest thing we can think of. It will be said in the future, "What hath God wrought!" (@Numbers 23:23). And if He is working in any of us, for restoration or anything else, it is most important to take notice of it -- in however small a measure. It is our business, as priests to God and to Christ, to take account of the work of God in each. It is the first thing we hear of as in the gospel. There is joy in heaven, we are told, over every repenting sinner.
A.A.T. Have you any idea how Paul could have got all this information about the man, because he was not at Corinth?
J.T. That came up at our last reading, and it reminds us of what was spoken of at that time, that the assembly has ears. The ears of the assembly are spoken of in (@Acts 11:22) and, of course, these ears are of those who form the assembly, and they take in things that are interesting to God and further His work. Therefore Paul was informed as to the evil at Corinth; in fact what was evident at Corinth as regards the incestuous man was a matter of common report. We are not told who
{104}
circulated the report, but evidently it needed to be circulated was not taken account or rightly at Corinth. And so someone in the house of Chloe reported to the apostle that a state of division existed at Corinth; therefore, it would look as if the ears of the assembly should be alert for all such information.
J.A.P. Did Paul get any information from Titus, such as we were just speaking about?
J.T. No doubt he did. He speaks of him as if he did. He says, "Because if I boasted to him anything about you I have not been put to shame but as we have spoken to you all things in truth, so also our boasting to Titus has been the truth; and his affections are more abundantly towards you, calling to mind the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling ye received him. I rejoice that in everything I am confident as to you".
A.B.P. Verse 7 gives us the actual facts It says concerning Titus, "Relating to us your ardent desire, your mourning, your zeal".
J.T. Quite so.
W.F.W. Going back to chapter 2:4, the apostle said, "For out of much tribulation and distress of heart I wrote to you, with many tears; not that ye maybe grieved, but that ye may know the love which I have very abundantly towards you". Evidently Paul greatly felt the evil and he was greatly concerned that they might get help in regard to it. He did not use his apostleship in the way of using a rod but he passed through the sorrow in his soul.
J.T. Quite so. That he refrained from using the rod is helpful; the apostle would tend to pave the way for his own coming in buoyancy and the liberty of the truth of Christianity.
C.N. Does Paul therefore suggest the authority that is in the kingdom and the reaction that it has on the assembly?
J.T. Yes. That is our subject. He speaks of going
{105}
about preaching the kingdom of God. It marked him, but the preaching is to be accompanied by the spirit of the kingdom. We are told that it is righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit.
W.F.K. This man had repented; grief according to God works repentance. They could not do anything with him until he had repented.
J.T. Just so; but when he does repent he is a subject for the work of God; in fact, it is the work of God that brings about repentance.
C.A.M. Are we to act under the authority and commandments that are in the kingdom, like the first epistle to the Corinthians? That is comparatively simple, but the apostle also feels for the repentant man. We seem to need a sort of sensitiveness for that.
J.T. That ought to mark the assembly. The assembly is the centre whence all the operations of God work out; the accompaniments that promote holy buoyancy and joy; joy in the Holy Spirit. It would certainly seem here with great significance that that is just what existed, and Paul was labouring to the end that it should be there; that it should not only be actually existent on earth, but that it should be there, that it should be at Corinth at this particular juncture. It was a critical juncture, and these two brothers, Timotheus and Titus clearly belonged to the dispensation and intended to be characterised by it as delegates of Paul; and so they would create conditions, you might say, at Corinth such as marked the apostle when he went there first. The Lord had told him that He had much people in that city and not to be afraid, that no one would set on him to hurt him; so that he had a free hand there during the first eighteen months of his stay, and now that he is coming back he is desirous that he should be in the same spirit, and it is evident that that should apply to us, that in all circumstances we should maintain the character of the dispensation.
{106}
A.P.T. He says, "... lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with excessive grief". That would hardly be an assembly feature, would it? To allow that condition to prevail would not be in keeping with the dispensation.
J.T. No. I heard of a remark of Mr. Stoney's that he would like to push a certain man into heaven so that he might breathe the atmosphere of the gospel. What is in mind in our chapter is that the assembly should afford heavenly conditions, buoyant conditions.
W.F.W. Kingdom truth leads up to that. The kingdom is corrective and that implies assembly features That is what the apostle had in view.
J.T. He was representative of heaven, really. He tells us in this epistle that he went up there. He was caught up to the third heaven and into paradise, as if God would fill us, as witnesses here in any little measure, with thoughts of heaven, which ought to be reflected in the assembly.
A.R. What about pushing a man into the assembly?
J.T. I would not like to inaugurate anything like violence, but the kingdom of heaven is taken by violence, the violent take it by force. That is not violence in the ordinary sense of the word; it is spiritual, as overcoming obstacles, so that the joy of heaven should be amongst us, and if there is a man that has been a subject of the work of God, if he has been adversely subject to anything else, we ought to be able to help him, and that is the point here. The apostle urges them to show grace. The word 'grace' apparently means to forgive him. It carries the thought of forgiveness.
R.W.S. Is there skill in Paul suggesting that if Timothy go to Corinth he be there without fear? With conditions as they were at Corinth, why send a Timothy?
J.T. I would think he was a timid man. One would gather that, and no doubt God takes account of what we are constitutionally, in a physical sense, in taking us up
{107}
for His service; and if a man is weakly and timid as evidently Timothy was, he might be more effective in the circumstances then current in the assembly at Corinth. An aggressive man might hinder the work. Sometimes special firmness is needed; going forward with what is right. Timothy was not a man of that kind, but still he was the kind that suited the service; a timid man that would give way to others for the moment, but yet would maintain the truth. Timothy was representative of Paul, especially in his ways; something that we hardly know now by experience -- the idea of apostolic representation. Timothy represented that class of ministry: one who represented the apostle in his ways; not only in his teaching, but in his ways; "my ways", he says, "as they are in Christ", (@1 Corinthians 4:17).
A.N.W. Is it not necessary to see that in taking this course with the Corinthians he is not endeavouring to undo what they were told to do in @1 Corinthians 5 by saying that it was sufficient; but now it was time to receive him back?
J.T. Yes; because we may go beyond what should be done. Then another point that is important, I think, added to chapters 2 and 7, is that the types furnish the idea of the assembly needing correction; needing adjustment. Indeed the book of Leviticus affords the furnishings, positive and negative, that are needed for the service of God; reparation or correction of what is erroneous even though it be the assembly itself; even though it might be the high priest, or it might be a prince in Israel, coming down even to an ordinary brother or sister. Chapter 4 contemplates the need of a corrective offering being made by the assembly. God has furnished us with instruction so that the service should not be impaired by any lack on our part either in any undue severity or the want of grace; "sin through inadvertence against any of the commandments of Jehovah", verse 2. The defection arises from something done inadvertently.
{108}
That is, it was not wilful. A wilful sin in Leviticus is dealt with most summarily. In fact, Hebrews deals with that side, and Hebrews has to do with the service of God. Sin in Hebrews is apostasy. There is no forgiveness for that. But in Leviticus the sin is reckoned as inadvertence. The word is, as the brethren will notice, in @Leviticus 4: 13. "And if the whole assembly of Israel sin inadvertently". It is not regarded as a sin of will; a wilful sin, as it says in Hebrews, "For where we sin wilfully ...", chapter 10:26. There is no forgiveness for that. Here it is in advertence, therefore the door is open for correction. That correction implies that there is a judgment of the thing; although it was done inadvertently, yet it was sin nevertheless when it became known. When it becomes known it is sin, and it is dealt with as if the whole assembly were guilty of something, that is if somewhat is done against "any of all the commandments of Jehovah in things which should not be done, and are guilty". That is, the guilt is there nevertheless, although it was not done deliberately; and then the scripture directs that the elders of the assembly shall lay their hands on the head of the bullock before Jehovah. It says the bullock was to be a young one, and it was to be a sin-offering, and it was to be brought to the tent of meeting, "and the elders of the assembly shall lay their hands on the head of the bullock before Jehovah; and one shall slaughter the bullock before Jehovah. And the priest that is anointed shall bring of the bullock's blood into the tent of meeting; and the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle it seven times before Jehovah, before the veil; and he shall put of the blood on the horns of the altar that is before Jehovah which is in the tent of meeting; and he shall pour out all the blood at the bottom of the altar of burnt-offering, which is at the entrance of the tent of meeting. And all its fat shall he take off from it and bum on the altar. And he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock of
{109}
sin-offering: so shall he do with it. And the priest shall make atonement for them; and it shall be forgiven them", verses 15 - 20. That is the principle of forgiveness applied to the assembly. "And he shall carry forth the bullock outside the camp, and burn it as he burned the first bullock; it is a sin-offering of the congregation". That is, the blood of the offering is carried into the tabernacle and all such offerings are burned with fire without the camp, meaning they are serious before God. Not only have they offended each other, but they have offended the Lord: "... any of all the commandments of Jehovah". It is very gracious for God to provide this for us, because the types are for us. They are types for us in our dispensation. So that God has recourse to Himself to His own provision in grace; that in which He has come out in the gospel. He now comes out to repair -- to set us up again in the assembly -- so that the assembly should function; because the assembly is there abstractly even though there is error. The assembly is there abstractly, and God is ever ready to support it. In fact, the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it, showing it is abstractly kept in perfection, but nevertheless it is capable of sinning.
A.R. We should have an assembly conscience.
J.T. That is a good phrase. We are more ready to join in characteristics, perhaps, that are not marked by conscience. We are apt to join and hold to a line of things not marked by conscience, rather for justification of self, and to show that we are of one mind; whereas the assembly conscience will bar anything in the sense of special friendships, with special ability to be friendly with one another and to support one another.
W.F.W. What you have said as to a defective part in a machine is very instructive; something being defective in the assembly, so that it will not function properly. In the mind of God it is there and held there, but yet it is not functioning properly. You can take the most
{110}
expensive machine and if there is something wrong it will not function. The same thing applies to divine things.
J.T. It is well to use any line of things that we can apply illustratively. This matter of repair, the need of repair, and the power of repair to set things up as they used to be and should be is most important. Leviticus has that in mind.
C.A.M. In verse 15, which you just read, it refers to "the elders of the assembly", and in verse 16 it says, "the priest that is anointed". Would it be right to say that the elders of the assembly refer to some local element, whereas the priest that is anointed might be looked at as one that acted for God in a universal sense?
J.T. I think so. The priesthood is universal. The priests are not restricted to what is local any more than the Levites are. The elders of the assembly are always local. The term may be applied to the whole assembly or the whole nation of Israel, but in principle elders always, work locally and hence the elders of Ephesus, for instance, although by extension they may be regarded as the elders of the assembly, yet practically they are local at Ephesus. They are said to be made by the Spirit of God as overseers, not simply elders, but persons who look after things in an overseeing manner. And there is intelligence, there is ability to deal with things, because overseers should know; they know what is defective, and then they know how to repair, as we have seen.
J.A.P. Do we get help as to the priesthood in the incident when Phinehas took matters up for God? God said he was jealous for Him. Is that what is needed in these matters?
J.T. Just so; the priest thinks for God. @Leviticus 8 says that the priests are to keep the charge of Jehovah, day and night seven days, verse 35, meaning the whole dispensation. God has allied Himself, as it were, with them in approaching men in relation to matters of
{111}
leprosy such as this, or any irregularity, such as the outbreak in @Numbers 16, for example. In principle, the priests are always available to act for God.
W.R. Is Paul not setting up the saints in Corinth in the dignity of priesthood? He says in the beginning of chapter 7, "Having therefore these promises, beloved, let us purify ourselves from every pollution of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in God's fear", verse 1.
J.T. Just so.
R.W.S. In verse 13, something has been hid from the eyes of the congregation, but when the thing becomes known then the congregation shall present a young bullock. It does not say the assembly; it is the congregation. What is the difference?
J.T. Footnotes to @Exodus 12, verses 3 and 6, New Translation, give instruction as to the use of the two words. 'Assembly is the congregation looked at as a moral whole, a corporate person before God'. 'Congregation is the actual subsisting congregation composed of all its members'.
W.F.K. Should there be assembly repentance before adjustments are met?
J.T. There should be.
W.F.K. How does that work out?
J.T. @Leviticus 4, which we have been considering, indicates this. We also have instruction in Revelation. The seven assemblies are viewed as in responsibility, and, having failed, the Lord directs them to repent and do the first works, chapter 2:4,5; not only the actual repentance is required but the things that are needed should be done to set the matter right.
W.F.K. If this was not done the Lord could not be with the assembly.
J.T. He could not.
F.S.C. There is a word in (@2 Corinthians 7:9), "Now I rejoice, not that ye have been grieved, but that ye have been grieved to repentance; for ye have been grieved
{112}
according to God, that in nothing ye might be injured by us. For grief according to God works repentance to salvation, never to be regretted; but the grief of the world works death". Is that assembly repentance?
J.T. It is indeed. God has made provision in the types for us, and we see how the Lord carried out the same principle in writing to the seven churches; all is for us. "Now all these things happened to them as types, and have been written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the ages are come", (@1 Corinthians 10:11). So we are to take on what was written, and if it applies at a given time we should apply it. Why should there be a defect? God says, I do not want you to be at any disadvantage; I do not want to charge you with wilful sin. God is not wishing to place us beyond recovery; He is wishing to keep us within the range of recovery where grace is; where He is Himself. Hence, why not use it? And in order to use it, to set ourselves in the position to use it; that is, owning the thing that has been done. However ignorantly done, yet it is done and should be corrected and acknowledged not only to one another but to God.
A.R. Is that a local repentance? How do you-look at the repentance in Corinth?
J.T. There should be an acknowledgment to God. Only the other day I had a word about that in a letter from a certain place where an action had been taken several years ago and now it is found to be wrong, and the brethren are concerned how to deal with it, and clearly @Leviticus 4:13 - 21 is the way: to acknowledge it before God according to the instruction furnished. A young bullock is offered for a sin-offering, meaning that God is looking for the best in the way of acknowledgments.
A.P.T. In regard to the word our brother quoted from (@2 Corinthians 7:10), "never to be regretted". Does that fit in with the assembly side?
J.T. That is a good word. The assembly is not to
{113}
live in regrets. We are not to live in regrets in heaven, I am certain; nor are we to live in regrets here either. The matter is made clear and the assembly conscience made perfect through the sin offering; it sets us up again as free from the stain.
J.S. Is that to bring about buoyancy again in the assembly?
J.T. Just so. God is counting on us to represent Him here, and if we are not buoyant, rejoicing, we cannot represent God. The Spirit of God is here; hence it is joy in the Holy Spirit; that is a characteristic of the kingdom.
C.N. So that the elders laying their hands on the head of the bullock would be taking on the thing, and the action of the priests would be the atonement made for it, so that, as you say, the whole position is clear.
J.T. Quite so. They are God's priests; as if He were to arm Himself with them so that His rights are maintained. And as we have often remarked, Leviticus always speaks of the priests as available.
A.R. In what way can a local assembly sin today.
J.T. We cannot get any better example than the one we have before us. They were puffed up about the wickedness amongst them; and they did not deal with it; then after they dealt with it they were slow in showing grace; although grace reigns; it is the dispensation of the grace of God.
J.T.Jr. Would not verse 2 of the chapter in Leviticus amplify what our brother has brought up? It says, ".. any of the commandments of Jehovah"; that is, even one commandment. Matthew and Corinthians would be the law of the house. It would be a violation of any one commandment; even one.
J.T. Therefore the word in @1 Corinthians 14:37 is very significant, "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual ..." -- he would recognise that what Paul wrote was the commandment of the Lord. Hence John's
{114}
gospel says, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me", (@John 14:21).
R.W.S. Elders are not mentioned at Corinth. I was wondering if there was some reflection upon the elders there m connection with the assembly sinning.
J.T. There may be that. The Lord is helping us in having recourse to care meetings, admitting all the brethren, old and young; for why should we not be careful about the things of the Lord. A care meeting ought to be marked by the application of the principles that God has ordained for the government of His house; administrative principles. I do not know that we are weaker m anything than we are in administrative principles. It is painful to see the violation of some of them often allowed to pass.
W.W.M. Would you say something about the work of God that was mentioned at the beginning? Is it your thought that we are to value that work and promote it even though for the moment we may be hindered by something in the person in whom it is? The work of God is always to be valued. Moses says, "Make us glad according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted us, according to the years wherein we have seen evil. Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy majesty unto their sons. And let the beauty of Jehovah our God be upon us; and establish thou the work of our hands upon us: yea, the work of our hands, establish thou it", (@Psalm 90:15 - 17).
J.T. That bears much on what is before us. It is he that writes later, "What hath God wrought!" And what comes up in relation to that is the preciousness of the work, such as Bezaleel and Aholiab wrought, including the use of precious stones. The most precious things were employed. The epistle to the Philippians corresponds, as stressing the excellence of the work of God in Christianity. To them the apostle says, "And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in full
{115}
knowledge and all intelligence, that ye may judge of and approve the things that are more excellent", chapter 1:9,10. In the breastplate of the high priest, each tribe is represented by a precious stone; not only the name of the tribe but by the precious stone, as if we should know the value of the precious stone and say. That is Judah; that is Benjamin; so that we know how to value one another. We are apt to think of each other very crudely and even as together by dint of circumstances, ordinary external circumstances, whereas God's work brings us together in affection. Hence, as we see one who is the subject of the work of God, whether it be Judah or Benjamin, we recognise him. We know him by the precious stone. "To you therefore who believe is the preciousness", (@1 Peter 2:7). Peter uses that word, and so he speaks about the precious blood of Christ as of a lamb without blemish and without spot. The foundational position is in that, and hence the precious stones in the heavenly city. In the book of Revelation each foundation of the city is adorned by a precious stone.
C.F.E. The priest is spoken of much in @Leviticus 4. Does he take on the sin of the whole assembly?
J.T. Yes, he officiates in all the cases mentioned. Indeed, he himself is one of them. The first one mentioned is the priest, showing how all, outside of divine Persons, are liable to be defective. This type, however, contemplates complete adjustment as also does the first epistle to the Corinthians as to the man put away. The apostle, while ordering the man to be excommunicated, to purge out the old leaven says at the same time, "according as ye are unleavened". Thus while the assembly is capable of being leavened by the conduct of one of its members, viewed abstractly it is unleavened.
J.A.P. Does assembly sin oftentimes begin with the sin of a person? The chapter in Leviticus which we are considering begins with the sin of a soul. I was thinking of what Paul said to the Corinthians: "A little leaven
{116}
leavens the whole lump". Is that the way matters begin?
J.T. Yes; "a little leaven". The abstract idea of which we have spoken is important and ought to be always before us. The apostle says, "Purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump", (@1 Corinthians 5:7). That is what we are speaking about. He further says, "... according as ye are unleavened". On that basis we start over again. It is a foundational thought of the assembly. That is the work of God, and the work of God is in keeping with the cost at which the assembly is secured for God. It is purchased with the precious blood of Christ. Paul says to the Ephesian elders, "Shepherd the assembly of God, which he has purchased with the blood of his own" (@Acts 20:28) with notes.
W.F.W. From chapter 13 you were going to bring before us other things bearing on what is before us.
J.T. It was only to bring out from the chapters immediately preceding what is always present; that those whom God is using in His service are always objects of attack. The anointing always brings out the attack of the enemy. It comes out particularly in this second epistle to the Corinthians; Paul's adversaries -- because he had them. He would say, no doubt, in his inmost heart, I am sorry for them, but I have them. He singles out a certain one among them, a rival, no doubt saying, "His letters, he says, are weighty and strong, but his presence in the body weak, and his speech naught", (@2 Corinthians 10:10). That is, Paul can write a good letter, he would say, no doubt. "But his presence in the body weak, and his speech naught". That is the character of the attack. Those who are rivals will say discreditable things of those who are seeking to set out the truth as it should be. God has furnished many of His servants who are able to do this and we ought to have it before us that they are to be protected because the enemy is specially against them and that is the thing that works out in the
{117}
end of this epistle; Satan's emissaries were there and they were attacking Paul, and Paul says I am a fool to talk about myself in talking about them, but ye have compelled me, chapter 12:11. We force the brother or brothers whom God may be using in His service to speak of themselves; they may have to speak of themselves but they are fools in doing it, and they feel that. They would rather others would do it and others should do it. And so when the apostle comes down to the last chapter of the epistle, he comes to this point as to himself. He speaks about two or three witnesses, alluding to the fact that he had promised to come and was coming. They would say. He does not mean it; he is not exactly truthful about it; but he was truthful about it and he wanted them to know that he was truthful. Now he says, "I have declared beforehand, and I say beforehand as present the second time, and now absent, to those that have sinned before, and to all the rest, that if I come again I will not spare. Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, (who is not weak towards you, but is powerful among you, for if indeed he has been crucified in weakness, yet he lives by God's power; for indeed we are weak in him, but we shall live with him by God's power towards you,)" verses 2 - 4. That is the confidence the apostle has. "Examine your own selves if ye be in the faith; prove your own selves: do ye not recognise yourselves, that Jesus Christ is in you, unless indeed ye be reprobates? Now I hope that ye will know that we are not reprobates", verses 5, 6. Someone there might suggest that terrible thing; no doubt that is implied. "But we pray to God that ye may do nothing evil; not that we may appear approved, but that ye may do what is right, and we be as reprobates. For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. For we rejoice when we may be weak and ye may be powerful. But this also we pray for, your perfecting. On this account I write these things being absent, that being
{118}
present I may not use severity according to the authority which the Lord has given me for building up, and not for overthrowing", verses 7 - 10. I thought we should finish with that as bearing, not on the priesthood exactly, but on those whom God has set in the assembly according to the first epistle, to announce the truth and administer divine principles among the brethren.
A.B.P. Is there a link between this and @Leviticus 4 in the fact that the person who is not designated other than by the word 'one', who steps forward in the acceptance of the position and takes the lead to slaughter the bullock, may be outwardly expressing weakness in doing so?
J.T. Let us read the note to verse 15: 'The expression "ones hall slaughter" has interest in respect of the point where self-offering and mediatorial work begins. It was not the priest who slaughtered, unless he were the guilty one (verse 4), and then it is not as priest. I do not know that it is more precise in verses 4 and 24'. And in the chapter, verse 24, which is referred to, reads, "And he shall lay his hand on the head of the goat, and slaughter it at the place where they slaughter the burnt-offering before Jehovah: it is a sin-offering". Whether there is any point of weakness, I do not know, but the word 'one' would point to the fact that the thing had to be done. It might appear in other connections that the priest should do it, but the word "one shall slaughter the bullock before Jehovah" would mean that it had to be done. What was said about Ananias and Sapphira comes into one's mind. The burial had to take place and one of the young men did it. I do not know whether much can be said as to weakness.
A.B.P. I was thinking of it in the light of the weakness which Paul would attribute to himself in the verses we read. He seems to be prepared to be so regarded. Naturally speaking, it is weakness to admit error. Spiritually it is really power, is it not?
J.T. It is indeed power. I mean to say, you often
{119}
see it, that it needs courage, where a thing has been done that is not right, to say it is wrong; to say it outright; to call it by its right name.
W.R. Does Paul bring himself forward in that way as having parental authority over the saints? He says in verse 14 of the preceding chapter, "Behold, this third time I am ready to come to you, and I will not be in laziness a charge; for I do not seek yours, but you; for the children ought not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children", verse 14. Is that the thought, that Paul would desire in his activity among the saints to "lay up" something for them that could be carried forward to the glory of God?
J.T. He became a father to them. They did not have many, he said; they did not have many fathers. They had many teachers, and he acted towards them as his children, laying things up for them. He would work with his hands so as not to be a charge to them.
R.W. S. Would the gain of all this accrue in Corinth, according to the last verse of the epistle? "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all", verse 14. Is that the gain accruing from taking up issues and facing them -- having this rich heritage?
J.T. Just so; the Father, the Son and the Spirit are brought in there; certainly involving a very strong position in that sense. "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all". I think you have already said that the elders are not mentioned. It is all the saints -- the whole assembly -- in evidence in Corinth. When we come to the actual official side, in the first epistle, we have "So also is the Christ", the body is set out in that way, the Christ being expressed in the assembly as anointed. It is an anointed vessel here below in power to maintain for God on earth.
J.S. Does the apostle show how skilful he was?
{120}
J.T. Well, I am sure he does. That would link up with what we have already alluded to in Exodus: the skill of the workers in the tabernacle, especially the two leading workers, Bezaleel and Aholiab. That marked Paul. He was a wise architect; in building he knew just what to do.
W.F.K. Do you think those who form an assembly can be too severe and thus damage the building? I was thinking of verse 10 of our chapter. "That I may not use severity according to the authority which the Lord has given me". I was thinking of the building up.
J.T. That is specially important at the present time. It is a beautiful ending in such an epistle, especially as followed by the salutations, bringing in the whole Godhead. It fits particularly in an assembly to which Paul is regarded as a father; not only an apostle, but a father A father would be severe, if necessary, but characteristically a father works in love. He addressed the Corinthians as a father. "My beloved children", he says, "I admonish you", (@1 Corinthians 4:14).
J.T.Jr. Would verse 5 of this last chapter bring them back to chapter 11 of the first epistle examining and (proving) Really, you could hardly take the Supper without this; that is, where there is unjudged sin-examining and proving would lead you to judge it.
J.T. That is what you get here. "Examine your own selves if ye be in the faith; prove your own selves" Whether we are in the dispensation characteristically, is meant. We are to examine ourselves, and in chapter 11 it is, "and thus eat". How can we answer to this chapter unless we are fed with right food?
{121}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD (6)
@John 3:3 - 11; @Luke 4:42 - 44; @Luke 6:20; @Luke 8:1 - 3
J.T. We have been looking into the epistles in our consideration of the kingdom of God, which is the subject before us, and it is now thought that we should turn to the gospels as confirmatory of the teaching of the epistles. The kingdom of God is formally treated of in Mark, Luke and John, whereas the kingdom of the heavens is treated of only in the gospel of Matthew; so it is thought that we should leave this latter phase of our subject for a later period; that we should first look at the two or three instances in which the kingdom is found in John and then go on to Luke. The verses in @John 3, which have been read, are, we may say, the only ones, which treat of the kingdom of God in this gospel, and should be looked at attentively. John only of all the evangelists treats of this subject basically, reminding us that the kingdom is only seen and entered into by those who are born again; although it may be outwardly entered, yet only those who are born anew are really in it. Luke, in chapter 6: 20, points out the persons who possess the kingdom. He says the poor have it. John says that only those that are born again have it. Of course, Luke is not setting this aside, but stresses the effect of new birth in a characteristic way; that they are poor in this world, not only in material things, but as refusing to be other than poor as in this world, poor in spirit, as Matthew records the Lord as saying. And then in chapter 8 Luke gives us persons who are characteristically of the kingdom as delivered from Satan's power. It is said that the Lord "went through the country city by city, and village by village, preaching and announcing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God; and the twelve were with him, and certain women who had been healed of wicked spirits and infirmities, Mary who was called Magdalene, from whom
{122}
seven demons had gone out, and Joanna, wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many others, who ministered to him of their substance", @Luke 8:1 - 3. It is thought that this should be reserved for the closing part of our reading as showing the kind of people who are in the kingdom, who have been affected by it, especially a person out of whom seven demons had gone. They were with the Lord and ministered to Him of their substance.
C.A.M. Do you look at that as the result of what takes place in @John 3 where we get the very beginnings of our moral history?
J.T. I would say so; and then the effects worked out from the basic thought of new birth. It would seem as if it is suitable that John should treat of it in this way. It is applicable to the last days; that is, to our own times, because, as is usual in his way of presenting the truth, he would stress what is basic; not simply what is external, or what is professedly held, but basically held, and therefore will survive and go through.
C.A.M. Is that why he stresses this matter of birth? I wanted to ask you whether being born of water brings us to the meaning of the death of Christ at the very beginning. The water represents the moral side of the death of Christ in connection with the believer's beginning. Is that how you look at it?
J.T. Yes. It is the element of cleansing.
C.A.M. It was just that matter I specially wanted to ask you about. Do you regard the aspect of the death of Christ in connection with the blood as the judicial matter, and the water the cleansing?
J.T. Well, inasmuch as one is said to be born of it, the water would be there basically. It is the element of cleansing, not the element of refreshment, as running with the idea of new birth, because the word in verse 5 is, "born of water and of Spirit". It is as if, in this second reference, the Lord would impress us with the
{123}
element of cleansing, by putting the water first. The first reference is, "Except any one be born anew he cannot see the kingdom of God". That is, you might say, the most elementary reference to genuineness in the matter; and then the second reference brings in the element of cleansing, being an extension of the first as necessary to entering into the kingdom; as if the seeing is not so important as the entrance into it. Entrance into it implies moral cleansing, somewhat in keeping with Titus -- "the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit". That would be a further thought of @John 3, only it is a carrying on of the truth. It is a continuation of the thing to the full thought of Christianity, the washing of regeneration and the renewal of the Holy Spirit; as if it were on full Christian ground in that reference. @John 3 gives us basic things which indicate that we are genuine; not only to say things but to move into them and to appropriate them.
H.O.E. Would the Lord's words in chapter 13 bear on this? He said, "He that is washed all over needs not to wash save his feet, but is wholly clean".
J.T. Yes. They express a full thought. "Washed all over" is the idea of a bath, as over against the mere feet-washing.
W.F.K. Is new birth a sovereign act of God?
J.T. It is. One cannot effect it himself, clearly. It is God's action, but yet we cannot omit the moral results which bring in exercise with men; those who are to share in it.
T.E.H. Would you help as to entrance into the kingdom? We do not see the king, but a sphere where the king has dominion. Is that right?
J.T. Yes. God has come in. The Lord had said, for instance, in Luke, and in Luke only, "The kingdom of God is in the midst of you", @Luke 17:21. Generally, it is viewed as coming, or about to happen, but Luke stresses that it was here when the Lord was here,
{124}
whereas Paul's ministry would say it is here because the Spirit is present. It is a question of the Spirit.
A.R. Is that the idea of being born of the Spirit? You must be spiritual to see the kingdom.
J.T. That is the first point for us to lay hold of at this time -- the action of God in new birth. It gives us ability to see; as if the eyes are opened to see this thing without seeing anything more for the moment. There is power to see it, and the fact that the Lord alludes to it would mean that it existed as He spoke.
A.A.T. Would that apply to Old Testament times?
J.T. I do not think they are in mind. It is a question of the changes that came about through the Lord coming in. For instance. He says, "But from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of the heavens is taken by violence, and the violent seize on it", (@Matthew 11:12). He had spoken of John the Baptist as the greatest of those born of women, but He says that a little one in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he. That would mean that it is not in Old Testament times, nor even in John's time. Whilst John the Baptist laboured and spoke of it, yet it was something coming. The kingdom of heaven, he said, was at hand; whereas in the Old Testament it was not there at all. It was the kingdom of David or the kingdom of Israel, but the kingdom of God depended on God coming in, and from the moment Jesus began to minister, in Luke, it was there. He said, according to chapter 4:43, "I must needs announce the glad tidings of the kingdom of God to the other cities also, for for this I have been sent forth. And he was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee". The word here apparently is the idea of evangelising the kingdom. The Lord in Luke is saying that the thing exists; it is evangelised. It is a great matter; not simply that it was coming, but it was there.
A.A.T. Does @Luke 17 help in relation to @John 3? When the Pharisees asked the Lord about the kingdom of
{125}
God coming, He said, "The kingdom of God does not come with observation", (@Luke 17:20). Would that be indicative of the fact that they were not born anew and could not take it in? He says, "The kingdom of God is in the midst of you", and then turns to the disciples. They were apparently aware of the position.
J.T. Quite so. They did not accept or understand the great fact that had come about by the incarnation. The Lord said, "The kingdom of God is in the midst of you", but it did not come in an outward way, like the kingdom of David, or any outward matter that will take place in the millennium. It is a thing to be observed by the Spirit, by persons born again. It comes not with observation; that is, the natural man does not see it. He may see certain effects, signs and the like, but he does not see the moral side at all. It is a question of having his eyes opened to see it.
A.B.P. Is there a connection between @John 3 and @Luke 9? The Lord says, "There are some of those standing here who shall not taste death until they shall have seen the kingdom of God", verse 27.
J.T. That is important. I was thinking of reserving that, but it is important to get the full thought. That was the kingdom, as you might say, literally, as it will be in the millennium. What they saw on the mount of transfiguration was what will be displayed publicly presently, and they saw it really in the sense in which it will be displayed. @John 3 deals with the moral side of the matter, that one cannot see it unless he is born again, and that shuts out millions who might profess to be in the kingdom, but are not born again.
A.R. Where do you see it today?
J.T. It is a question of the Holy Spirit, as it was here in the Lord's time; but at that time He was not in the saints as Christ was not yet glorified. Still, the kingdom was here in virtue of divine Persons being here; the Son and the Spirit being on earth; thus God was here. It is
{126}
really the kingdom of God. Now, redemption accomplished, the Son is in heaven and the Holy Spirit is here in the assembly and hence the kingdom of God is here. So that the kingdom of God, as we have already seen, is righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit; therefore, anyone who sees it sees it in relation to the Lord's people, where the Spirit is.
D.P. Why is the blood not mentioned?
J.T. The Spirit and the water are mentioned; not the blood; but for redemption the blood is needed. It is implied in verse 14 in the uplifted Son of man. Eternal life could not otherwise be given to the believer. The earlier teaching of the chapter leads up to this. Verses 14 - 16 present redemption through the death of Christ and the consequent gift of eternal life -- all testifying to the great love of God. Thus the chapter treats of the death of Christ, because the Lord says, "And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, thus must the Son of man be lifted up", (@John 3:14). That is, the lifting up of the serpent in the wilderness really refers to the Lord's death; the water also does, but not in the full judicial sense. In the early part of the chapter what is stressed is the new birth -- a great practical necessity. It is a basic subjective result in man effected by the Holy Spirit. In view of what the presence and work of Christ on earth brought out (which the Lord knew, chapter 2:23 - 25) the new birth was an absolute necessity to the accomplishment of the counsels of God as to man.
R.W.S. Would the allusion to the wind suggest that there is a certain current in which the Holy Spirit is operating? And would the meetings afford such a current so that a person there might come under the observation of the Holy Spirit and be born again; more so than being out in the world?
J.T. You are making a point of being at the meetings?
R.W.S. Yes. If the Spirit is free in a meeting would there not be something, in that sense, which is not found
{127}
elsewhere? The passage alludes to the wind blowing where it will, and then it says, "thus is every one that is born of the Spirit", verse 8.
J.T. I would say that fully; therefore the importance of keeping in touch with Christians. Of course, the Spirit operates sovereignty, because the wind blows where it lists; "thus is every one that is born of the Spirit". Well, that is quite likely to take place where the Spirit of God is known to be. It is a great matter to keep before us, that the Spirit of God is here on earth, and it is known where He is. He is not in the wind. It is known where He is; He is in the assembly. The Spirit came to where the disciples were; where they were assembled. @Acts 2:1 - 2.
T.E.H. He hovered over the face of the waters, and then God said, "Let there be light". Is the latter the result of hovering?
J.T. That is a good way of treating that passage. The Spirit was there. We do not know how long He hovered there. The earth was waste. Some hand had done it; had created a chaotic condition. But the Spirit is there, nevertheless, to effect something which is seen throughout the first chapter of Genesis.
H.O.E. Would you say that the Spirit is now in the saints preserving and producing the features of the kingdom?
J.T. Yes. Hence the importance of keeping where the brethren are, because normally they are where the Spirit is. He came to the brethren, as we have noted, and the effect was seen immediately.
A.R. The sound was "as of a violent impetuous blowing". It was God really.
J.T. You might say, speaking reverently, the inwards of God were implied, for it was a question of breathing. It was not as in @John 3; the word there is not breathing. But in @Acts 2 it was a hard breathing. Thus God signalises the great occasion of the incoming of the
{128}
Spirit. His affections were involved in men receiving His Spirit; and therefore the assembly is essential to the presence of the Spirit now. His dwelling here is in the saints.
J.T.Jr. While Peter was speaking to Cornelius and his company the Spirit fell on those who were hearing the word. @Acts 10:44. Does not the hearing involve attention? Would not our meetings be better if our attention were better?
J.T. Quite so. Hearing is most important. The action of the Spirit in effecting new birth is mysterious, but, still, it is there, and the Lord intended to convey that. "Thou hearest its voice, but knowest not whence it comes and where it goes: thus is every one that is born of the Spirit". But it is a unified action; I mean, it is unified in the person involved, not affecting simply one part of him. The person is affected throughout by the action.
W.R. Do you think then that the three thousand souls added at Pentecost would get the gain of this?
J.T. They would. They were genuine. The chapter shows they were genuine cases. They continued, we are told, in the apostles¬ teaching and fellowship, in breaking of bread and prayers. They were so real and pleasing to the Lord that He was free to add others to them, they too being genuine.
J.A.P. Was the eunuch, prior to being spoken to by Philip, a subject of new birth as we speak of it? He was reading the Scriptures.
J.T. He might have been affected before. You cannot just say that he was not. Nicodemus undoubtedly was affected before, which would show that the Spirit was working, effecting new birth in men during the time of the Lord's ministry on earth. The Spirit was then operating on this principle, the Lord Himself being the Object in connection with whom the Spirit was working.
{129}
R.W.S. Was the Lord doing the work then, and is the Spirit Himself doing it now?
J.T. Well, the Spirit was doing it then too, when the Lord was here, because the Spirit was here in some sense from the outset. What is said in @Genesis 1 would indicate He was here in some sense all the time. He was striving with men even after that, and is still doing so. We are now considering divine Persons. We have already been saying that the kingdom is in relation to the assembly now, or to the Spirit in the assembly. The Spirit is, however, sovereign, and a man might be born anew out in the ocean, or elsewhere, without relation to persons.
A.R. I know when I was converted, but I cannot tell when I was born again. Why is that?
J.T. Well, what you call your conversion may have included new birth. God can act instantaneously both in regard to new birth and conversion. One could bring forward illustrations of what happens; how the Spirit may act instantaneously in one, so that he is affected, though it may not be in the sense of being converted. Something has happened and if the man is normal he is sensible of it. When the Spirit's action in new birth takes place in one he is sure to be affected.
C.N. Does the idea of being born of water prove that there is a moral correspondence in the person in whom the Spirit has wrought?
J.T. I think the moral idea must be there in some sense, even in the first action, because it is an action depending on something. The man is actually affected. "Except any one be born anew ..." It is an action of God, but it is not in the air. It is in a man. It is not in a cow or any other such creature; not in an angel. It is always in a man. It is a human being that is born anew.
W.F.K. Do you think the thief on the cross was born again?
J.T. He certainly was. He said, "Remember me,
{130}
Lord, when thou comest in thy kingdom", (@Luke 23:42). He saw there was a King there and, we may say, a kingdom also. There was a King there and he anticipated the Lord coming in His kingdom. Undoubtedly he was born anew for he saw the King and apprehended that He had a kingdom.
C.A.M. Would you say that the expression "born of water" would be the commencement of a man's moral being? It is not the same as washing one's robes. It would not be the same, for instance, as the cleansing of the leper, or other cleansings like @Numbers 19. Does it not refer to the beginning of a man's spiritual history?
J.T. Quite so. The washing is not what we call judicial. It is a subjective thing. The blood effects judicial cleansing. That is, it implies that the Lord Jesus has been into death; that there has been death, and the word here conveys just the initial thought of cleansing. The Lord had not died yet, but He implies that there is such a thing as this -- a man being morally affected in the sense of cleansing. He would speak of things differently from this point of view; he is different; he would speak of things in a holy way from the start.
G.B.L. Does @Leviticus 12 serve as a type to show that cleansing is connected with birth? When a child is born cleansing is required in the type.
J.T. Yes. Sixty-six days were required for a female child for the full cleansing of the mother, and thirty-three days for the male child; so that there is something there to remind us that the incoming into this world, whether it is a male or female, involves defilement; the female involves more pollution naturally than the male, if the brethren are able to follow that. It would mean much as to the condition of the human race in this world, and the polluted condition that is in the race, and how this idea of cleansing must take place. So that the first reference -- the eyes being opened to see the kingdom -- is not enough. There must be a movement, definite
{131}
movement, which means that I leave certain things behind.
A.A.T. Is the man in @John 9 a sample of what we are speaking of? He was born blind, but got the movement you are speaking of afterwards.
J.T. Yes. He would illustrate the idea of being born anew and how it works up to full faith in Christ, so that the idea of being born anew is just an initial thought. The believer is not yet fully on the ground of redemption. It is the initial idea, whereas @John 9 shows that the man steadily progressed. The Lord waited until he had been cast out of the synagogue, and then He says to him, "Thou, dost thou believe on the Son of God?" That is the next thing; what you believe after you have been born anew.
W.R. What is according to the old nature cannot be reformed or improved. Is that why the Lord Jesus speaks the second time, "Except any one be born anew"?
J.T. It means that Nicodemus who, from the Jewish standpoint, was, perhaps, the best man you could find, and was undoubtedly born anew, had need of this new thing. Whatever we may be religiously, we need this new thing. It says, "Except any one". The number of occurrences of the word "verily" in this section is remarkable. There are about twenty-four of them in John, but they are very strong here in emphasizing the necessity of the new birth. It is a real truth, an essential truth, and without it there is no Christianity at all.
H.O.E. Does the manifestation of the works of God in @John 9 include the work of the Spirit initially in the opening of the blind man's eyes?
J.T. Just so. It is one of the most remarkable passages, because the man is not regarded as a sinner himself. I mean, he is not regarded as having sinned himself, nor his father; showing that God is regarding the man as just existing to bring out His works; that the works of God should be manifested in him. It is not the
{132}
work, but the works. The first work would be new birth, and that may have synchronised with what happened as the Lord took him up. The man did not ask Him to do it. The Lord spat on the ground and made mud of the spittle and put the mud on his eyes, anointing him with it, and told him to go to Siloam and wash. Much had to be done. The man had to find his way to Siloam. He was still blind, and if possible, blinder than before; but how did he get to Siloam? That is what the mind must follow. How did he get there? But he said that he was sent. The meaning of the word Siloam is. Sent. The moral element is in the fact that he was sent, and he obeyed the commandment, "Go, wash in the pool of Siloam". I would say, that is where new birth is seen. The man is entirely subject and does what he is told to do in order to be healed. It is the same sense in which any person has the obedience of faith; he is a witness to new birth; as he submits to the word of Christ one evidences new birth; so this man went to Siloam. That is the point he makes in speaking of it. The neighbours inquired of him, and he said that having gone and washed, he saw. That is historical, what he said to the neighbours. To the Pharisees, later, he says, "I washed, and I see". The point he makes is that he sees. He says in effect, if you examine me you will observe that I see.
R.W.S. Would you have the assurance that if a person is born again, the Spirit of God will follow that work up, or might it just be left as we see it in @John 3?
J.T. Nicodemus was long in coming to the full bearing of the truth. The fact is that we must always note a distinction between him and the rest of the people around. It says. But -- "But there was a man from among the Pharisees". There is an adversative force in that phrase in favour of him. So he is not left. What was in him is pursued. He says, "We know that thou art come a teacher from God, for none can do these signs that thou doest unless God be with him", verse 2.
{133}
That is clear evidence that there is some sight in him: he saw that God was with Jesus. That indicates how the Spirit of God would follow up one born anew. The Spirit of God effects the change Himself and He follows on it with an evangelist, I would say. Nicodemus identifies himself with the Lord at His burial, @John 19.
A.R. He came with one hundred pounds of myrrh and aloes to the Lord's burial. That shows he was genuine.
J.T. It did indeed, but he stayed a long time with the council, and that is another matter that we have to consider; that new birth may take place and yet a man may remain in worldly associations for a good while. Hence there is the need for a clear gospel being presented when there is any such case as Nicodemus; to present the true gospel; a separative gospel. The man in @John 9 had the truth in that sense; in fact, he testified it himself. They cast him out, and that made him fit for something else; namely, believing on the Son of God.
D.P. Is the effect of new birth, in principle, to be seen in Naaman the Syrian?
J.T. Well, I would say he must have been a subject of the work of God before the Spirit of God calls attention to him, @2 Kings 5. God had used him; God had given deliverance to Syria through him. Why should that be stated there? And why should it be that he was a leper if it does not suggest that God takes up men who are ready to receive the gospel to work in them sovereignly by His Spirit? In this case the evangelist was a little maid. Naaman was already a subject of God's work; but it is proceeding. The matter is proceeding, and so the maid is affected by his case. She says, "Oh, would that my lord were before the prophet that is in Samaria! then he would cure him of his leprosy", (@2 Kings 5:3). She was the evangelist, and that is what I think the Lord would tell us now -- to be urgent about need. If there are people around who seem to be interested; who indicate desire to be helped; who are the
{134}
subjects of the work of God, we should show that we are concerned about them. In the case of Naaman, the king of Syria took the matter up, which would indicate how the enemy is ready to interfere with the work of God, because Naaman was sent to the wrong man; he was sent to the king of Israel. The little maid did not say any-I thing about him; she spoke of the prophet in Samaria; that he would cure Naaman of his leprosy. The point is to be sure when instructing people as to the gospel, to send them to the right person.
Question. The man in @John 5 does not seem to be able to say very much. He did not know who it was that healed him.
J.T. He is hardly a type of a convert. He caused the Lord persecution. Still, he was the subject of the sign, a testimony of the Lord's outward work. The Lord did not seem to have confidence in him, for He says, "Sin no more, that something worse do not happen to thee", (@John 5:14). That implies that he is not to be trusted.
T.E.H. Isaiah was very desirous of seeing the result of the work of God. He says, "Who hath believed our report? and to whom hath the arm of Jehovah been revealed?" chapter 53:1.
W.R. Should we be energetic to seek out others to bring them into what we have of the light of the assembly and of the kingdom of God?
J.T. Just so; these cases that have been mentioned -- Naaman, the man in @John 9, and Nicodemus -- all point to persons who are subjects of God's sovereign work. Now having proceeded so far in John, we should touch on @Luke 4 to show how the proclamation of the kingdom goes with what we have been saying as to John. New birth is the sovereign, direct work of the Spirit. The passage in @Luke 4 which has been read is the first one that mentions the subject of the kingdom of God in this gospel, but we should remember that Luke mentions that the angel told Mary that the Lord would have a great
{135}
and everlasting kingdom, chapter 1:32,33. But the verses in chapter 4 refer to the evangelisation of the kingdom of God. It says in verses 42 - 44, "And when it was day he went out, and went into a desert place, and the crowds sought after him, and came up to him, and would have kept him back that he should not go from them. But he said to them, I must needs announce the glad tidings of the kingdom of God to the other dues also, for for this I have been sent forth. And he was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee". So now we have to consider Luke's side of our subject, which depends on John's side; but the preaching is essential. It is not exactly the preaching of the Christ, but the preaching of the kingdom of God; that there is such a thing as that to be preached, and to be preached universally, as the Lord says, "... the other cities also". And for this travel is needed. The Spirit of God could reach a point and we cannot specify the time it would take to do it. The Spirit of God might move quickly in effecting new birth; but in order to preach the kingdom, the Lord moved in the ordinary outward way, involving what He came into as becoming Man. I speak of that advisedly, that as in the days of His flesh He toiled, travelling from city to city in God's service. And later the apostles did it; and so now it is for us to do it; to travel to preach the kingdom. It is in order to preach the kingdom; not simply preaching the gospel in the terms of it, but the kingdom of God, implying that it is in power.
A.R. What do you have in mind as to the Lord being here in a limited way?
J.T. He came here in flesh and blood. We have to be careful in saying that He was limited, but it is a question of what He submitted Himself to. He uses the words, "No one knows, neither the angels ... nor the Son", (@Mark 13:32). One has to be careful in referring to such scriptures, but they are intelligible because the Lord, of Himself, entered into certain limitations to bring out
{136}
the position He had taken for the will of God. Here He says, "I must needs announce the glad tidings of the kingdom of God to the other cities also". He travelled from one place to another. There is no evidence that He carried on His service, in this physical sense, miraculously.
J.S. Do you think He alludes to His limitations when He says, "And how am I straitened until it shall have been accomplished!" (@Luke 12:50)?
J.T. Yes. That bears directly on what we are saying.
A.P.T. It is remarkable how Luke in his further record in Acts says, "The word which he sent to the sons of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, (he is Lord of all things,) ye know; the testimony which has spread through the whole of Judea, beginning from Galilee", (@Acts 10:36,37). It is interesting to see how the Lord served, as you remarked.
J.T. It becomes very testing and humbling in a way, and very affecting, because the Lord travelled, all these distances. It is never said that He used a conveyance except the ass on which He rode into Jerusalem. His feet carried Him. And so the woman of @Luke 7 kissed His feet and anointed them with myrrh, evidently because they carried Him to her; that is what Luke would keep before us. It is what the Lord does in His grace and patience. He says, "I must work the works of him that has sent me while it is day", (@John 9:4).
A.P.T. If a brother has ability to preach, do you think it is wise to preach every Lord's day evening?
J.T. Why are you asking that question?
A.P.T. We have had ministry as to our travelling in serving in the gospel, involving possible neglect in caring for local conditions. The matter of preaching the kingdom, as we have been considering it, is interesting, but are there not other things that are to govern our responsibility? It is important to look after the local company.
J.T. The home front has to be attended to. It is not
{137}
simply that we are good platform men; we must care for the saints, as well. So that in carrying on the service and testimony of God there is much more to do than to preach.
H.O.E. Going back to your reference to the Lord moving in a limited way, do you mean to convey the impression that the Lord would not always use His miraculous powers in service?
J.T. If all the service of the gospel were miraculous you can hardly say there would be faith. God came here in Jesus. Luke gives us the most beautiful touches about Him. He was a Babe in a manger, and grew up to boyhood and manhood. All was of God, but it was in normal growth. His conception and birth were miraculous, as we all know; but afterwards all was generally normal growth, until full manhood was reached. "The child grew and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and God's grace was upon him", (@Luke 2:40). The moral side is more stressed than the miraculous. After the Holy Spirit came upon Him and the consequent public testimony was rendered, what is stressed is that God was there. Nicodemus makes the great point, as to the Lord, that "none can do these signs that thou doest unless God be with him"; whereas Peter says He "went through all quarters doing good, and healing all that were under the power of the devil, because God was with him". @Acts 10:38. In @Luke 3:23 it says that Jesus was beginning to be about thirty years of age. That is to say, the Lord took on the service of God according to Levitical principles. That is the age at which the Levite began his service. And He waited until John was cast into prison. That is another thing; He would follow John. John began to serve before the Lord did, and the Lord would come after him. In John's gospel that side is omitted, but in the synoptic gospels it is clearly pointed out that He waited until John was cast into prison. John was beheaded. The
{138}
Lord is affected by these things. And, therefore, we have in Mark, who introduces the subject of the kingdom earlier than Luke: "Repent and believe in the glad tidings", chapter 1:15. That is the first thing the Lord said in Mark. He came and said that. Therefore, it is important to see how He was governed by Levitical principles and waited until the time came to enter on His service. Mark begins at once as to the actual service. He opens his gospel saying, "Beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, Son of God". That is the way Mark presents Him. He is abrupt, and his narrative is marked by the word "straightway".
A.R. What are the features of the preaching of the kingdom of God? Paul spoke about "my gospel".
J.T. The Lord alludes to the matter of preaching here. "And when it was day he went out, and went into a desert place". He was evidently alone there, and probably taking up time doing something with a purpose. "And the crowds sought after him". The idea of a desert is to be noted. The flesh will not be ministered to in a desert. And then it says, "... and came up to him, and would have kept him back that he should not go from them". We might say that the Lord should stay with them, but He is working out Levitical principles here, and He is saying to us that we must not be detained unduly. If it is on your heart to do something for the Lord, take the time to do it, but do not delay in it; do not spend too much time. So that it says that they "would have kept him back that he should not go from them", but He said, "I must needs announce the glad tidings of the kingdom of God to the other cities also, for for this I have been sent forth", verse 43. Now I have already remarked that He was not sent from heaven. Some one might say that this remark would indicate that He was, but it does not mean that. He was sent out as already here. It is after the Spirit came upon Him that He spoke of Himself as sent, as seen in verse 43. He is
{139}
telling those with Him that He has been sent forth to preach, that He is here on a mission, and this mission includes the idea of the kingdom of God. So it says, "And he was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee". It was a question of the kingdom.
W.R. It would seem from these verses in Luke that the Lord was under orders, and He was using His power at every moment to reach as many as possible that might be subjects for the kingdom.
J.T. Quite so; and how wonderful His work was! The amount of work He did is in evidence. Of course, all is not written, but what we have shows that what we do should be done well and not with negligence. Verse 20 of @Luke 6 ought to be in our minds before we conclude this reading. "And he, lifting up his eyes upon his disciples, said. Blessed are ye poor, for yours is the kingdom of God" -- it is persons who are thus characterised. @Psalm 41 says, "Blessed is he that understandeth the poor". I mention that because the Lord Himself is included in the idea of the "poor". The footnote there says, attendeth to, giveth head to, owneth. Heaven takes account of a man who is so viewed. The Lord is now speaking about the position of the apostles, and, indeed, the remnant that was here in His own time; how they were cared for by heaven. "He, lifting up his eyes upon his disciples, said. Blessed are ye poor, for yours is the kingdom of God". It seems to me that this is something which should be in our hearts. The kingdom of God is regarded as belonging to such; it is their proper portion -- the poor -- and the Lord says that they are blessed because of that.
J.S. Is not the King doing His own preaching in Luke? I am thinking of Ecclesiastes.
J.T. You mean king Solomon was the preacher. That is true. And then there is this other word m chapter 8 that we already alluded to and which I think would be a sort of
{140}
finish to our subject in this section -- the kind of people that were attached to the Lord in His service in the kingdom. He was an Object to them. They were ministering to Him of their substance, but it says, "he went through the country city by city, and village by village, preaching and announcing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God; and the twelve were with him, and certain women who had been healed of wicked spirits and infirmities, Mary who was called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out, and Joanna, wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many others, who ministered to him of their substance", verses 1 - 3. The kingdom is seen here in a rich, flourishing way, and the Lord is seen in it as the Object of the twelve and others who had been blessed through His ministry.
C.F.E. How do we acquire the substance seen in these women here?
J.T. I would think that, viewed spiritually, it is acquired in the kingdom. Entering into the kingdom, you acquire spiritual wealth.
A.R. Why does Luke speak specially about women here?
J.T. It is remarkable; it is the subjective side. I believe the kingdom is worked out in them peculiarly, as making Christ an Object.
J.A.P. Is it a feature of the kingdom to minister substance, in that way, to those that travel?
J.T. Well, the passage intimates how the work was carried on in the Lord's own times, and how we are to be patient in it; "city by city, and village by village". Of course, we use means and methods that are available now for travel, but I think the idea is one city after another. When we come to chapter 10, we see that the seventy were sent out on this principle. "Now after these things the Lord appointed seventy others also, and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place where he himself was about to come. And he said to
{141}
them. The harvest indeed is great, but the workmen few; supplicate therefore the Lord of the harvest that he may send out workmen into his harvest. Go: behold I send you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves. Carry neither purse nor scrip nor sandals, and salute no one on the way. And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say. Peace to this house. And if a son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it; but if not it shall turn to you again", verses 1 - 6. Now this is a large number of workmen. They do not appear in chapter 4. These are the Lords men, seventy in number. The field is widening, and we have instructions to govern us, and I think the basis is laid for assemblies to be formed, because they were sent into "every city and place where he himself was about to come". And sons of peace is a leading idea. A son of peace is a man you can get on with. He is building material. The Lord coming to a place points to assembly formation. Thus not only is preaching contemplated, but also the result of it. For assemblies, as in Judaea, (@1 Thessalonians 2:14), there must be sons of peace.
T.E.H. Would @Acts 13 give us a wonderful example of this? There was the ministering to the Lord and then two of His servants were sent forth.
J.T. This chapter undoubtedly is in mind, because, as we already remarked, the gospels are intended to confirm the epistles, and the apostles¬ service. The Lord's own example, as seen here, is similar to the case of Barnabas and Saul.
A.B.P. @Luke 8 seems to be "richly furnished", as Peter says in his epistle. "The twelve were with him", it says. Would that be administration? And then, would the women who ministered unto Him, afford the full scope for the kingdom, in that way?
J.T. Yes. You feel the administration is most important -- as seen in the twelve -- and must go with the service kingdom-wise, because if we are going from city to city, we encounter various elements; there were many
{142}
assemblies in Judaea after the Lord went to heaven, and these cities would imply need for administration, and I think it is the one thing that is not being used properly. It is remarkable that the twelve are there; and then these women would be there to afford fellowship, and to minister to those who serve in the gospel, that they are not wanting in anything.
A.B.P. Is this seen in the early Acts where the saints are referred to as continuing in the apostles¬ teaching and fellowship and in breaking of bread and prayers? The whole scope of the kingdom seems to be operating there.
J.T. Just so; I suppose the women here would represent the idea that there was no need. They "ministered to him of their substance".
J.T.Jr. And then we must link the great regard for His feet as seen in the previous chapter. "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that announceth glad tidings, that publisheth peace", (@Isaiah 52:7). There is something in regard to the Lord's feet that is very precious.
J.T. I think that is especially to be noted, because there can be no doubt that Mary Magdalene is very like the woman in the end of chapter 7. She was a woman such as Mary Magdalene who was evidently devoted to wickedness at one time, but now she valued the feet of Jesus. She kissed His feet, and anointed them with ointment. It would seem as if we are to be reminded that what is needed in the ministry, is seen here. In @Acts 2, what a furnishing there was! No one said that anything he had was his own; they had all things in common. It seems as if that is presented to us at the outset of Christianity to show what the mutual side is. There is no doubt that these persons seen in @Luke 8 are intended to show us how the kingdom works out. They are subject persons and Christ is everything and in all to them.
A.B.P. It is significant that the apostles¬ feet were
{143}
prominent at the beginning, as also the feet of the lame man.
J.T. In what we have had before us today, I think there is a lesson to remain with us; especially those who are doing anything in the way of preaching; to see that the thing we preach is already here, because the kingdom is not mentioned until it is here. As we have seen, Luke contemplates that the kingdom was here in the Person of Christ.
{144}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD (7)
@Luke 9:27 - 36; @Luke 10:8 - 11; @Luke 11:20; @Luke 17:20 - 21
J.T. The reference to the mysteries of the kingdom, in the parable of sowing the seed, should be reserved for our consideration of Matthew, who gives us more on these points. It is thought that on this occasion we should confine ourselves particularly to the subject of the kingdom as it bears on the gospel. On the last occasion we touched on chapter 8 and now it is thought that we should consider the mount of transfiguration, which seems to be a turning point in the subject. The kingdom there is not viewed as it is now in connection with the gospel, but evidently in an entirely spiritual way. In chapter 9, verse 27 to the end of verse 36, we have an account of what happened on the holy mount; referring not to the moral features of the kingdom down here, but to what is up there; what is spiritual. The word is, "There are some of those standing here who shall not taste death until they shall have seen the kingdom of God", verse 27. The characteristic features are not designated: it is just the kingdom of God. In Mark, the corresponding passage says, "There are some of those standing here that shall not taste death until they shall have seen the kingdom of God come in power", chapter 9:1. And in Matthew, "There are some of those standing here that shall not taste of death at all until they shall have seen the Son of man coming in his kingdom", chapter 16: 28. Here, in @Luke 9, it is just the kingdom of God without any qualification; clearly not the kingdom of God as we have been looking at it in Romans and Corinthians, but rather how it is to be apprehended as up there, as a wholly spiritual matter. And there follow illustrations that bear on this -- or on which this bears -- such as chapter 10, in which the seventy are sent out, obviously in order to make way for the formation of
{145}
assemblies. Therefore, what is before us runs into the present dispensation and present circumstances, and the formation of assemblies; because it is said that, the seventy were sent out. "The Lord appointed seventy others also", meaning that they were in addition to the twelve, "and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place where he himself was about to come", chapter 10:1. It is where the Lord comes, and of course we have learned to count upon Him coming to us in assembly, and undoubtedly the allusion is to this, so that it is Christ coming in from heaven. Having gone up. He is viewed in that light. And the expression "son of peace" runs through the instruction. Sons of peace are to be looked for. And in chapter 11, in order to bring this out more clearly, we have the idea of the finger of God: the Lord cast out demons by the finger of God, and that was the proof that the kingdom of God had come. Matthew speaks of this in the same connection, as the Spirit of God and, of course, there was the living evidence, but the finger of God is evidently God intervening, according to the statement by the Spirit in the Acts, that the Lord "went through all quarters doing good ... because God was with him", (@Acts 10:38). So that the kingdom in this setting is mediatorial. It is God and His finger, but it is through Christ; God is working through Christ. And then in chapter 17 we have the formal assertion that the kingdom of God is in the midst of them, meaning that it was a question of what was in Christ, and what is in Him now. It has not come with observation; it is not in a public way, but in a moral way, and yet it is in Christ. "The kingdom of God is in the midst of you", verse 21.
J.S. Is seeing a special feature here?
J.T. Well, that is what it says. They should not see death until they saw the kingdom, which would greatly emphasise the idea of @John 3; persons who can see it and who can enter into it.
{146}
J.H.E. That would bring in the eyes of the heart mentioned in Ephesians?
J.T. Just so; what we see inwardly.
C.A.M. Would you say that to get a correct view of it we have to look at it from the top?
J.T. Yes; and to see how it embraces the legislative and administrative branches of the kingdom of God.
J.T.Jr. Does Peter's reference to this help as to the bearing on this dispensation? He says that the Lord received honour and glory from God the Father. Would that connect with Peter's part in the dispensation?
J.T. That is in the mount, (@2 Peter 1:17); just so, Peter himself had a peculiar part in the administration; not, however, in the sense in which we are speaking of it now. Peter had the keys of the kingdom, alluding to the power of administration.
A.N.W. Would it be right to speak of what transpired on the mount as a private view of the kingdom, it still being true, that it did not come by observation? Would that be right to say?
J.T. It would. It was a vision on the top. Matthew calls it a vision.
A.B.P. You suggest that legislation was seen in Moses and administration in Elijah?
J.T. That is what I was thinking, although it is very general. That is the idea suggested. It is the linking up of the Old Testament economy with the present one. It is not a question of the assembly, because the Old Testament, save in type, does not contemplate that. It is the kingdom.
A.B.P. Would you say a little more about administration in relation to Elijah?
J.T. Well, he came in at a time when the legislative side in Israel had failed. Elijah was peculiarly used to meet the situation. It was a time of quickening in the administration of what is of God, which is always important especially when there is a lapse, so that you are
{147}
impressed with the place that Elijah has as alongside of Moses, as if he were almost equal. And I think it would mean what personal service may be in a time of decline; of what one man can do. And so he is alluded to by James in this sense; what he did by prayer, he prayed with prayer. And so it is that James is said to be himself signalised in that the Lord appeared to him; as if he represented the service of one man, what one man may be or do. That ought to be an incentive to us, each one, to do something, because something has to be done if one is to be signalised.
W.F.K. Is glory connected with the kingdom? They beheld His glory.
J T Quite so; these men were there, but only in the way of enhancement of the position; not to remain. They talked with Jesus. It is very remarkable that they should be the ones to speak to Him. It is said, "As he prayed the fashion of his countenance became different and his raiment white and effulgent. And lo, two men talked with him, who were Moses and Elias", verses 29, 30. They are not angels. The point is that they are men. These great officers, either as legislative or administrative, are men. It shows that God has laid hold of men and is thinking of men in what He is doing.
W.F.K. Did they represent something in past testimony? .,..
J.T. They did; that is what we are saying: what Moses was in his service; what Elias was in his. How distinguished they were in it! One of them when he died, was hidden in burial; God Himself buried him, but Elias was not buried; he went up to heaven in a whirlwind.
R.W.S. Does Elijah's taking the twelve stones in the repairing of the altar, @1 Kings 18:30,31, bear on administration.
J.T. It does, clearly. The altar is repaired; it represented twelve. Moses had the same idea in the
{148}
twelve pillars. @Exodus 24. They did not need repairing, but one point with Elijah is repair: the resetting up of things, and that in power. What Moses inaugurated needed repair.
F.S.C. Does the Lord represent the subjective side of the kingdom? He was in subjection to the Father; He prayed.
J.T. Yes, in the sense that He was subject; this characterised Him as become Man. The word usually means something that is inward and consciously realized as over against what is objective; but I see your point. It is a great point throughout this gospel that the Lord is seen about ten times in prayer. In this chapter we have Him thus, verse 18: "... as he was praying alone". And in chapter 11 He is seen praying and one of the disciples asked Him to teach them to pray, verse 1. And in the end of this chapter, verse 29, He is seen in prayer when He is changed: His countenance became different, and His raiment white and effulgent; showing the attitude as honoured.
R.W.S. When you use the expression up there is that heaven as over against what is on the earth?
J.T. Well, it is just according to the meaning of the phrase. The word up has a very great place in Scripture, even in regard to the resurrection. It is applied to the resurrection, but not always; that is, we have Christ raised from among the dead, @Romans 4:24, and Christ raised up from among the dead, @Romans 8:11.
A.P.T. In @Revelation 4 the voice says, "Come up here". Is that the idea?
J.T. Quite so; caught up into paradise; caught up to the third heaven. Scripture says. Have you anything else in mind?
R.W.S. I am not quite clear as to the bearing of this. I would like to follow the instruction, as you quote the book, whether this was actually present, though a future setting, and why it was brought in.
{149}
J.T. It was obviously to impress the disciples. It has the same importance as Paul's ascension to the third heaven. It has the same bearing as John being caught up, as has just been remarked, "Come up here". That is to impress us with the greatness of what we are connected with and what we will come into; it should bear on us down here in the time of our humiliation.
A.P.T. Verse 26 begins with the word "For" and verse 27 with the word "But". Would that help to denote what the Lord has in mind in a spiritual sense?
J.T. Quite so. The "but" is the transfer to something else. "But I say unto you of a truth ..." The "but" there is to carry you from one thing over to something else; a great matter that the Lord had in His mind.
A.N.W. Has it not a direct bearing on their tasting death? The Lord makes a point of that, that they shall not taste death until they have seen the kingdom of God.
J.T. They would be equal to Elijah in that sense and also, in a sense to Moses -- something extraordinary -- something was to happen and they were not to taste death before it happened.
E.E.H. Would you say it was educational for the disciples to have seen this?
J.T. It would be highly educational. I suppose it would be one of those things which would be landmarks in their histories, like (@1 Corinthians 15), where the Lord is said to have appeared to so many. There were above five hundred of them who saw the Lord at one time; and Paul says, "Of whom the most remain until now", showing that they would be distinguished persons, and that is a great matter, to be distinguished among the people of God.
C.F.E. Is there any thought in the eight days mentioned here?
J.T. I suppose it points to a further development; passing on to something else; another dispensation. It
{150}
is a change over from seven. We have six days in @Mark 9.
A.R. Moses had wished to see God's glory, but he could see only God's hinder parts, but this is a question of His face. What is the difference?
J.T. Well, we are in the realm of revelation now, and revelation is a question of the face of God; of seeing God in Christ here and hearing His voice, the Father's voice.
J.T.Jr. Would the prayer in verse 18 be on the level of what was down here, because He goes on to speak of His sufferings and of His being killed, and then in verse 28, "He went up into a mountain to pray;" that is, prayer is on the mountain? Does that involve the change we are speaking about?
J.T. Yes; I think it is to show that. We are told that He has passed through all the heavens; that is, the idea of ascension attaches to Him. He might have gone up without dying, and did here, because it was going up. "He went up into a mountain". "If then ye see the Son of man ascending up where he was before?" (@John 6:62).
J.A.P. Is there help in Paul's remarks in @2 Corinthians 3:18? "But we all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image". Does that help us as getting a view of Christ, and we becoming like Him?
J.T. It does; it has a bearing on it, because the "same image" in the passage includes His image -- "from glory to glory". There is a strong link here with that, but there is no change in any one, but in Christ here. The apostles remained just as they were, but He was changed. The wording, "as he prayed", is remarkable, too, showing, as our brother said already, the position prayer has in this wonderful scene. "And as he prayed the fashion of his countenance became different and his raiment white and effulgent".
A.B.P. Is the present service of Christ as intercessor a part of the functioning of the kingdom of God? I
{151}
there a link between His prayer on the mount here and His present place as interceding for the saints?
J.T. Undoubtedly it is intended to bear on the whole scene that the movement begins there, real movement begins there. The attitude of prayer would imply that He is interceding. I suppose He is thinking of the three He brought up with Him; that they would understand it was worth while to be taken up and that His prayer had entered into it.
A.R. Do you have in mind to say something more about the Lord's countenance being changed here? Is it suggested that Moses and Elias were changed? They, "appearing in glory", spoke with Him.
J.T. The thought is that they came out from it. They are not said to be changed. They really represent the heavenly saints, but the Lord had been down here in testimony and service, and the bearing is on that. The bearing is not on Moses and Elias or what the occasion would be to them. They are simply representative as augmenting and filling out the scene. The angels are not there, they are not in mind. It is men -- "two men". The change in the Lord gave character to the occasion. The whole movement is seen to begin in Him. "And it came to pass after these words, about eight days, that taking Peter and John and James he went up into a mountain to pray. And as he prayed the fashion of his countenance became different and his raiment white and effulgent", verses 28, 29. That is the position. The movement is clearly in connection with Him. It is a great matter that the saints who form the assembly, represented in the three apostles, are brought into the movement, which presently will be enlarged to the universe. All the coming glory will begin with Christ; He is "the beginning".
A.R. He is the Speaker -- "Hear him"; is that the idea?
J.T. Yes; the great Mover, the Beginner of everything
{152}
. The apostles were unequal to this display of glory; indeed, they were oppressed with sleep, and later Peter spoke of making three tabernacles; one for the Lord, one for Moses and one for Elias, showing they were not delivered from the Jewish system. What is presented is to glorify Christ in His kingdom. Thus it is said, "as he was saying these things, there came a cloud and overshadowed them, and they feared as they entered into the cloud: and there was a voice out of the cloud saying. This is my beloved Son: hear him", verses 34,35. It is a question of hearing what is said by Him. What is current in His ministry down here is in mind.
J.T.Jr. Would the idea of majesty be seen in the condition in which Moses and Elias were as they spoke to the Lord in that He was in majesty then? Would all that remain in the apostles¬ minds?
J.T. That is the idea; the majesty of Christ would enter into Peter's ministry, as we can see by his second epistle. It is remarkable that he did not write about it in his first letter. It shows that apostolic ministry was governed by the Spirit.
R.W.S. The feature of the kingdom of God in this setting is the majesty of the Person?
J.T. Yes; but there are other accompanying things that belong to the kingdom, because it is a question of seeing the kingdom, not any special movement or feature of it, but the thing itself; the whole thing is to be seen there. Thus the Lord's announcement in Luke is, "... until they shall have seen the kingdom of God".
A.N.W. What is the warning to us in this oppressive sleep that comes upon the disciples on this august occasion?
J.T. It certainly ought to mean at least that we should not sleep in the meetings! Sleeping in the meetings is derogatory, even if we are tired and weary; the Lord was weary, too. We ought to learn to respect the place. We cannot say that Peter and the others added anything
{153}
to the great occasion. That is the thing to notice; that we should avoid the things in which they broke down. The mount of transfiguration was a most striking testimony to Christ's glory.
A.R. You mean that we should see the kingdom Christ's glory -- now?
J.T. It is characteristic of Luke that what the three selected to go up were to see was the kingdom of God. It is a group of circumstances in which He is to shine; we are to see the things that we are brought into. We are brought into a system of things, not only persons, but things. The man in Mark had his eyes opened and saw "all things" clearly; not only a divine Person, but the things related to Him.
D.A.P. Would Peter and those who were sleeping miss what the two men were speaking about to Jesus?
J.T. Yes, they were speaking about what they were seeing; it was His decease which He should accomplish at Jerusalem. The moral glory of Jesus was in their minds more than the physical glory there. The moral glory was wrapped up in what they were saying: that is to say. His departure; as Israel departed, so He is departing out of the world. It should be accomplished; it was His moral glory, a matter of accomplishment -- and where? At Jerusalem!
A.B.P. Should we normally have in mind the thought of departure? Our life is not an earthly matter; while having part in it here by the Spirit, it is native to heaven.
J.T. That is right; there ought to be moral glory in all our departures. "Precious in the sight of Jehovah is the death of his saints", (@Psalm 116:15). There is moral glory attaching to a real Christian in his death.
A.Mac. Is that seen in both Moses and Elijah? Both of them went up at their end, and sight entered into it. Moses saw certain things from the mount, and Elijah saw certain things, too.
J.T. Just so; they are linked together peculiarly in
{154}
that way. They are selected by God to fill out this wonderful scene. But what we were just saying is really the thing to be thought of by all of us; how the moral glory of Jesus was occupying Moses and Elias and they were talking with Him about it; He was not talking to them about it.
W.F.K. Would the white raiment suggest purity in the kingdom?
J.T. I should say so; it is a feature of Luke here, and at the Lord's resurrection, and at His ascension that there were those who stood by in white garments. Well, now, chapter 10, as we said before, points to the formation of assemblies -- that feature of the kingdom. It enters into the formation of the assembly. The assemblies are to be characterised by the Lord's visitations. "Now after these things the Lord appointed seventy others also, and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place where he himself was about to come", chapter 10:1. The whole passage would, I think, confirm what we are saying now. The idea of the word 'assembly' does not enter into it exactly, but it says, in verse 2, "The harvest indeed is great, but the workmen few; supplicate therefore the Lord of the harvest that he may send out workmen into his harvest. Go: behold I send you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves. Carry neither purse nor scrip nor sandals", verses 2 - 4. We have been speaking lately of travelling lightly and those that have goods need to be in exercise as to them. We do not take anything out of the world, nor should a servant of Christ think of taking anything out with him, as we have here: "carry neither purse nor scrip nor sandals, and salute no one on the way. And into whatsoever house you enter, first say. Peace to this house. And if a son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it; but if not it shall turn to you again. And in the same house abide, eating and drinking such things as they have; for the workman is worthy of his hire. Remove not from house to house", verses 4 - 7.
{155}
C.A.M. It has been said that Luke's line makes way for Paul's ministry. This account of the seventy sent from city to city is peculiar to Luke. Do you think that should govern us now as moving about; that we thus enter into the idea of Paul's travellings, for instance?
J.T. Yes; I should say Paul represents the highest idea the Lord had in service. He says, "Be ye imitators of me, even as I also am of Christ". These seventy are sent out after the apostles. Paul somewhat corresponds as coming in after the twelve, and as having laboured more abundantly than they all.
A.R. Lydia would be like a son of peace; Paul went to her house at Philippi.
J.T. Quite so; the Lord saw to it that she was, because I think He intended her to be a suitable one to receive Paul and those who accompanied him. It is said that the Lord opened her heart to attend to the things spoken by Paul, and that would enhance the conditions. And so when he was leaving the city he "came to Lydia". If a brother visits us here, who is he going to see? That becomes a test.
A.R. Her house has peace in it; our houses should have peace in them.
J.T. @Luke 10 calls for sons of peace.
R.W.S. Does the thought of, "Let not the assembly be charged", enter into this? Would the glory of that bear on this section? These Levites are sent forth; might it be some addition to the service in which the glory of that ministry is involved?
J.T. What the Lord said, as seen here, would indicate that. He said, "Behold I send you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves. Carry neither purse nor scrip nor sandals, and salute no one on the way. And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say. Peace to this house. And if a son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it; but if not it shall turn to you again. And in the same house abide, eating and drinking such things as they
{156}
have", verses 3 - 7. It would look as if the servant has a free house; that he has free surroundings; nothing to hinder him in his service. And he is not a burden on the person with whom he is staying.
A.P.T. There is an excellent illustration of the kingdom in chapter 22, where the Lord sends Peter and John to the city. They meet a man with a pitcher of water and the master of the house seems to be ready for them; a son of peace.
J.T. I think Luke has all that in mind. He has a great sense of the greatness of the thing he is dealing with; that is, the moral greatness of it; hence, when he writes to Theophilus the second time he is quite free, evidently having the sense that Theophilus was reducing his own estimation of himself. The word "excellent" is dropped in the second treatise.
E.A.L. I believe you have said that a minister being over particular would lack in spiritual control; that in the servant natural likes and dislikes should be under control.
J.T. Just so; we do not want to acquire priestcraft. Those of religious reputation assume power over people and make demands upon them. The liberty of sonship makes us free and righteous in the houses of the saints.
A.N.W. "Such things as they have", is the statement the Lord makes, (@Luke 10:7).
J.T. Just so.
J.T.Jr. Is this thought of two in regard of the servants carried forward from chapter 9 where it is seen in Moses and Elias? There would be the idea of legislation and administration here also?
J.T. Yes; "two are better than one", the Scripture says. There is great increase in the idea of two.
R.W.S. Do they carry in their affections the ministry of the glory of chapter 9?
J.T. I would think so; I suppose Paul and Barnabas are the best illustration of two working together in the
{157}
truth. Peter and John first, and then Paul and Barnabas, as if the Lord illustrates what He said, which is a feature of the gospels. They confirm what you get in the Acts and the epistles. Things are confirmed in the actual facts presented. So you can picture the glory that was reflected in Peter and John, as they say, "Look on us". And then, as we said, Paul and Barnabas, and later, Paul and Silas. These facts are illustrative of what we are dealing with here; how the kingdom was set out in Christians, and how we should learn from them. The scene on the mount is illustrated in the fact that Mary, as seen in chapter 10, is sitting at the feet of Jesus and hearing His word. She is setting out the kingdom in that sense, and that helps us as to how the gospels confirm what we have in the epistles.
A.E.W. Would Paul be like a son of peace in the last chapter of the Acts? -- "in his own hired lodging", preaching the kingdom of God and receiving all who came to him.
J.T. It was indeed a free house!
A.R. We have been having the teaching of the kingdom of God, and now we see it demonstrated.
J.T. Quite so; and if a man who has a house uses it in a hospitable way, the brethren are free to go there.
Question. What would you say about the house in @2 Kings 4 in relation to this?
J.T. The Shunammite was a 'great' person. She made a home for Elisha. That illustrates it very well. I have no doubt she is the continuation of the wife of the son of the prophet, who sold the oil and paid her debts. She and her sons thus became free. So she was free in her house because she paid her debts. We cannot entertain freely unless we pay our debts. And so the Shunammite is not in debt; she is capable of entertaining the prophet and entertains him well.
A.A.T. I notice that in @Luke 10 there is the healing of the sick, and then in chapter 11 the finger of God is
{158}
spoken of as the power active in the kingdom of God.
J.T. That is what we will get at now. The word was, that when the disciples visited any city the people there were to know that the kingdom of God had come nigh them. That is a great matter, if I am a preacher or teacher, or whatever I may be, that I am to be able to say something as to the kingdom of God coming nigh to people. Even if they have not received it, it has come nigh to them. It is a testimony to be rendered. And as to the finger of God, it says, "But if by Beelzebub cast out demons, your sons -- by whom do they cast them out? For this reason they shall be your judges. But if by the finger of God I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God is come upon you", verses 19,20. That, I think, is to bring out that God was with them. The apostle implies that the testimony will be given, "God is indeed amongst you". That marked the assembly at Corinth; that God was there. The Lord said to Paul there, "I am with thee, and no one shall set upon thee to injure thee". And so he stayed there for eighteen months and the result was that a large assembly was formed there.
J.A.P. Would it seem that the kingdom of God, having a heavenly side to it, is opposed by Satan's kingdom? In Ephesians reference is made to the power of spiritual wickedness in the heavenlies; is that set up to compete with the kingdom?
J.T. Well, the charge was by the Lord's enemies in verse 15: "But some from among them said. By Beelzebub the prince of the demons casts he out demons". That was the attack of the devil that should never be forgiven, according to another passage. And so the Lord goes on to say here, "Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation: and a house set against a house falls; and if also Satan is divided against himself, how shall his kingdom subsist? because ye say that I cast out demons by Beelzebub. But if by Beelzebub cast out demons, your sons -- by whom do
{159}
they cast them out? For this reason they shall be your judges. But if by the finger of God I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God is come upon you". It is not simply come nigh them; but come upon them; and upon them as a sort of moral judgment, for we have the idea of the stone cut out without hands; it breaks to pieces those on whom it falls, (@Daniel 2:34).
A.R. In @Exodus 8 the scribes said to Pharaoh, "This is the finger of God!"
J.T. Quite so; it is a remarkable thing; possibly the Lord had that circumstance in mind; that is, the plague of the gnats or lice. It was the finger of God. What they had in Egypt was really here -- the finger of God -- and who can stand against it? It is the power of God, in that sense; they could not stand against it. Another thing is that the gnats were never removed, meaning, evidently, that power is here, despised and under reproach, but here nevertheless. It alludes to the saints as characterised by the power of life.
A.R. The living kingdom, in that sense, in life.
J.T. That is the idea exactly; it is a question of life. The finger of God, I suppose, would point to accuracy and detail; nothing is omitted. I think that is it. We all know about the fingers of a man, and what they wrote on the wall; they meant the overthrow of the Babylonish kingdom. It was most accurate and sudden; the thing happened that night.
A.R. We have, in the idea of the gnats, the power in the saints for the overthrow of the Egyptian kingdom.
A.B.P. Is the judicial side of the kingdom seen in, "they shall be your judges"?
J.T. Quite so; that was something they would have to reckon on and the kingdom coming upon them is remarkable, it seems to me. It is not simply coming nigh; it is the power of it adversely; it grinds to powder.
A.B.P. In that relation the judges will take up the details eventually?
{160}
J.T. Just so; "... and books were opened". (@Revelation 20:12). And then, @Luke 17: 20 says, "And having been asked by the Pharisees, When is the kingdom of God coming? he answered them and said. The kingdom of God does not come with observation; nor shall they say, Lo here, or, Lo there; for behold, the kingdom of God is in the midst of you". He is here calling attention to Himself as in the midst of Israel, as answering the Pharisees.
J.T.Jr. Does that apply today in the way the Lord is among us?
J.T. I thought so; on the line of what we had already as to the Lord being in the midst of the assembly; that a man should come in who would fall down and worship; he acknowledges what is there and reports that "God is indeed amongst you". That is an immense testimony, that God is amongst a certain people of a truth. There is no question about it and the fact that there are such companies on earth is something that the Lord can fall back on in the judgment day.
W.R. Would you say the kingdom of God is not only in Christ now, but in the saints?
J.T. Exactly; that is what is meant; the Spirit of God is here; divine Persons are here. The conditions are as great or greater than they were during the Lord's presence on earth. He told the apostles, "Greater works than these shall he do because I go unto my Father".
J.T.Jr. Is the order of things in the kingdom in mind? It says in chapter 9, "But Peter and those with him ... having fully awoke up they saw his glory, and the two men". Is that linked up with this scripture in that the Lord says, "The kingdom of God is in the midst of you"? So that we see a system of things functioning in men.
J.T. I would say that, especially the twos that were sent out; the thirty-five pairs sent out in witness to the kingdom. It was in them in principle. And you may
{161}
say that it is a figure of the present time, making way for Him to come Himself. "All the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up from us". (@Acts 1:21,22).
A.B.P. There seems to be a judicial aspect to Abraham's word to the rich man in chapter 16: "They have Moses and the prophets". That would be represented in Moses and Elias, I suppose, but now the kingdom is amongst them in Christ personally. Would their condemnation be that they had Christ amongst them and had not believed?
J.T. I thing it is remarkable that this matter is being revived peculiarly, we might say, in our times, because it was not much stressed in the beginning of the revival. It has been stressed more lately -- the thought of the Lord coming to the saints. There was an opposition to that, which meant that He was here all the time, which is true, in a sense, but not all the truth. All the truth includes what John says, quoting the Lord: "I am coming to you"; not I have come to you, but, "I am coming to you".
F.S.C. The Lord seemed to face great opposition after the mount of transfiguration, did He not?
J.T. I thought that would be apparent in this remarkable section. What a section of vitality and activity; numbers added to the economy; not only the twelve, but the "seventy others also ... two and two", making way for the Lord to come.
A.R. In chapter 5 of the Acts a man stands up in the council and says, in effect. You are fighting against God in fighting against these people. The position is impregnable. You cannot overthrow that! It involves the kingdom.
J.T. That is very important; and the addition of persons in the seventy sent out as labourers must be especially noted. We are not told who they were any
{162}
more than we are told who the five hundred were to whom the Lord appeared, but they were all distinguished. Here the seventy are making way for the Lord, and what does it matter what others think of us if we are making way for the Lord?
J.S. Do we see the power of the testimony in the seventy in the overthrow of Satan?
J.T. That is what we get later in chapter 10. They reported that the demons were subject to them. It says in verse 17, "And the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the demons are subject to us through thy name". That is remarkable, because it would be connected with the finger of God: "And he said to them, I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven. Behold, I give you the power of treading upon serpents and scorpions and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall in anywise injure you. Yet in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you, but rejoice that your names are written in the heavens". And then the Lord rejoices: "In the same hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit and said, I praise thee. Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes: yea. Father, for thus has it been well-pleasing in thy sight. All things have been delivered to me by my Father, and no one knows who the Son is but the Father, and who the Father is but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son is pleased to reveal him", verses 17 - 22. Well, now, all that has come into our own times in a most remarkable way. It has been stressed in our own times; hence the importance, and solemnity, too, of what the Lord has given to His people, as to whether we are in any way affected by it, because the Lord is stressing here the importance of the persons and their names. We do not know them on earth, but they are written in heaven.
D.P. Would the power the seventy had be an extension
{163}
of what the Lord referred to as casting out demons by the finger of God?
J.T. That is the thought. The finger of God in Luke is really the Spirit of God in Matthew; it is the same incident, and that should be the point with us; that God is among us of a truth.
A.R. The Lord uses the title. Lord of the heaven and earth, in this passage. Is that the idea of the kingdom? He is not only Lord of heaven but also of earth.
J.T. It is the Father; it brings us really to Ephesians, which is the height of the truth with which we are dealing. Luke enlarges it. The Lord says, in chapter 10, that He beheld Satan as lightning falling from heaven, but later it is said, and Peace in heaven, "glory in the highest". It is not now peace on earth, as at the beginning of the gospel, but in heaven, because as we proceed in Luke we are instructed on the heavenly line. That is the point on which we should be clear.
J.S. To make place for the assembly?
J.T. Just so; because the assembly is going to fill it.
R.D.G. Is it particularly significant that in chapter 17 the question of the kingdom is raised by the Pharisees, who live in the world of appearances? The Lord points out definitely that it is not a question of appearances or "observation".
J.T. If it is a question of appearances, it is a question of the religion of the world. Great importance is being made of freedom of worship in the Atlantic Charter and I have seen a picture of worshippers, representing this idea. The human idea of a number of persons seen in a picture worshipping is what interests the Pharisees. They can talk about that, but we should know something different from that. God is a spirit, and we must worship Him in spirit and truth. He is stressing that to us now, in association with the other things we are speaking of. The truth that God is a spirit enters into preparation for heaven. We belong to a spiritual realm where we
{164}
know God and worship Him according to what He is.
A.N.W. As "come nigh" the kingdom means blessing; as "coming upon" man it means judicial action; and as in "the midst" it represents power. Is that a right presentation of the truth?
J.T. I think it is. "I am coming to you" is a beautiful expression. It came up in power amongst us about forty years ago. It is mainly seen in John. It was alleged that the Lord Jesus is here all the time; whereas the beauty of the truth is that He comes. It is a divine movement: "I am coming to you", the Lord says. Matthew quotes the Lord as saying, "Behold, I am with you all the days", and of course that has to be understood and accepted. It is in keeping with Matthew's side of the truth which, of course, does not weaken John's line, which contemplates movement by the Lord while in heaven, as seen in Acts and @1 Corinthians 15, whereas Matthew records no ascension.
A.P.T. @John 20 says, "And the doors shut where the disciples were, through fear of the Jews", verse 19. Would the kingdom underlie that in some way?
J.T. Quite so; you mean there is power there to shut the doors. The doors are in the plural; it is not door. The saints have power within them to shut out what intrudes. That is what is implied; it is the kingdom, I would think.
R.W.S. When it speaks of the days of His receiving up, in chapter 9, does that have any bearing on what we are speaking of?
J.T. Yes, it does, in the sense that the apostle that was to be named to fill the place of Judas was to be one who had experience in "all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up". (@Acts 1:22). It was necessary that the apostle selected should have that experience. Therefore, it enters into what we are saying, that the power of the
{165}
kingdom is involved in the Lord's coming to us. There is nothing to hinder us. "Lift up your heads, ye gates; yea, lift up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in". @Psalm 24:9. That may be applied to the saints now, although it will be an earthly scene in the future, but the door is now opened to the King of glory.
{166}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD (8)
@Matthew 3:1 - 17; @Matthew 4:23 - 25; @Matthew 5:1 - 21,44 - 48
J.T. In considering the subject before us, we have already looked at certain sections of the epistle to the Romans, the epistles to the Corinthians, and the gospels by John and Luke. In the remaining readings, therefore, including this one, we shall need to touch on Matthew and Mark, so as to link on with all the gospels. It is thought that we should look at Matthew now as treating of the kingdom of the heavens, a term that is almost confined to Matthew. The word heavens is used in the plural here, as will be noticed, and would undoubtedly link on more particularly with what is called "the expanse" which was named by God, "Heavens"; it is that part of the heavens which comes nearest to us. We cannot say much as to the number of heavens there are, but certainly there are three, and our subject would link on more with what is nearest to us; what is designated as "the expanse" in @Genesis 1. It would seem as if the term is intended, as connected with the kingdom, to direct our view more to the heavenly side. In @Matthew 6, the Lord's prayer is that the kingdom of God was to come. It was to be prayed for; that His will should be done on earth as it is in heaven. So that what is before us now is to see how the divine will is to be worked out now in us down here on the earth as it is in heaven. And another thing that is to be noted is the thought of the King; we have the genealogy of the King in this gospel. "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham". It is to be noted that He is said to be "Son of David" before He is said to be "Son of Abraham", as if the thought of the King should be stressed; thus the Lord's genealogy is traced, in Matthew, through forty two generations; and it is said the forty second reached to Christ. "All the generations, therefore, from Abraham to David were fourteen generations; and from
{167}
David until the carrying away of Babylon, fourteen generations; and from the carrying away of Babylon unto the Christ, fourteen generations". This gospel, therefore, contemplates the Lord as the legally established King, the true David. He is "Son of David", but the King; in fact, the "great King". And then another thing to be noted, as we shall see, is that the idea of righteousness is in mind throughout this book more than in the other gospels. So the Lord said to John, according to what we read in chapter 3, "Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness", verse 15. That would be righteousness in the ordinary sense, but also what may be called ecclesiastical righteousness, because Matthew is the only gospel writer that formally mentions the assembly. It is he who tells us of the foundation of it and also the structure of it. Joseph, the reputed father of the Lord Jesus, is particularly said to be a righteous man, which is an important thing; referring not simply to an incident, but to a matter that involves a principle in the gospel. It is said, in verse 19 of chapter 1: "But Joseph, her husband, being a righteous man ..." He behaved in a most comely and godly way toward Mary, his wife, in view of the revelation he had from God; all being governed by righteousness. That was the point.
C.A.M. The beginning of the chapter we read speaks of the "wilderness of Judaea". I was wondering, when you were speaking about the heavens, if the existence of the wilderness does not imply that earth was not fully answering to heaven as yet.
J.T. Therefore it involves discipline.
C.A.M. Yes; it just occurred to me that it would involve that. It would involve the prophetic word also, would you say?
J.T. The position entered into John's ministry, as we see in @Isaiah 40:6. The wilderness is to be changed so as to blossom as a rose; thus the disciplinary character of it will be over; but while it lasts, there is need for discipline.
{168}
John the baptist is said to have been in the deserts. That is the wilderness in an intensified way, as the plural indicates. He had to do with wilderness conditions in view of the ministry that was entrusted to him. It would qualify him so that he would be sympathetic with others in whatever adverse circumstances they might be.
R.W.S. Would you enlarge on your remarks as to the kingdom of heaven being related to the heaven that is nearest to us?
J.T. I think it is the atmospheric heavens; that is, the heavens that were made on the second day of creation, called "the expanse". It is said in @Genesis 1:6, "And God said, Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and let it be a division between waters and waters. And God made the expanse, and divided between the waters that are under the expanse and the waters that are above the expanse; and it was so. And God called the expanse Heavens. And there was evening, and there was morning -- a second day". Now that is clearly something additional to what is mentioned in verse 1 in which we read, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth"; but in verse 6 we have detail as to how what is called the "expanse" became formed; that there were waters above it and below it, and we cannot but see that what is alluded to is an extension of what is spoken of in verse 1. Our Lord Jesus Christ went up to heaven -- involving verse 6. What he reached beyond that, we have to think of, because He went beyond "all the heavens". Paul said, of himself, that he went to "the third heaven", but evidently there is what is beyond that. Therefore we come back to what is immediate, in what is called "Heavens" in verse 8. Our feet are on the earth now; that is, the believers¬ feet, in the wilderness period. Therefore the feet of the saints are spoken of in the types. The children of Israel did not have to buy shoes in the wilderness. God kept them
{169}
from the need of shoes; what they had lasted to the end of the wilderness journey.
A.R. Does the kingdom of heaven suggest elevation?
J.T. It does; the kingdom of the heavens is elevation, but in the sense that the elevation involves the will of God, and the Lord's prayer implies that that will should be done on the earth as well as in heaven. We are not above yet; it is while we are here below that the will of God is to be carried out and hence the kingdom is needed down here. And that is what we get in these passages read, because John the baptist first speaks about the kingdom of the heavens in chapter 3, and then the Lord Himself speaks about it in chapter 4 and it is touched on in detail in chapter 5.
J. S. Do you view the heavens as ruling in the light of heaven?
J.T. That is another thing; they rule in a moral sense. They rule because the will of God is carried out there, but God Himself, of course, rules; He rules, and the heavens, in that sense, rule, according to what the book of Daniel teaches.
A.N.W. When John says that the kingdom of heaven has drawn nigh, is it a matter of time, or is it the Person of the Lord he has in view?
J.T. The time enters into it because we are told in verse 12 of chapter 4, "But having heard that John was delivered up, he departed into Galilee: and having left Nazareth, he went and dwelt at Capernaum", verses 12,13. That is historical, and John undoubtedly had in mind that it would be a matter of time before the kingdom of heaven would be actually there, but it had drawn nigh. That is what I would understand.
W.R. Do you see that in relation to the magi? It seems that the star that the magi saw was held in relation to the mind of heaven.
J.T. That is another thought, and stresses what we are saying. The magi had the idea of the heavens;
{170}
they probably were astronomers; they belonged to the educated or, so to speak, higher class in the East, and they had seen Christ's star; not His mountain, or His river, or His sea; but His star; it was the star of the King of the Jews. Well, they understood; that is. God spoke to them in view of what is in mind. He spoke to them according to ideas they could understand. They could take in the idea of a star and that the Lord had a star; in fact. He holds the stars of @Revelation 1, but this is His star. It must have been one such as would be intelligible to such persons as the magi.
A.N.W. In an earlier meeting, you linked the kingdom drawn nigh with another thought: The kingdom of God is among you. That would be in His Person, would it not?
J.T. Just so.
R.W.S. Would it be too much to say that each breath we take involves the expanse? Is that to have some moral counterpart in us?
J.T. Quite so; it shows it is the part of the heavens nearest to us.
A.P.T. It was said to Nebuchadnezzar, "Thou shalt be bathed with the dew of heaven", in contradistinction to the suggestion about the breath. Would there be a suggestion in that?
J.T. There is; in the use of the word breath there is more than the thought of heaven. We speak of the atmospheric heavens but that word atmospheric hardly goes so far as the use made of breath in Scripture, because we read of "the breath of God", and we read of the breath of the Lord Jesus; He breathed into the disciples. It is just to distinguish the use of words, which I think is important.
A.B.P. The luminaries in Genesis were set in the expanse of the heavens. Would that suggest that the will of God is carried out in these bodies that express the glory of God and show forth His handiwork?
{171}
J.T. That is what I was thinking. We have the ordinances of the heavens, and we have to do with ordinances of the earth, too. They all have the same sense, only the will of God is adhered to in the ordinances of the heavens, but we cannot say that of the ordinances down here, for some of them are of man.
F.N.W. It is remarkable how the star went before the magi and rested at Bethlehem.
J.T. Showing it was a matter of heavenly guidance.
F.N.W. "The stars from their courses" are referred to in Deborah's song.
J.T. Just so.
W.F.K. Would repentance, in chapter 3, make us kingdom subjects? It says, "Repent".
J.T. The word is "Repent, for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn nigh", chapter 3:2. There is a reason given why men should repent; that is, the kingdom of the heavens has drawn nigh, and, of course, it is a very urgent matter, because we cannot contend with the heavens; we cannot overcome them. Indeed, it says in Romans that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, so that heaven is overpowering, and therefore there is every reason why men should repent in view of the coming of that kingdom.
A.R. Do you get a contrast between the thought of the kingdom of God and the kingdom of the heavens in Joseph's dream? The sheaves bowed down to him, but then the sun and the moon and the eleven stars bowed down to him also. Is that the idea of the two spheres?
J.T. It is. But it also carries with it the greatness of Christ; that not only the stars, but the sun and the moon, bow down to him. Hence principalities and powers are made subject to him. That is, not only men and women ruling people here on earth, but the principalities in the heavens bow down to him.
A.A.T. Did you not want to say something more about the Son of David?
{172}
J.T. I made reference to it in chapter 1, in the genealogy of Christ. It is very important, because it is the only one we have, properly, as peculiar to the King. It is a question of the King. Well, we have now reached the moral side, which is the side we want to stress, only I think what is said about Joseph is striking; that is, that he was a righteous man. That is one of the most important things that could be attached to a man down here; that he is righteous.
C.A.M. Are we to look at these names in the generations in relation to some feature of the work of God in each, and that they reach a certain objective?
J.T. You would be obliged to attach that idea to it, because God was in all these generations. Some that might be called generations are not in the list. That is, God is discriminating against certain ones, which is important. God does discriminate against persons who, from all appearances, should be in the list, but are not there, because God discriminates against unrighteousness.
C.A.M. That is a very remarkable thing. That raised the question in my mind, because we say that so many generations reached to Christ; that they go through a certain history but they reach Christ. That would be looking at the work of God abstractly in these generations.
J.T. It would. God was over all that. He took up Abraham. David is mentioned first because of kingship, but Abraham was the beginning of the generations here. We have a greater number in Luke, but as we have remarked, the importance of righteousness entering into these generations is a very great matter, and especially ecclesiastically, because God is concerned about assembly history. The word 'ecclesiastical' refers to what relates to the assembly. The question of righteousness is outstanding in relation to it; not only in ordinary matters such as business and the like, but assembly history, and in our relations with the assembly. Righteousness is predominant in it.
{173}
A.P.T. The Lord Jesus speaks in this gospel of "righteous Abel". It only occurs in Matthew.
J.T. That is characteristic. You get more about righteousness in Matthew than in any of the other gospels, and all this is in view of the assembly.
J.T.Jr. It is remarkable how much Peter speaks about righteousness. He speaks of Noah, as a *preacher of* it, and also of the way of righteousness. And he is brought into this gospel in special connection with the assembly.
J.T. Exactly; and his name signifies that he is material for the assembly. The Lord commits the keys of the kingdom of the heavens to Peter.
T.E.H. He finishes his second epistle with the idea of righteousness *dwelling*.
J.T. The reign refers to the millennium, and the dwelling is in eternal conditions where righteousness will dwell. The wilderness is where righteousness is carried out, in spite of difficulties, in spite of opposition.
A.N.W. Repentance is the element to it on our part.
J.T. That is just what we have in John's remark: "Now in those days comes John the baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judaea, and saying. Repent, for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn nigh", verse 1. It is urgent; and in connection with this there is the matter of righteousness, whether it be ordinary matters or assembly matters.
A.B.P. There is a symmetry in reference to the generations -- three sets of fourteen. Is that idea of symmetry a sort of parallel to the thought of righteousness?
J.T. I suppose we could discover, if we were able to give time to it, that God was working out righteousness in these generations; and the number three is used in the types as a symbol of the development in anything. Sometimes it is seven. Three is a shorter way of dealing with a matter. Have I proven to be righteous in a reduced
{174}
plan of my life; in a small portion of it which God gave me in early days? Joseph would be a comparatively young man here, and the Spirit of God tells us that "Joseph, her husband, being a righteous man, and unwilling to expose her publicly, purposed to have put her away secretly; but while he pondered on these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, Joseph, son of David ...". His relation with David is noticed at once. God is giving him a great advantage to judge everything as to the circumstances he is in. They were delicate and complicated, and Satan would not fail to take advantage of them. But he is called son of David. "Joseph, son of David, fear not to take to thee Mary, thy wife, for that which is begotten in her is of the Holy Spirit", verses 19, 20. That is, he is aided in his righteousness, because God takes a man up if he is usable, and now he is aided in the position and maintains it fully as the sequel shows.
J.T.Jr. What happens in the assembly should be supported by righteousness; it should be righteous, should it not?
J.T. That is the point for us; righteousness should mark what is done in the assembly. In complicated cases we are tested. We all should understand Matthew in the light of righteousness. The history of the world is nothing compared with the history of the assembly, and the history of the testimony. It is there we should expect righteousness. It is seen in these forty-two generations; let us learn how it is worked out. The first trouble in the assembly was in the matter of food. The widows were being neglected. It seems that sectional prejudice entered into it -- "murmuring of the Hellenists against the Hebrews".
T.E.H. Would you help as to Jephthah: in New Testament language he became an assembly man, but earlier he had a lot of unrighteous matters to be dealt with in his own soul before he came forward.
{175}
J.T. Quite so; with most of us it is so, if we are to be anything for God in His service, we must especially work out righteousness, as we have been saying.
A.I. It says in chapter 5, "For I say unto you, that unless your righteousness surpass that of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of the heavens", verse 20. How would you fit that in with what you are saying?
J.T. Christendom is marked by sects, and there may be differences if the question of righteousness arises. The Romish system, I would say, is the worst. The Lord suggests the idea of comparison as to righteousness. Therefore I would not regard a professed believer who is a Presbyterian as on the same level as a Romanist or Christian Scientist. We have to pay attention to grades because the idea of righteousness is graded.
A.R. Would you say Barnabas, in @Acts 15, because he wanted to take Mark with him, involved fellowship? I wondered how that was to be regarded.
J.T. That would be more personal; there was not much *principle* involved. Mark was restored, and evidently Barnabas was too. There was really no ground for the cleavage; it was personal. But you will notice that the support of the brethren was with Paul. There is nothing said about Mark and Barnabas for a time. They lost ground, and that was serious. The general position was clear. Paul was approved and supported.
R.W.S. You have alluded a great deal recently to the Corinthian epistles. I was just noticing as to the working out of the evil seen in Corinth that almost the last injunction of Paul is "... that *ye* may do what is right", (@2 Corinthians 13:7).
J.T. That is a weighty word to any local company. How often you hear, as to conditions of failure: Well, they are not any worse than others. That will do no good at all; it is a question of facts, involving what is *right*. Paul says, "Not that *we* may appear approved, but
{176}
that ye may do what is right, and we be as reprobates". That is the word for each of us: You see that you do what is right. In this sense it is no matter what others may do; let me see to myself that I am doing what is right; because heaven is looking on in each case.
A.A.T. At the beginning of the church's history, Ananias and Sapphira were examples of unrighteousness.
J.T. Yes. It was lying. Unrighteousness is a most important word in the divine vocabulary -- in a negative sense.
J.T.Jr. Nehemiah had to meet all sorts of things in maintaining righteousness, and he brought in the question of the God of the heavens in regard to the position, chapter 1:4.
J.T. So with Daniel; Nebuchadnezzar had to learn righteousness.
J.A.P. Is there a difference between righteousness considered in Romans and the righteousness that we get here?
J.T. Romans treats of imputed righteousness. It is most important as to Christian doctrine that righteousness is acquired primarily on the principle of faith, not works. In our scriptures we are dealing with practical righteousness. The Lord says, "For thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness", verse 15.
F.N.W. Is not Abraham an excellent example to bring forward in this gospel in relation to righteousness? The quotation in @Romans 4:3 is identical with that in @James 2:23. "Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness". But in @Romans 4 it is by faith; in James, he proved his faith by what he did in offering up Isaac; it says there that the scripture was fulfilled, as if it is substantial there.
A.MacD. Is it not remarkable in that connection that Abraham was met by Melchisedec, king of Salem, who is later called king of righteousness? This has a special touch.
{177}
J.T. Yes. He met Abraham. That was to distinguish Abraham. It was not only because he had imputed righteousness, by faith, but because he was practically righteous; he was waging war in righteousness. The fight was of God, like Deborah's, and Abraham took part in it -- not to take sides with any of the kings who were fighting, but to rescue his brother. He rescued Lot. That is the point.
A.N.W. You spoke just now of ecclesiastical righteousness. Would that be in mind in @2 Timothy 2:19 on the negative side, and termed "iniquity"? In the positive list, verse 22, the first principle is to *follow righteousness*. Is iniquity like ecclesiastical unrighteousness?
J.T. Quite so; I am glad you brought that up; because it is one of the leading points in the revival at the present time, the effect of which is going on and will go on to the end. The word is "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity". The allusion there, I believe, is to ecclesiastical unrighteousness, and there is much of it all the way down in the public history of the assembly.
E.A.L. Is this matter of withdrawing or separating from iniquity seen in @Matthew 3, in the winnowing fan? Is the idea of winnowing separating the false from the true?
J.T. Quite so; there is the chaff and the real grain. You want to secure the grain. This is effected in "every one who names the name of the Lord" withdrawing from iniquity. And then after that is secured and the great principle of separation is established, the next thing is to follow righteousness. That is the first thing mentioned in the list; righteousness, faith, love and peace. And then the next thing is "with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart". All this indicates the way the present revival has come about; that God wrought in certain souls and they separated themselves
{178}
from evil. They had discovered the way back in those years alluded to. They were a group, of course, but a group in the sense of following righteousness, calling on the Lord out of a pure heart. You cannot complain about that, nor show in any way of reasoning that they are a sect. They are simply *right*, as following righteousness.
A.B.P. Would this character of righteousness enter into John's word in our chapter, "Make straight his paths", verse 3? Would that possibly terminate in *the way* that is seen in the Acts?
J.T. Just so. The word way is mentioned in that sense in chapter 9. It is significant that it is mentioned at the time of Paul's conversion. See note on @Acts 9:2, New Translation.
A.B.P. And the idea of straight comes in at the beginning of Paul's history, "the street which is called Straight".
J.T. Quite so.
A.P.T. In @2 Corinthians 10, one says, "his letters ... are weighty and strong, but his presence in the body weak, and his speech naught", verse 10. Is that man moving in assembly righteousness?
J.T. A man saying these things against Paul! Do you not think he is the very opposite?
A.P.T. I think it is very serious to attack in this way those who serve the Lord.
R.W.S. John the baptist urgently forbade the Lord being baptised of him; was that commendable?
J.T. That brings up the leading point in this gospel. It comes in verse 13 of chapter 3: "Then comes Jesus from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptised of him; but John urgently forbad him, saying, have need to be baptised of thee; and comest *thou* to me? But Jesus answering said to him. Suffer it now; for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. Then he suffers him", verses 13 - 15. It was a question not only of that particular item, but *all righteousness*.
{179}
D.P. Why did John take up the position in the wilderness instead of honouring the city with his presence?
J.T. That is a good question to raise. We have already remarked that it was not only in one desert, but in *deserts*, as if he did not avoid the idea of the wilderness. There are variations in wilderness conditions, and John seemed to take them all up, as if it were a curriculum he had to go through, for his great mission, so that he should be in the thing really, as involving suffering. We are told to endure suffering, and it is doubtful if any one of us can be of much service unless we have learned in our youth, and perhaps always, to endure suffering.
C.F.E. Do you think wilderness conditions call for dependence?
J.T. Yes. Here is a man born of a priestly family, having that distinction, and of course such distinctions can only hinder us if we make use of them. But John evidently did not, whether his mother and father saw to it, or whether it was his own desire. I think if we look at the first chapter of Luke, we shall see how it stands. His father had been dumb for some months until the promised son was born; and some one asked. What is the child to be named? It was thought that he should be named after his father, which is a natural thought, and so it says, "And they made signs to his father as to what he might wish it to be called. And having asked for a writing-table, he wrote saying, John is his name. And they all wondered", verses 62,63. And then we are told that "his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue, and he spake, blessing God", verse 64. That is the first thing from his side. Zacharias, being filled with the Holy Spirit, prophesied most beautifully, as the brethren will know. Then later, it says, "The child grew and was strengthened in spirit; and he was in the deserts until the day of his shewing to Israel", verse 80. It is evident that he was to go through a course that would take him away
{180}
from what would promote natural instincts. Of course, he had such instincts, and desert conditions would tend to offset these; and thus, as under God's hand he would be rendered suitable for the great service opened up to him.
W.R. According to Matthew, John is very severe on the scribes and Pharisees.
J.T. Yes, and the Lord is especially so in chapter 23. But this matter of the deserts ought to be noted particularly because there are many young here, and if we aspire at all to have a part in the service of God, we have to accept that side of the position; not to cater for the natural side, for that which would feed the natural, but, as it were, to *starve* the natural appetites. John was in a position where he would be forced, as it were, to this great preserving feature. God is over that, to render him just what he needed to be, as a forerunner of Jesus. And the Lord, we may say, crowned the thought in saying to him, "Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness". And so John suffered Him, meaning that he was already a disciple. He was a *learner*.
C.A.M. Referring again to "all righteousness", you were referring to imputed righteousness and the part faith has in it; it says in @1 John 2: 29 that every one who practises righteousness is begotten of God. That has to do with our moral origin, does it not?
J.T. Quite so; the work of God in us is marked by that. He that is born of God practises righteousness; not exactly that he is told to do it, but he does it because he is born of God; he is like God.
C.A.M. Is it not remarkable that the prodigal said he had sinned against heaven? Would that be in line with what has been said as to righteousness?
J.T. The prodigal says, "I have sinned against heaven and before thee". That is, as you say, remarkable. Why did he speak about heaven? That is what came into the prodigal's mind. He had a right thought. He probably got it earlier, that heaven ruled; and not only
{181}
that, but heaven is beneficial. How could we get on without it, in view of the seasons and the effect of them on the earth, the supply of food and other needed things? We are sinning against it if we are wasteful and unthankful.
A.B.P. Are the heavenly bodies in their orbits a witness to obedience to the command of God?
J.T. I think so. The prodigal knew that he had sinned against heaven and sinned against God because of the bounty of heaven. How beneficial it was to him! He had money; his father was well off and had given him his living, and he went off and wasted it in riotous living. That is sinning against heaven. That is not what heaven does. It benefits those who are down here. And another thing is that manna, the food of the mighty (the mighty means the angels), represents the idea of heaven.
A.B.P. I wondered if the heavenly bodies, moving in their prescribed orbits, in righteousness, represent obedience to the word of God and should be considered as types of what we should be in obeying the truth.
J.T. I am sure that is right. And therefore the introduction of righteousness in Abraham's history answers to all that, because he is directed to look up to heaven. He is the heavenly man peculiarly because his generations are not given in Genesis. Abraham's generations are not mentioned; Isaac's and Jacob's are. There are about ten of them mentioned in Genesis, but his is not amongst them. I believe it is because he belongs to heaven; he is elevated in that way in the mind of God. Isaac is typically a heavenly man, too, but he is rather the heavenly man in *testimony* down here in relation with the assembly.
A.B.P. Is it significant that the term "the word of God" comes in first in relation to what was spoken to Abraham?
J.T. He is the first one of whom it is said that the word of God came to him. @Genesis 15.
{182}
D.P. Why is Matthew so careful to establish the legality of the Lord's genealogy?
J.T. Well, it is most important for us because the legality of an assembly status applies today to those who are true to Christ. Matthew is the assembly gospel. It is the only gospel that treats formally of the assembly and hence the importance of righteousness. The word *legality* should be rightly understood. It is not the idea that is in mind when we speak of a legal man, or an exacting man. That is not what the word would mean as applied to Christ's genealogy and the facts relative to the assembly in Matthew. Using it in the sense before us is to establish the position of Christ as the Messiah of the Old Testament, and also as Head of the assembly. The facts furnished in Matthew establish all this incontestably. And I believe that is the point in Matthew, that the legality is established beyond question.
J.T.Jr. Matthew would require us to know something of Abraham and David in taking up his gospel. We need to know something of their histories and also something about John, because John is introduced immediately without giving us his birth.
J.T. Therefore, to apply this principle now to ecclesiastical history, it is important for us to understand the Reformation. It is not exactly a scriptural word, but it is a good word to cover the position and we all ought to see how the Reformation was established to be right; that is, the principle of justification by faith, and separation from the system of Rome. The Reformation resulted in the establishment of the thought of "justification by faith". That is Paul's great point in Romans; and what has been developed more recently, which relates not exactly to justification by faith, but to the *assembly*, the Spirit of God here and the formation of the assembly; the righteousness, or legality of that position has to be established. The word *legality* is used in the same sense in which it is applied to @Matthew 1 to bring out the
{183}
righteousness of Christ's claim to the Messiahship; and so what happened a hundred and twenty-five years ago has to be shown to be right; to be legal. The position in which we are as walking together and meeting together as of the temple of God, all that attaches to the assembly; all that is most important, and the doctrine of it should be established.
C.A.M. Do you think that the generations from Babylon to Christ correspond to the present time? The Reformation really was the saints coming out of Babylon, do you think?
J.T. That is what happened. There was a certain amount of that in the Reformation. They did not go very far, because the clerical principle was carried with it, but in the more recent revival that was abandoned as wrong; the clerical principle was renounced in that. So it has been said that the notion of a clergyman is dispensationally a sin against the Holy Spirit. That is one of the strongest points we can have before us.
E.A.L. At the time of the Reformation the church of Rome wanted to establish that those who came out from it were legally wrong, but in truth they were morally right; that was the strength of their stand.
J.T. The letter to Thyatira deals with that -- "the rest in Thyatira". They were the separated ones that came out from Rome, and the Lord gives them promises. If we look at the end of @Revelation 2, we shall see that. We have not time for it now, but the brethren ought to have it before them. It is the idea of separation.
F.N.W. During the last one hundred and twenty-five years there have been certain difficulties and divisions. What would you say establishes the legality of our position today?
J.T. One point negatively would be the clerical element. Over against that is the ground of gathering; hence, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord *withdraw* from iniquity ... and *pursue* righteousness,
{184}
faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart", (@2 Timothy 2:19 - 22). How are we to bring that into the ecclesiastical position? @Matthew 18 helps us, because there the Lord says, "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them", verse 20. The position is established in that way in two or three *without* a clergyman! The principle is the assembly meeting together, and going on together, governed by the Scriptures and recognising the Holy Spirit.
C.F.E. Going back to John the baptist again, would you say that he stands alone in his ministry? He is not linked on with others in his ministry.
J.T. He never was really. He says in @John 3: "He must increase, but I must decrease. He who comes from above is above all", verses 30, 31. Earlier he had said, "The friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices in heart because of the voice of the bridegroom: this my joy then is fulfilled", verse 29. He finished there, you might say. He did not establish a system of his own at all. It was never intended that he d, although he made disciples, but he finished and disappeared in the acknowledgment of the glory of Christ. His joy was fulfilled in the thought that the Lord Jesus had *the first* place; indeed *all* the place.
A.R. Other gatherings of brethren today, I suppose, would claim the legal or right position.
J.T. The legal position is seen in the sense in which we are speaking, in what is right according to scripture. The genealogy here is established by law; that is, the facts presented in Scripture, as in the first chapter of Matthew. These names run down from Abraham to Christ, and He is proved to be the Messiah by what is stated, the Spirit of God inditing it. Chapter 4 shows what He is and what He can do. "And Jesus went round the whole of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom, and healing
{185}
every disease and every bodily weakness among the people. And his fame went out into the whole of Syria, and they brought to him all that were ill, suffering under various diseases and pains, and those possessed by demons, and lunatics, and paralytics; and he healed them", verses 23, 24. Well, who could question His Messiahship? There it was! John sent messengers to Him later, asking, "Art *thou* the coming one? or are we to wait for another?" And He said, "Go, report to John what ye hear and see. Blind men see and lame walk; lepers are cleansed, and deaf hear; and dead are raised, and poor have glad tidings preached to them". (@Matthew 11:4,5). That was the testimony. It is a question of what He was and His power. He went about doing good for God was with Him.
As regards ourselves; that is, the assembly now, 1 and 2 Corinthians apply particularly. Chapter 14 of 1 Corinthians supposes conditions in Corinth. Well, suppose there were three meetings there: one was a Jewish synagogue, one an idol temple, and the other a Christian assembly. What is to be said about these? A man comes into the Christian assembly. He may have gone into the others, too. What would he say about the heathen temple? What would he say about the Jewish synagogue? But what would he say about the Christian assembly? *God is there*. That is a legal point, and the evidence was that prophesying was going on. Men were prophesying, bringing God to souls; and the man who came in felt the power of that, and he fell down and worshipped God, and he reported that God was among them. That is the point. Let that be clear! Let us see to it that there is something like that, that God is among us.
A.A.T. Would you say that is the kingdom of the heavens?
J.T. That all enters into what we are saying; we are dealing with the kingdom of the heavens; that is power.
{186}
The kingdom is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit and that is what we are dealing with. Righteousness is the leading feature in Matthew.
A.P.T. In the beginning of chapter 5, the legality of the Lord's position is maintained. It synchronises with @1 Corinthians 14. The blessing is where the Lord is. He says, "*Blessed* are the poor in spirit, for *theirs* is the kingdom of the heavens". And then He follows on in a delightful way, the sequence of being in the atmosphere of the assembly.
J.T. The word 'blessed' is mentioned nine times. What really enters into the point of the assembly in @1 Corinthians 14 is that blessing is there in the power of the Spirit, operating in prophesying.
R.W.S. It is not sufficient to speak of good meetings or getting converts; that in *itself* does not establish the legality of the position at all.
J.T. That is the thing to look into because we know that thousands of people who are spoken of as converted are not real. In large evangelistic meetings this has been going on. But where is the formation resulting from such conversions? God is to be glorified in the assembly unto all generations of the age of ages, (@Ephesians 3:21). And if those converts are not in the assembly what can we say of them?
J.H.H. Does Peter give a good word in @Acts 10:34 when he says, "Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him"? Is that the legality we look for?
J.T. Very good; *he that works righteousness*.
W.F.K. What does "poor in spirit" mean?
J.T. It would be poor in the sense in which the Lord was *poor*. We may be poor in that sense although we have means in a literal sense. It is said, "Blessed is he that understandeth the poor". (@Psalm 41:1), referring
{187}
undoubtedly to the Messiah. It is to be noted that the Lord is not spoken of as having money in His possession. He had to ask to be shown a penny, (@Luke 20:24).
A.I. Would chapter 5 bear on the features of the kingdom?
J.T. Yes. The verses read speak of it; it is a question of teaching. It is really a legislative chapter. There are seven mountains mentioned in Matthew, and this chapter treats of one of them. Verse 1 says, "But seeing the crowds, he went up into the mountain, and having sat down, his disciples came to him; and, having opened his mouth, he taught them". We have this list of things that are mentioned, which are features of the kingdom. And so in the final passage we read, verse 44 to the end, we have the disciples likened to their Father; that is, to God. So the Lord says, "Love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you, and pray for those who insult you and persecute you, that ye may be the sons of your Father who is in the heavens; for he makes his sun rise on evil and good, and sends rain on just and unjust. For if ye should love those who love you, what reward have ye? Do not also the tax-gatherers the same? And if ye should salute your brethren only, what do ye extraordinary? Do not also the Gentiles the same? Be ye therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect". That is what is in heaven now -- *par excellence* The Father in His holy character is brought down to where we are; we are enjoined to reflect here below what God is.
W.R. Is it not a question of God being in us and among us?
J.T. The characteristics of God are to be seen in the brethren; those who are righteous; only it is here our heavenly Father; and He is called *your Father*.
J.A.P. Does this work out in Job? At the beginning he was speaking of his righteousness, but at the end he prayed for his friends.
{188}
J.T. Yes. That is real righteousness; just like what is before us -- he is like God.
A.I. Does teaching such as we are having at this time have in mind the thought of perfection?
J.T. That is what is stated: "*Be ye* therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect". That is indeed a great idea, and it is brought down to ourselves.
C.F.E. It would seem as if there is an inner circle here; the crowds are not brought into it. "His *disciples* came to him".
J.T. "But seeing the crowds, he went up into the mountain, and having sat down, his disciples came to him", verse 1. The crowds did not go up there. The disciples went up. They thought it worth while and they went up; so with our meetings: relatively few come, but those that do come get instruction and blessing, generally.
A.B.P. Is it significant that this teaching was on the mountain? Is it in keeping with the idea of the heavens?
J.T. I think so; the teaching is connected with the thought of moral elevation. There are seven mountains in this gospel; we have often noticed that, like the mountains round about Jerusalem in the Psalms. There is more that has its bearing on us in this passage than has come under review. We are not to be militant in the literal sense; we do not want to take the sword. We may have to suffer for that, because we are not like other men. All that enters into the instruction of this chapter. We are to be like our Father, who is in heaven; and we are to bless those that curse us; that is the idea. We do not avenge ourselves: "... not avenging yourselves, beloved, ... for it is written. Vengeance belongs to me, I will recompense, saith the Lord", (@Romans 12:19).
{189}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD (9)
@Matthew 9:35 - 38; @Matthew 10:1 - 7; @Matthew 11:1 - 15; @Matthew 12:28,29
J.T. It is proposed that we look again at the gospel of Matthew in pursuing our subject. We have previously considered certain parts from chapter 1 to the end of chapter 5. The kingdom of the heavens is peculiarly marked out in this gospel. We have, for instance, in the last paragraph of chapter 4, an allusion to the work of the Lord, involving the kingdom. It says, "And Jesus went round the whole of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom, and healing every disease and every bodily weakness among the people. And his fame went out into the whole of Syria, and they brought to him all that were ill, suffering under various diseases and pains, and those possessed by demons, and lunatics, and paralytics; and he healed them", verses 23 - 25. And in chapter 9, which we have just read, there is a similar thought in the closing verses, only that there are certain variations, the Spirit of God calling attention to the extraordinary works of power of the Lord Jesus. All this enters into the idea of the kingdom, which is before us. And in chapter 12, the verses read, "But if by the Spirit of God cast out demons, then indeed the kingdom of God is come upon you. Or how can any one enter into the house of the strong man and plunder his goods, unless first he bind the strong man? and then he will plunder his house", verses 28, 29. And then, attached to these verses is another point of great importance, namely, a judicial or punitive feature which enters into this matter, because of a word or saying against the Spirit. In chapter 9 it says, "But the Pharisees said. He casts out the demons through the prince of the demons", verse 34. Another passage in chapter 12:24 is almost identical and alludes to the judgment of God upon any one speaking against the Spirit of God. The presence of the Spirit of God is the leading
{190}
feature of this dispensation. He is marked by peculiar humility in serving in God's kingdom -- serving men. So it is said in verse 31 of chapter 12: "For this reason I say unto you. Every sin and injurious speaking shall be forgiven to men, but speaking injuriously of the Spirit shall not be forgiven to men. And whosoever shall have spoken a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever shall speak against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in tills age nor in the coming one". I think we do well to have these four scriptures before us, especially in view of the terrible word as to any one speaking against the Spirit of God. It is well known to many of us here that the great servant who was used of God to open up the truth to us, said that the notion of a clergyman is, dispensationally, a sin against the Holy Spirit.
J.S. Is that because the Spirit is quenched by clericalism?
J.T. I should think so. He is quenched in the usual procedure that marks the so-called sects at the present time, and of course it began very early in the dispensation. The clerical idea began early. It is seen in Diotrephes, @3 John 9.
C.F.E. Is that seen also in chapter 9:34, in the Pharisees denying the power of God?
J.T. Yes. "The Pharisees said. He casts out the demons through the prince of the demons". That is the allegation: that the Lord Jesus was acting in the power of an evil spirit, and that was a word against the Spirit of God.
A.B.P. Is it important that we discern, in any matters that come up amongst us, if the dispensation has been misrepresented?
J.T. I should think that would enter into what we are saying, and we are reminded therefore of how easily we may participate in what is, in effect, a sin against the Spirit. Therefore we are enjoined not to quench the
{191}
Spirit and not to grieve the Holy Spirit. Quenching the Spirit would be trenching on His activities and thus sinning against Him.
A.B.P. Was the sin of Moses, which in one sense was provoked by the people, a serious matter because it misrepresented the dispensation?
J.T. Well, it hindered his entrance into the land, his leading Israel in, but it did not affect the Spirit (typically) for the water flowed out to the people. The action affected Moses and Aaron governmentally, but not in a final sense, for their places in the testimony and in blessing are fixed eternally. But as to this dispensation, it is the time of the throne of grace instead of the Lord's own throne, which will involve judgment. In general this dispensation is characterised by grace, it is "the well accepted time", "the day of salvation". But the question arises as to the general current situation in the world, involving also happenings of the last war and some earlier wars -- certain efforts which were tantamount to antichristian attack on military lines -- and the question is, are they to be regarded as subject to the punitive dealings of God as entering into the character of the last days, corresponding to what is described in the book of Revelation in the form of judgments. If judgments entered into this dispensation at the beginning, and indeed throughout, as might be pointed out in various events, why may not the present circumstances come under that head? Whether the conduct that has marked current matters, and especially of late, should be called governmental or purely punitive, they certainly have the character of early events, such as the destruction of Jerusalem and the extraordinary death of Herod. These cannot but be regarded as punitive, only they do not characterise the dispensation, though entering into it.
A.R. What about the sin unto death in John's first epistle? Would that fit in here?
J.T. I should not call that a punitive sin in the sense
{192}
in which we are speaking. Such a sin might be in a person who is really one of God's people, such as Ananias and Sapphira, and certain others that are spoken of at Corinth: "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep", (@1 Corinthians 11:30). I would regard those cases as purely governmental, not punitive.
A.N.W. In tracing these matters you have referred to in relation to the kingdom, are you giving it a wider bearing than the assembly?
J.T. One of the assembly's prerogatives is to exercise discipline -- perhaps more accurately, governmental acts -- in order that the persons involved might be saved in the day of the Lord. They are not merely punitive; they are mainly corrective. The assembly, through Peter, dealt with Ananias and Sapphira. The physical effect, death, was evidently the act of God, although Peter identified himself with it in announcing it. The Old Testament required corporal punishment in maintaining the government of God in Israel, but it is not applied in the assembly. Delivering to Satan and putting away are divinely prescribed, but the cases of Ananias and Sapphira and those at Corinth were direct acts of God. So that there are remarkable expressions and distinctions in Scripture that we should notice, and know how to judge when we meet them. Christians ought to be on their guard lest they may be in any way supporting what is antichristian and so come under the penalty of God. In recent circumstances some indulged in national and personal prejudices and compromised themselves in this way.
A.A.T. Is it not so that the Galatian saints were going back to Judaism and in that way sinning against the Spirit?
J.T. They were in danger, but the apostle addresses them as Christians. There were persons, who were Judaisers, who troubled them, and the apostle says, "I
{193}
would that they would even cut themselves off who throw you into confusion". (@Galatians 5:12). But he does not suggest that *all* were guilty; those who were direct Judaisers were guilty; that is, as bringing in apostate principles. They brought in Old Testament conditions as governing this present dispensation. Christendom today is largely thus affected.
R.W.S. Are you connecting the kingdom with present happenings? I think I followed what you said as to the assembly, but are you connecting present public happenings with the operations of the kingdom?
J.T. No; they would not be, because the kingdom is not characteristically punitive, as we have said. "For the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit", (@Romans 14:17). Therefore, what we have read here and what generally characterises the kingdom of God is the gospel. It is grace; now grace reigns "through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord", (@Romans 5:21).
R.W.S. Does that same thought apply to the kingdom of the heavens?
J.T. Yes. We are engaged with the kingdom of the heavens now, in Matthew; the idea of Christ being in heaven is implied. It is His present service in heaven that is in mind, and what flows out of it. Other features that we have been considering, especially in Luke, relate to the kingdom connected with the Spirit on earth, which is the same thing in result, but still, there are the two thoughts. The presence of the Spirit on earth is the idea that is conveyed in the kingdom of God. "But if *I* by the Spirit of God cast out demons, then indeed the kingdom of God is come upon you". Therefore, Luke tells us that the Lord Jesus went about doing good. That was the idea of the kingdom; God being with Him.
C.A.M. Would it be right to look at the kingdom as
{194}
not universally acknowledged at the present time? It has its own wonderful sphere, but there are spheres exterior to it, so that these other operations of God in judicial matters, of which you were speaking, would exercise themselves in those surroundings. The words that occur to me are, "in the midst of you", (@Luke 17:20,21). There is something *surrounding* the kingdom of God that is in measure subject to the government of God.
J.T. I see your point; that is, not characteristically subject to the government of God, but it might be in some detail.
C.A.M. I was wondering whether the pharisaical element that the Lord is speaking of continues on in the clerical element today.
J.T. Quite so; hence the whole system of religion that has developed and now has to be classified with heathendom, Judaism, and even Mohammedanism. Can God in any sense be favourable to it? I think that under certain circumstances He can be, in a governmental sense; and that this is illustrated in the present international combinations.
J.A.P. Does the prophecy in @Zechariah 4 bear out what you are saying as to the kingdom of God -- how it is actually supported? It says, "Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith Jehovah of hosts ... and he shall bring forth the headstone with shoutings: Grace, grace unto it!" verses 6,7. And then, "These are the two sons of oil, that stand before the Lord of the whole earth", verse 14. Is that a suggestion of the Spirit coming in?
J.T. I think so, as giving character to the present time. Haggai agrees somewhat with that. Jehovah says, "The word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, and my Spirit, remain among you", (@Haggai 2:5). That, of course, would be beneficial -- it is Horeb, not Sinai. That, I think, would be Jehovah's way of showing how near the kingdom in the previous
{195}
dispensation came to our dispensation from the standpoint *of good*.
A.R. In 2 Thessalonians reference is made to *that* which restrains, and *he who* restrains. Is that restraint against the spirit of antichrist? The spirit of antichrist seems to be prevalent in the present war, but there is a power holding against it.
J.T. Yes: *that which* restrains, and *he who* restrains has to be noted, and I would say that the latter refers to the Spirit; whereas *that* which restrains, I would say, is the principle of government that God inaugurated after Israel was set aside; that is, what God has set up in the four monarchies. That still stands as a principle with God, and of course it comes into our cognisance, because we are called upon to pray for those whom God has set up -- "the powers that be", (@Romans 13:1).
A.R. Do you mean *that* which hinders would be the governments on earth that are favourable to Christianity?
J.T. In general; they are not always favourable to Christianity, but they are helped of God to keep order, maintaining government generally. We thank God for it constantly now. And beside that there is that which resists evil in the prayers of the saints and the general working of the Spirit in the assembly.
A.B.P. Should we not make room in our thoughts for God to act in His own rights outside of the bounds of the present dispensation in individual cases, or even in certain national matters?
J.T. I would say that, because "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the expanse sheweth the work of his hands". (@Psalm 19:1). And then it goes on to say, "There is no speech, and there are no words, yet their voice is heard", verse 3. That psalm speaks of a testimony through which God can speak to man, and we know He did speak to the magi from the East, for example. They were spoken to through a star; through the heavens. That, I am sure, goes on.
{196}
H.G.H. Is that suggested in verse 36? It says, "When he saw the crowds ..." Earlier, He was healing every disease, but when He saw the crowds He was moved with compassion for them. There were specific movements in relation to the healing of the diseases, but then there were *crowds* which would imply those outside of His immediate circle, but He had compassion for them.
J.T. All that helps as to what has been said as to spheres exterior to the kingdom of heaven. Chapter 9:35 speaks of what *He* was doing -- how immense it was! And then in verse 36, He was moved because He saw that the people were harassed and cast away as sheep not having a shepherd. *He* was the Shepherd of Israel, but He does not say that here. What He says is, "The harvest is great and the workmen are few; supplicate therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he send forth workmen unto his harvest". And then He appoints the apostles. They were to carry on as He had been carrying on, but within the limits of Israel. Another thing thus comes up in our subject. Can we discern *modification* when it is required? We shall see it further in the next chapter, but here they are told to go to the house of Israel; not to the Samaritans. And they are told that their service would continue on until the Lord comes. We cannot, of course, admit of the exclusion of Christianity; we come on to it in chapters 11 and 12, as we shall see, but I think we may see that the presence of the twelve is stressed here, and that they are to be limited to the tribes of Israel. The designation "twelve" implies that they represent *administration*; verse 2 emphasises this. The legislative side being so far in the Lord's hands, is seen in chapters 5, 6, and 7. In chapter 10 the twelve are called "twelve *disciples*", which alludes to their education, it being derived from the Lord and thus it qualified them for their service, carrying also the administrative idea, as we have seen. And then verse 2
{197}
says, "Now the names of the *twelve apostles* are these ..." Notice, the word is changed to *apostles* and their names are given; and then again in verse 5 it says, "These *twelve* Jesus sent out when he had charged them". That is to say, it is a great administrative position under the three designations here: "twelve disciples", and "twelve apostles", and "these twelve". It becomes very interesting as to how the kingdom took form under the twelve, as it had taken form under the Lord Himself. We shall see presently that John the baptist was not in the kingdom as the Lord was now setting it up. He was not equal to it. "A little one in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he", chapter 11: 11.
J.T.Jr. Does the Lord send them out as distinct from Himself? It is a question of the *twelve*. Is the idea that the administration now is going on as if He were not there?
J.T. That is what I thought might be seen. The time for that has come. His work is plainly intimated in these two settings in chapters 4 and 9, but now He is inaugurating a new thing in the twelve -- what they can do -- and so this whole chapter has them in mind. So that in verse 1 it says, "And it came to pass when Jesus had finished commanding his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and preach in their cities". He would go on, but *they* were to go on. Thus the whole position is augmented. We do not have the seventy in this gospel, but we have the twelve greatly stressed in this chapter.
A.P.T. In verse 20 of chapter 10 it says, "*Ye* are not the speakers, but the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you". Would that be the character of the ministry?
J.T. That is an important part of the chapter. It is the Spirit Himself speaking in them. He was speaking in the Lord, of course, but now He is speaking in them.
C.A.M. What is the difference between the administrative
{198}
and the legislative? Is it a principle with God that after laying down the truth, like a statute, the working principle is brought in?
J.T. Yes; in detail; how the thing is done. But the legislative side is most important to get into our minds, because it involves principles, and deals with Christendom as it is. Each so-called denomination has its own rules and methods, but they all have to be tested by this chapter, and indeed, by this gospel as a whole.
W.R. Is there not something significant in the fact that the Lord taught in their synagogues and then the glad tidings followed the teaching?
J.T. Quite so; then we have a wider thought, as has already been alluded to in chapter 11: "And it came to pass when Jesus had finished commanding his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and preach in their cities". These would be the cities of Israel, because it is said later that they should not have gone over the cities of Israel until the Son of man had come.
A.R. Is it a divine system set up operating against what is evil here below?
J.T. Yes; although its main operation is in good. The punitive elements, I would think, are outside the kingdom as in its present form. It has a great many aspects. It would be instructive to us all to look over the various titles which designate the kingdom, but it would seem, from what we are dealing with now, that the kingdom of the heavens in Matthew and the kingdom of God in Luke are set for good.
W.C.R. Is the throne of grace a kingdom thought?
J.T. It is the very centre of the kingdom. It is a *thing*, not a person. It shows what our dispensation is. It is a throne of grace; not of judgment. And yet, we are told in Romans, "For there is revealed wrath of God from heaven", (@Romans 1:18), but it is not yet put into execution, and so in another epistle also marked by grace it says, that the Lord Jesus is our deliverer from the
{199}
A.P.T. What you say is confirmed by the words of the Lord Jesus in chapter 10:7: "And as ye go, *preach*". It is the positive side of their ministry. And then to confirm the thought of judgment being withheld, it says, "It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in judgment-day than for that city", verse 15. The judgment is in abeyance. In the meantime the disciples keep on doing the work of grace in the kingdom.
J.T. That is right. Judgment is in abeyance. The beneficent character of the kingdom is in operation and is not to be interfered with. The judgment is deferred, even for the cities in which the Lord had wrought in such a marvellous way. His works of grace and goodness were the testimony, and hence the serious judgment to come later -- in the day of judgment. Therefore, in verse 7 it says, "And as ye go, preach, saying. The kingdom of the heavens has drawn nigh". It is already intimated what the kingdom of the heavens is. And then "Heal the infirm, raise the dead, cleanse lepers, cast out demons: ye have received gratuitously, give gratuitously". That is the idea. That is the position of this whole dispensation.
A.P.T. What is the present bearing of this on all of us who would seek to be in the kingdom of the heavens? How does it operate today? How is it positively carried forward through the saints?
J.T. I think as we have already seen -- in the *doctrine* of it; it is Romans in the main, and the other epistles that we have gone through, but *the* way of it you get largely in the gospels, seen particularly in the personal way in which the Lord *did* things. Hence, we have these things that He tells the twelve to do. Also, when John sends to Him, as seen in the next chapter. He says, "Go, report to John what ye hear and see. Blind men see and lame walk; lepers are cleansed, and deaf hear; and dead
{200}
are raised, and poor have glad tidings preached to them: and blessed is whosoever shall not be offended in me", verses 4 - 6. That is what He was doing. John wanted to know whether He was the Christ or not, and that is the answer He sends. John had heard in the prison of the Lord's works -- why did he not know whose they were?
J.S. Could anyone know better?
J.T. Quite so. What needs to be understood now is that the kingdom is here by the Spirit. The kingdom of heaven alludes to Christ in heaven, but the kingdom of God to the Spirit here, and hence in the assembly. Therefore, it should mark the assembly; good works are implied: "Having been created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God has before prepared that we should walk in them", (@Ephesians 2:10).
F.S.C. How do you bring the last verse of this gospel into what you are saying -- "And behold, *I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age". (@Matthew 28:20)?
J.T. That would be to help them, to augment them in their great mission. "Behold, *I*am with you all the days". He had led them up to that. You might inquire, Where is He now? Matthew does not record the ascension. He contemplates the Lord as here. He is here, we may say, mysteriously, to support us in our service and testimony. The promise to the two or three in chapter 18 is included in this. The Lord does not include punitive works in the service committed to us. God reserves to Himself the judgment of enemies. "Vengeance belongs to me, *I* will recompense, saith the Lord", (@Romans 12:19). We are to hold aloof from that, and therefore John says, "For neither does the Father judge anyone", (@John 5:22). The Father is connected with grace.
C.A.M. You alluded to their cities -- "He departed thence to preach and teach in their cities", chapter 11:1. Has that a present bearing in connection with our localities?
{201}
J.T. By extension, I think it raises the question of assembly position.
C.A.M. Some years ago there was ministry entitled, 'The Upper Room and the City'. The upper room was regarded as a moral idea, but the city thought was greatly stressed and has continued to be since. Do you think that would be in line with this thought?
J.T. I think it would, and of course in line with the formation of assemblies. The preacher in Ecclesiastes is the former of assemblies. The two things -- preaching and the formation of assemblies -- go together. We have here "As ye go, preach". Note that! The Lord directs them to preach as they went. Then there is the additional thought in Christianity; namely, the *number* of assemblies; that is, the constitution of the assembly is not only one great general thought, but it is seen as in its local positions, and hence the apostle refers to *all the assemblies*. The first mention of the word in that sense is in (@Acts 9:31): "The assemblies then throughout the whole of Judaea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified and walking in the fear of the Lord, and were increased through the comfort of the Holy Spirit". So we have the assemblies founded. The assembly in its general thought is the residence of the Holy Spirit here; but the operative and administrative thoughts are in *local* companies, each having its own responsibilities and prerogatives to carry out the government of God in itself.
T.E.H. Would you help as to the Macedonian man? He says. Come over and help us, but the suggestion is that the apostle went specifically to Philippi. He went to a city.
J.T. The assembly was in mind. The man was probably a Greek, belonging to the old Greek system. Philippi was a city in Macedonia. And apparently there was a work of God there ready for the apostle's ministry. I suppose Philippi may be taken to represent a characteristic local assembly more so than Ephesus. Ephesus is more official and represents the assembly as a *whole* in
{202}
some cases, but Philippi would bear the general characteristic of grace. It is the epistle that speaks of the "supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ".
J.S. Much is made there of the gospel.
J.T. Quite so; they had fellowship with it from the first day until the time Paul wrote.
R.W.S. Does the extension of the teaching involve each one of us? You alluded to the Lord's preaching and teaching in chapter 10, but then the end of that chapter brings the ministry down to "a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple".
J.T. That brings out the feature of chapter 10 -- the general spirit of it. Verse 28 says, "And be not afraid of those who kill the body, but cannot kill the soul; but fear rather him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing?" and then, later, "He that receives you receives me, and he that receives me receives him that sent me. He that receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. And whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward", verses 40 - 42. It shows what runs along with the great principle of the chapter; that is, the administrative service of the twelve, including the thought of "a righteous man". Then, as you say, it comes down to one who gives something in the name of a disciple. The name of a disciple is important administratively, and it is a question of administration here.
A.B.P. Is there any point to the fact that the twelve apostles are listed in twos? The evidences of the power of the kingdom which the Lord refers to in answering John are also listed in twos. Would it mean that the persons who are administrators are themselves a testimony as also the fruits and power of the kingdom?
{203}
J.T. Showing that "two are better than one"; and of course if you have more you can multiply it accordingly. Whatever number there may be in a local company, the principle of two would be there, and therefore Matthew stands out as representing the assembly, because the principle of two or more enters into it -- "two or three", or "two of you".
A.B.P. Peter and John at the Beautiful gate of the temple would represent this?
J.T. I think so; that feature is seen in the early part of the Acts; that is, in Peter and John, and especially in Paul and Barnabas. Much was bound up in the idea of two, and it may hold now. The question is whether it holds practically, whether we can work it out.
J.T.Jr. Thomas must in some way have gotten away from Matthew, according to John's record. He was away from one meeting. The idea of two would hold us in right channels.
J.T. I think so. I think it works out, perhaps, in ways that we have not thought of. Matthew's gospel is pre-eminently a part of the Scripture that makes much of the idea of two; so that we ought to seek to find out the advantage in it. But it is seen in good and bad senses.
A.B.P. Simon the Cananaean had a great responsibility as being paired with Judas.
A.P.T. Would the service of God in a locality, being held by two, result for the better?
J.T. The idea of two works negatively as well as positively. The company you keep comes into it. If it be a question of the service of God, two in special friendship are apt to damage each other. And it may work out in partisan feeling.
C.A.M. While we cannot make too much of leadership, yet leadership is never without support, is it? Even at the end, Paul said. Only Luke is with me. There was always some support to leadership, was there not?
J.T. Are you stressing the idea of *with*?
{204}
C.A.M. Yes, it would work out in ways we had not thought of; for instance, the two sons of oil in (@Zechariah 4:14), in some ways they are existent, would you not say?
J.T. I would say that Paul and Barnabas were such, at first, at least. And also Paul and Silas. "Luke alone is with me" would be a reflection on others.
J.A.P. Does it involve that one of the two has to take the second place?
J.T. That is another thing to accustom ourselves to -- to take the second place if necessary; not to be aspiring to the first place.
W.F.K. Peter is mentioned first in the list of apostles. Is it in mind that he is to have the keys of the kingdom?
J.T. I think Peter is especially in mind in Matthew. Matthew himself comes in in chapter 9. He is seen as a good brother; a man that would give an entertainment for the Lord.
J.T.Jr. It is remarkable that you get his vocation. He was a tax-gatherer.
T.E.H. Would Peter be a good second man when occasion called for it? He beckoned to John at the Passover as if he would realise there was one nearer to the Lord than he at that moment. Lord than he at that moment.
J.T. He would take such a place in recognising that John had greater discernment, but Acts appears to hold throughout that Peter is first among the twelve.
E.E.H. Would you say a little about John the baptist; as to how one of the least in the kingdom is greater than he?
J.T. It is to bring out what is in mind. We should not forget that there are gradations in this matter; that the dispensation of Christianity is the best that God has devised, embracing the house of God, and the assembly. We are prepared for the superiority of it by the Lord's word as to John here: "Verily I say to you, that there is not arisen among the born of women a greater than John the baptist". That should be particularly before us, for
{205}
the idea of grade comes into this section, and shows that the greatest of the old order that God went on with in Old Testament times is less than the least in the kingdom of the heavens. We are prepared for Christianity, I think, in this remark which the Lord made. While He eulogised John in speaking most wonderfully about him, yet, being the great regulator of everything. He placed him as less than those in the kingdom of the heavens.
W.W.M. What is involved in violence? It says, "The kingdom of the heavens is taken by violence, and the violent seize on it". (@Matthew 11:12). Is that spiritual energy?
J.T. I would think so; it is a tribute to what John taught. It says, "But from the days of John the baptist until now, the kingdom of the heavens is taken by violence, and the violent seize on it". The word *violence* would be in a good sense, I would think; that we must be prepared to do violence to nature and to family links, if necessary, for the kingdom of the heaven's sake. The kingdom of the heavens must be first. "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness", (@Matthew 6:33).
H.G.H. Is there a suggestion here that the kingdom of the heavens should find a great place in our preaching today?
J.T. I think so; Matthew would help us in that way, because he says in chapter 12: "Behold, more than Solomon is here". I think the allusion is to the kingdom; to what was attached to the Lord and in Him personally and what is now in the Spirit, because the last verses of chapter 12 bring out the position of Christianity, in relation to the brethren.
A.R. Why should the Lord link Jonah with Solomon?
J.T. I suppose he had a great place in the mind of the ordinary Jew. Both Solomon and Jonah were preachers. The devil is endeavouring to depreciate Jonah; to make him a mere myth, whereas he is outstanding in the Lord's mind and in His teaching. The reference would be to
{206}
bring out what the new thing was, that it was greater, and this would involve the greatness of the preaching, I would say. Both Solomon and Jonah were eclipsed by the Person who was here and by the preaching.
A.N.W. Will you say a word about the little ones, and the comparative degrees in the kingdom?
J.T. There is a diminutive thought attached to them. "One of these little ones", referred to in chapter 10: 42, carries the thought of humility or insignificance. In John's case it says in chapter 11:11, "He who is a little one in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he". The little one there may be the *least*. It is somewhat different from the end of chapter 10 but a similar idea, I would say. The footnote to chapter 11 is, "It is the comparative degree; whoever else is taken, the 'one' is less; the idiomatic force is more preserved by 'a little one'". Paul would carry this with him, that he was not behind the other apostles in any comparative degree even if it be used in this sense. He was a little one in truth. His name meant 'little' but he was "less than the least of all saints", (@Ephesians 3:8). I suppose that is the best way to illustrate this word.
F.S.C. Do you think there is any link with the idea of the little child earlier in this gospel?
J.T. Yes. It is not a babe there; it is a little child; one that has some intelligent sensibility, I would think. The Lord Himself is thus described. He used the word *babes* in chapter 11 when speaking to the Father about the disciples, but the term in which He is referred to in the beginning of the book is "the little child".
R.W.S. Is John's failure in this chapter dispensational and is what is better coming to light? Is the kingdom in relation to the assembly in view?
J.T. What you say is important. But John's is a very bad failure. Although he was in prison it was nevertheless failure that he should have in his mind to send his disciples to the Lord with questions which
{207}
imply doubt as to His position as the Christ. That is what John did. He caused it to enter into the mind of others as well as his own, that the Lord may not be the Christ. It is a terrible thing that he should have that thought in his mind, especially as he had been so clear in the matter earlier.
R.W. S. I thought you had the up-grade in your mind as leading on to the assembly, that the gates of Hades should not prevail against it. I wondered if he might represent failure in that way in his dispensation.
J.T. And we must consider as to John personally that he does not lose the place the Lord gives him as regards the greatest born of women.
A.B.P. Does it serve to open up the idea of seeing the kingdom? It is referred to in John's gospel. The Lord told John's disciples to return to John and tell him what they had *seen* and *heard*.
J.T. That was the message; it was what was to be seen, and apparently John accepted the testimony. We have to think of him in that way, because John the apostle follows on that line and gives John the baptist a great place. If he has not a dispensational place as great as those who are in this dispensation, yet it would seem that he has a place morally equal to it, from what John the apostle says about him in the end of chapter 3. Nevertheless John's failure, as we have said, was great.
A.P.T. Verse 3 is emphatic as regards the Person of the Lord. "Art *thou* the coming one?"
J.T. That was in his mind.
A.B.P. Was his weakness that he judged the matter by the fact that he was in prison?
J.T. I would think he was judging by external circumstances. He would wonder why he should be in prison if the Christ were here.
A.N.W. What makes the days of John an epoch to entitle the Lord to say, "But from the days of John the baptist until now, the kingdom of the heavens is taken
{208}
by violence, and the violent seize on it"? Why does He make that a distinctive period?
J.T. I think it is to honour him. We have that phrase in various connections, such as the *days of David*, the *days of the Son of man*, and many others. I would think it was in the Lord's mind to honour John; that he gave character to the period. We never hear of Paul's days, as far as I know; I suppose it is because he brings in what is heavenly; he is a heavenly man like Abraham. The Son of man refers to the Lord's relation with *men*, not specially as in heaven, but generally.
J.T.Jr. John was well known. The people regarded him as a prophet. He was in the public eye, but I suppose this little one is over against that idea. The Lord never intended the assembly to be a great public matter in the way of display at the present time.
J.T. So Paul represents the idea: "less than the least of all saints"; not of *all servants*, but of *all saints*. You wonder how he could say that, but he must have been able to say it by the Spirit.
W.F.K. John prophesied, "I must decrease". He was not ready for his own prophecy.
J.T. I think Paul was intended to bring in Christianity in all its characteristics, even exceeding the ministry of the twelve.
W.W.M. Paul says, when in prison, "And in this I rejoice, yea, also I will rejoice; for I know that this shall turn out for me to salvation, through your supplication and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ", (@Philippians 1:18,19). That was *his* attitude in the prison position.
J.T. "For let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus", (@Philippians 2:5). The use of the word *also* is remarkable. That mind was in Jesus but Paul had in mind that it should be in the Philippians.
R.D.G. Were even James and John in danger of misrepresenting the kingdom when they wanted to call down fire from heaven?
{209}
J.T. Just so. It shows how, as we already remarked, we may misrepresent things, while intending to be right and even zealous.
R.W.S. I think it is remarkable the way the Lord answers John. He speaks well of John throughout, even intimating that he was Elias. Is that a kingdom feature?
J.T. Quite so. It is a kingdom feature, because the Lord would lift him up. He knew that in general he was worthy of it.
J.H.H. Would it mean that John was thoroughly adjusted?
J.T. I would think he went off the scene adjusted. He was honoured too, in that he was beheaded; he suffered martyrdom in that way. Elijah and John the baptist are linked together. The Lord says. If you will receive it, this is Elijah which is to come. Malachi tells us he is yet to come to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children.
T.E.H. If we are tested in the last days in our apprehension of the truth, there are those like John's disciples who can hear and see and be of help to us.
J.T. What a need there is for the young men! There is a large group of them coming on, and their letters are good. We may say that their letters are weighty, but we have to wait generally to get their bodily presence, and what they are in character, but we have good hope that they all will prove worthy and that they will quit themselves like men and be strong.
{210}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD (10)
@Matthew 13:1 - 18,24 - 33,44 - 52
J.T. The brethren will all be aware that we have been considering the kingdom of God, and we have now come to our last session on this subject. We have been engaged with the kingdom of God generally, in its abstract character, but it is thought that we should review this chapter because it treats of the kingdom in a somewhat mixed character; so that we have the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens. Perhaps, if we keep our minds on this term, we may have a clearer view than we have had. The chapter furnishes instruction as to the present form of the kingdom; not the abstract form that we have been engaged with. The mixed condition that has arisen is presented in this chapter in seven parables. The closing section, verses 51 and 52, show how the truth in the chapter works out in believers who are regarded by the Lord as discipled into the kingdom of the heavens. One such is like a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old. So that believers are thus furnished, as to the kingdom, with what is new first; namely. New Testament scriptures, or truth; and then, with what is old, namely. Old Testament scriptures. This is a matter of first importance for us because of the complicated conditions that have arisen in Christendom. We need to be discipled into the kingdom of the heavens; taught as pupils, so as to learn things as they are, with care and attention and with accuracy.
H.H. "Every scribe" would connect with the idea of accuracy.
J.T. I think it would, because a scribe is supposed to be an accurate man. He writes, and writing tends to accuracy. Inaccuracy is very prevalent among the brethren, especially in regard of what is mysterious. This chapter presents the kingdom in a mysterious sense, and we are very hazy about it. The thought is that we
{211}
might gather help as to the mysteries of the kingdom. They are spoken of in this chapter and also in @Mark 4 and in @Luke 8. It is well understood, I think, by many, that mystery in Scripture refers to what is known by the initiated only. The public side is spoken to the crowds, and the Lord explains in verse 13 why He speaks in parables: "For this cause I speak to them in parables, because seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not hear nor understand; and in them is filled up the prophecy of Esaias, which says. Hearing ye shall hear and shall not understand, and beholding ye shall behold and not see; for the heart of this people has grown fat, and they have heard heavily with their ears, and they have closed their eyes as asleep, lest they should see with the eyes, and hear with the ears, and understand with the heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them". (@Isaiah 6) is quoted; a well known passage which refers to judicial blinding which came about in Israel because of their obduracy in refusing the ministry of the Lord. So that this parabolic ministry of the Lord has a judicial character. People are unable to see and understand because they have refused the truth. Hence, the refusal of the truth tends to this kind of judicial dealing on the part of God.
E.A.L. It says here, "Hearing ye shall hear and shall not understand". The footnote says it is an emphatic negative. Do you think our difficulty when we say that we cannot see things in the ministry may be because we have made up our minds in a self willed way not to see them?
J.T. We may shut our eyes to the truth. Therefore, if we characteristically do not see, and say so, we may be blinded by the judicial dealings of God which is a most solemn thing.
C.N. Does verse 16 give us the character of the initiated ones?
J.T. "But blessed *are your* eyes", meaning they had
{212}
been affected by God. The natural man does not understand what is of the Spirit, we are told in 1 Corinthians: "he cannot know them because they are spiritually discerned", chapter 2:14. Therefore, it requires a work of God in each one of us if we are to understand; and so the word here is most precious: "But blessed are *your* eyes because they see, and your ears because they hear". The Lord is speaking to His disciples.
A.B.P. Does this link on with the word we had in @John 3 about seeing the kingdom of God?
J.T. It is the same suggestion, because the Lord says: "Except any one be born anew he cannot see the kingdom of God", (@John 3:3). It corresponds very distinctly with this. The Lord says, "But blessed are *your* eyes because they see", which would mean the disciples were the subjects of new birth.
S.J.H. What is the difference in the setting? In another gospel they come to him in the house to inquire. They are initiated there, are they not? But this seems a little different.
J.T. If we look at verse 36 we shall see what opens up the matter: "Then, having dismissed the crowds, he went into the house; and his disciples came to him". He is taking up a new position, in the house, which is a most important matter in the understanding of the chapter. Another thing is that in verse 1 we have, "And that same day Jesus went out from the house and sat down by the sea". The house He has left is the Jewish house. He had been teaching in the Jewish position, but now He has left it and has sat down by the sea, which would allude to the gentiles, to ourselves.
H.H. Would that introduce a new start with the Lord leaving the house?
J.T. He is in the field now, to which sowing applies. The Jewish position was already under tillage by God and there was no need of sowing, the Lord being in operation there, but it had failed. The Jews turned
{213}
against the Lord. I believe that is what is meant. The Jewish position is given up in verse 1, and hence the idea of the sowing which refers to the gentiles.
W.W.M. In verse 14 it says, "In them is filled up the prophecy of Esaias". The thing is filled out now.
J.T. That is right. The time had come for it, which is a very solemn matter. It is quoted from the chapter that tells us the time when the prophet himself was converted. "In the year of the death of king Uzziah, I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up; and his train filled the temple. Seraphim were standing above him ... . And one called to the other and said, Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah of hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory!" (@Isaiah 6:1 - 3). Then he speaks about having his lips cleansed with a coal from the altar and this prophecy follows. He becomes capable of uttering such a prophecy.
R.W.S. In chapter 12 they had attributed the works of the Lord to Beelzebub. Does that make it a moral necessity that he should go out to the nations?
J.T. I would think so. They have disqualified themselves. It is in that chapter the Lord says, "Whosoever shall speak against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this age nor in the coming one", verse 32. That remark is the basis of chapter 13, because the parabolic teaching comes in so as to hide the truth from those that were apostate. The truth is there. The parable has the truth, but it hides it; and in order that we should see what is hidden, in that sense, we need to be born again. The Jewish system will not help us, nor will any other merely religious system.
W.F.K. Is the kingdom a mystery to the world?
J.T. It is. That is what the word implies; although the word "mystery" has also a positive sense in the truth being there.
W.R. Have you in mind that the judicial teaching is one of reduction? In verse 8 it speaks of the fruit:
{214}
... "one a hundred, one sixty, and one thirty". Would that be that the judicial ministry is on the lines of reduction rather than increase?
J.T. The persons who get the good of it are reduced in number. The judicial dealings of God would not necessarily reduce the number of those who get the gain. Mark speaks of thirty, sixty and one hundred -- the up line -- as if it is the idea of encouragement in Mark. Where there is real evangelisation there is encouragement and increase. But Matthew is severe in dealing with us. He is leading up to the assembly, and if we allow ourselves to be blinded because we belong to any system of teaching, or whatever it may be, we are apt to come under this judicial dealing.
H.H. Would what you say about the assembly be touched on in the end of chapter 11? "No one knows the Son but the Father", verse 27. Would these chapters have that in mind?
J.T. Yes. The Lord says in that chapter, "I praise thee. Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes", verse 25. The wise and prudent are the persons that are shut out judicially.
C.A.M. Would you say that the fact that this is addressed to everybody -- it is addressed to the crowd although it is a parable -- might have the effect of awakening some as to whether they were in these classes? Would it cause concern in their souls, and would it be a sort of test to us as to whether we are to be classified with those who are hindered?
J.T. We are challenged, I should think.
C.A.M. If so, it would show that there is something in the way of a work of God in us.
J.T. In verse 1, where the Lord goes out from the house and sits down by the sea, the allusion would be to leaving Judaism on account of its hardening and darkening influence, and then we are told, "And great
{215}
crowds were gathered together to him, so that going on board ship himself he sat down, and the whole crowd stood on the shore. And he spoke to them many things in parables", verses 2, 3. That is where the matter is broached. It is parabolic teaching, as containing a judicial element. The crowds would have many among them that were judicially blinded. They might be there with curiosity and the Lord is hiding the thing from them, and is putting it into parables, but the initiated would understand.
C.A.M. Someone who may come into this room, may go out with a sense that it was all meaningless to him, but he might go out with a great concern because he could not understand.
J.T. Quite so, if he did, there would be hope for him.
A.A.T. Is the house in verse 36 the assembly?
J.T. Well, it is a change-over from what we have been having inasmuch as the truth of the assembly is opened up in it. We shall see that later. It would indicate that the assembly is in mind; the teaching is such as you might get in the school of Tyrannus, for instance, in @Acts 19. It was a severe sort of school, but it was a school in which the truth was unfolded and learned.
E.A.L. A man who recently attacked the truth said that he sat in the meetings and did not understand the truth: yet he attacked it.
J.T. Quite so; it is a very solemn thing. It would mean that he is not born again. It is one that is born again that may be regarded as having hope of seeing and entering into the kingdom of God.
W.W.M. The Lord says, "Because to you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens", verse 11.
J.T. Quite so. And it goes on to say, "... but to them it is not given; for whoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall be caused to be in abundance; but he who has not, even what he has shall be taken away
{216}
from him", verse 12. "For whoever has, to him shall be given"; this implies that he is an industrious learner in the kingdom of God. He *has* something. These are searching things, and they are characteristic of Matthew, because the assembly is involved in Matthew.
A.R. When does this first sowing take place?
J.T. I would say that it alludes to Paul's ministry. Of course, sowing applied under the twelve in @Acts 2 when Peter began to preach, but that was a Jewish position, externally, whereas when Paul and Barnabas began to preach, they went among the gentiles and began to sow for a crop, but they could not get it among the gentiles any more than among the Jews, unless God worked, but in @Acts 13 God did work.
F.S.C. What would you say about the Canaanitish woman in chapter 15? Would she be an outgrowth of the Lord's ministry?
J.T. She was an exception, of course. It was the exception that came into view in the time of the Lord's ministry because He was still ministering among the Jews, but the branches ran over the wall (@Genesis 49:22). If you look at @Romans 15, you get what the Lord's ministry was. "For I say that Jesus Christ became a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises of the fathers; and that the nations should glorify God for mercy; according as it is written. For this cause I will confess to thee among the nations, and will sing to thy name. And again he says, Rejoice, nations, with his people. And again. Praise the Lord, all ye nations, and let all the peoples laud him", verses 8 - 10. The Lord, in the days of His flesh was a Minister of the circumcision to confirm the truth of God and He carried it on in a wide way. He went to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and He told the twelve that they should not go in the way of the nations or the Samaritans, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. That is this gospel. The woman of Canaan was not of the lost sheep
{217}
of the house of Israel, but she said to the Lord that her daughter was ill and had a demon. The Lord did not answer her, and she cried after Him, and then He says, "I have not been sent save to the lost sheep of Israel's house". Then, later. He says, "It is not well to take the bread of the children and cast it to the dogs. But she said. Yea, Lord; for even the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from the table of their masters. Then Jesus answering said to her, O woman, thy faith is great". The truth was that she took her place as a dog and *got blessing*.
This is our own position. The gentiles have come into blessing because they have taken a low place and accepted the Lord; whereas the Jews refused Him.
A.P.T. Would Paul's remarks in @Acts 26 confirm your remark that Paul began to sow according to the Lord's commission to him? He says "... and the nations, to whom I send thee", verse 17.
J.T. Quite so; he was formally sent to the nations. He was not really raised up for the circumcision; in fact, in the general assembly in Jerusalem, the leading apostles said to Paul particularly, that he should go to the nations and they should go to the circumcision. (@Galatians 2:7 - 9).
A.R. He says to the saints at Corinth, "Paul plants". Would that be beyond sowing?
J.T. The emphasis there would be on God giving the increase. Paul and Apollos worked *together*.
W.W.M. In the parable of @Luke 15, would the Lord have in mind that the elder son represented the Jews, who would not come in, whereas the nations, represented by the younger son, did come in?
J.T. Just so; because the prodigal says to his Father, "I have sinned against heaven and before thee; I am no longer worthy to be called thy son", verse 21. He refers to the bounty of God through the heavens, in what is given in a world-wide way, for "the heavens declare the glory of God". They are not limited to any nation or persons. They are universal, and the prodigal had failed
{218}
at first, but he acknowledged that he had failed, "I have sinned against heaven and before thee; I am no longer worthy to be called thy son". He comes on to the ground of the Canaanitish woman because he acknowledges his unworthiness.
C.H.H. Would this be spoken of prophetically in @Isaiah 49 where the Lord says that He laboured in vain and spent His strength for naught? And then, in the following verses there is the indication that He should be glorified among the gentiles.
J.T. Yes. He would raise up the tribes of Israel, too. And so Simeon in Jerusalem refers to the Lord, as in his arms, and says to God, "Now thou lettest thy bondman go, according to thy word, in peace; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples; a light for revelation of the gentiles and the glory of thy people Israel". The gentiles come first. It is remarkable that Simeon should say that, as if God had the gentiles in mind before the Jews. It is characteristic of Luke. It is a question of the throne of grace. It is a question of grace on the throne, and working out unlimitedly to the gentiles, so that Simeon says, "... a light for revelation of the gentiles". He is to bring the gentiles into evidence. The word 'revelation' means unveiling; to bring them out to be seen; to be revealed; no longer veiled, as the gentiles were. There was a veil over the gentiles, but now the light is to reveal the gentiles, to unveil them for blessing, and then the Jews come in after; as it adds, "... and the glory of thy people Israel".
D.P. Would this judicial teaching of which you have been speaking be seen in @Acts 13 when Elymas the magician is seeking to turn away Sergius Paulus from the faith? Paul said, "O full of all deceit and all craft: son of the devil, enemy of all righteousness ... thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season", verses 10, 11.
J.T. That would mean that the Jews would come in
{219}
for judicial blindness just as we have been saying, according to @Isaiah 6, but it was only for a season, not for ever; and so it is now. The Jews, we know, are coming in for blessing, but now they are in darkness.
J.T.Jr. It is remarkable how the blessing is extended to the Jews right to the end in the book of Acts. Paul graciously takes them into his lodging. Would that not indicate how gracious God is with certain elements today in order to reach them?
J.T. It would be like the father of the prodigal with the elder brother. He begged him to come in, he would do all morally possible for him, but he would not go in. That is the position of the Jew now, whereas the gentiles are coming in.
H.H. Simeon said, "This child is set for the fall and rising up of many in Israel".
W.C.R. It says in the last chapter of Acts, "... persuading them concerning Jesus, both from the law of Moses and the prophets, from early morning to evening", verse 23.
J.T. It is remarkable the time he spent on them. The Lord Jesus seemed to be in a hurry to get to heaven at the end of the gospel by Luke. There is no period of forty days referred to in that book. It would almost seem from the text as if the Lord went up to heaven the day He arose. It brings out how He had heaven in mind; not simply to be there, but to carry on administratively what was in the mind of God; because administration has a great place with God, to make things effective. And then He says to the apostles, "Do ye remain in the city", as if there were no other, "till ye be clothed with power from on high", @Luke 24:49. It would seem that what was in His heart was to administer to the Jews. He also said "that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations beginning at Jerusalem", verse 47. It would stress the idea of grace -- the wonderful grace of God that was coming in and
{220}
that it should get to the Jew first. That was the point, the Jew first and then the gentiles. So @Acts 28, which has been quoted, says that Paul laboured all day with them at Rome, but in vain. The salvation of God was sent to the nations and they will receive it.
C.H.H. @Psalm 81 is beautiful: "Oh that my people had hearkened unto me, that Israel had walked in my ways! I would soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries ... And he would have fed them with the finest of wheat; yea, with honey out of the rock would I have satisfied thee", verses 13 - 16. It is wonderfully tender language.
C.N. @Acts 13:46,47 says, "It was necessary that the word of God should be first spoken to you; but, since ye thrust it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, lo, we turn to the nations; for thus has the Lord enjoined us".
J.T. Yes. It looks as if God at the very outset brought circumstances about so as to enhance the idea of grace. It is the throne of grace; not the throne of mercy, but the throne of grace. God can move out freely into the conditions He has set up. He can labour freely according to what is in His own heart.
R.W.S. Has not the system of sin become very complex, especially ecclesiastically, and is that why we have these seven parables, so that an instructed believer can chart his way through the evil?
J.T. I think that is very good, because we have to chart our way through, as you say. These parables contemplate a mixed condition. The kingdom of God has taken the form of a mixed condition through man's mind being allowed in the teaching. The position is darkened and these parables are intended that we might make our way through. As discipled into the kingdom of the heavens, we can make our way through.
Perhaps we should proceed further in the chapter. Verse 24 reads, "Another parable set he before them,
{221}
saying, The kingdom of the heavens has become like a man sowing good seed in his field". That is the Lord. The seed is good, but then, "While men slept, his enemy came and sowed darnel amongst the wheat, and went away". That is the work of the Lord's enemy, which we know historically took place very early in the history of the assembly. The enemy began to sow something in the way of imitation. The darnel resembles wheat, and the devil chose to imitate in order to defeat the divine teaching.
H.H. The note says, 'A useless weed resembling wheat'.
J.T. It goes on to say that "his enemy came and sowed darnel amongst the wheat, and went away", meaning that the devil knew his work would be done as the evil was sown. It would work itself, and we know historically what has happened. Therefore it says, "But when the blade shot up and produced fruit, then appeared the darnel also". The devil knew that would happen. "And the bondmen of the householder came up and said to him. Sir, hast thou not sown good seed in thy field? whence then has it darnel? And he said to them, A man that is an enemy has done this". How the Lord felt that! The enemy got in on the principle of imitation. He had failed to get in by persecution, but imitation succeeded. "And the bondmen said to him. Wilt thou then that we should go and gather it up? But he said. No; lest in gathering the darnel ye should root up the wheat with it. Suffer both to grow together unto the harvest, and in time of the harvest I will say to the harvestmen, Gather first the darnel and bind it into bundles to burn it; but the wheat bring together into my granary", verses 28 - 30. Now some one might say from that parable, that the good and the bad must continue together, and we must mix with them, whereas there are other principles that deal with that; that is to say, 1 Corinthians deals with evil amongst the brethren --
{222}
put it away. "Remove the wicked person from amongst yourselves", (@1 Corinthians 5:13). So there is no tolerance of evil in the fellowship.
A.B.P. Does the apostle endeavour to deal with the tares of Judaism at Galatia, in order that the fruits of the Spirit might come to light?
J.T. Quite so; and so it is now that we have withdraw from iniquity. These are principles that enter into this, because we cannot make Scripture contradict itself, We must not assume that Christians can mingle with unconverted people and take the Lord's supper with unconverted people, because Scripture says the contrary. We are told that we must come out from among them, (@2 Corinthians 6:14 - 18). And, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity", (@2 Timothy 2:19). So that we do not have to walk with unconverted or ungodly people. We must withdraw from them.
A.B.P. Does the parable of the seine support that? "They gathered the good into vessels and cast the worthless out".
J.T. Just so; these parables are very complete because the truth is spread out in them. We can see the truth as to separation there so that we can understand.
This parable of the darnel runs on to the end of verse 30, and then it says, in verse 36, "His disciples came to him, saying. Expound to us the parable of the darnel of the field". And the Lord did expound it, as we have seen.
The next section is another parable: "Another parable set he before them, saying. The kingdom of the heavens sowed in his field; which is less indeed than all seeds, but when it is grown is greater than herbs, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of heaven come and roost in its branches", verses 31, 32. So that the evil that the devil sowed among the wheat is now showing itself as overshadowing everything. Mere profession is overshadowing the truth in real Christianity, and this parable deals
{223}
with that. It typifies inflatory conditions where God's people are darkened by wishing to be great and have a name in this world.
A.R. Would you call that Protestantism?
J.T. Well, it includes what Protestantism has become; it makes room for the birds of the heaven; that is, Christian Science and modernism and many other whereas, Catholicism *cages* the evil, but it is there in a worse form then even in Protestantism, and of course it has the greater pretention; it *claims* everything.
H.H. Does the word "Christendom" cover it?
J.T. Yes; as corrupt -- it covers the whole position. We have to differentiate between Protestantism and Catholicism, but from the point of view from which we are speaking Christendom is a huge growth overshadowing everything else of the kind.
D.P. A believer, in coming out of those systems of which you have been speaking, would be required to have a judgment according to the truth about them?
J.T. Quite so; even as regards Babylon. "Come out of her, my people, that ye have not fellowship in her sins", (@Revelation 18:4). God has His people there, like the wheat, of which we have been speaking. According to 2 Corinthians the word is, "Wherefore come out from the midst of them" (that is, certain specified persons who have adopted evil), "and be separated, saith the Lord, and touch not what is unclean, and *I* will receive you; and I will be to you for a Father, and ye shall be to me for sons and daughters", (@2 Corinthians 6:17,18).
A.B.P. In the first parable the birds of the air come and take away the seed that has been sown; but in this parable they have a roosting-place in the system.
J.T. Quite so; a roosting-place, whereas in @Revelation 18 you have the idea of a cage or hold of every unclean and hated bird. I believe that Roman Catholicism cages these wicked people so they cannot have liberty.
{224}
J.T.Jr. A tree is large enough for the birds to have freedom, and does the idea of liberty, too, come in; they can go to any tree?
J.T. They do what they like and go where they like; go from one church to another if they wish to; but not in Roman Catholicism, they are caged there.
W.C.R. Would so-called Open-Brethrenism be like the tree?
J.T. In measure; that is, there is a refusal to acknowledge the truth. The truth was presented but they refused to acknowledge it, and carried on in spite of the protest that was made and the truth that was presented to them. They are still carrying on. Of course, it is fair that we should differentiate and not put them on the same level as others of whom we are speaking, but still, it is a solemn thing that they have refused the truth of fellowship, and the truth of the assembly. There is not much to be said as regards Protestantism or Roman Catholicism, for they hardly touch that, but so-called Open-Brethrenism did touch it, and the question of fellowship was brought to their attention, and they refused it.
J.T.Jr. The importance of the wall in Nehemiah came in at that point. It was a question of the wall. They said, "Come, let us meet together in the villages in the plain of Ono" -- they would make it all one level.
J.T. But Nehemiah would not accept it.
A.R. They did not understand the truth of @1 Corinthians 10: "The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ?" verse 16.
J.T. Quite so.
H.H. One thing that might be said is that many persons connected with that system but not acquainted with the history of it, when they get light, leave it, thank God. Many of our brethren have come from them.
S.J.H. Does the lesson in the next parable refer to bad teaching?
{225}
J.T. "The kingdom of the heavens is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal until it had been all leavened", verse 33. This is a parable of the kingdom and has mystery attached to it, and the idea of leaven is that it corrupts the whole body.
J.S. Is this the enemy now working on the inside?
J.T. It is a woman, which would mean corruption.
S.J.H. It is connected with the food? The teaching that some companies put out has something in it that would innate those that partake of it.
J.T. Quite so. How very searching all that is! Then it is said, "All these things Jesus spoke to the crowds in parables, and without a parable he did not speak to them, so that that should be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things hidden from the world's foundation", verses 34, 35. This is another quotation. We noticed one earlier, from Isaiah. And then we have this important point as to the house in verse 36. The crowds are left outside; but the Lord goes into the house and His disciples come to Him. It is a question of who will go to Him in the house. The crowds are dismissed. That is a point in this gospel. They are not interested enough to follow, but the disciples are. When the Lord went up into the mountain in chapter 5 the disciples came to Him, showing the disciples are real and the Lord recognises that. He does not ask for them; they come to Him. We are left free in that sense so as to bring out what is in us. The work of God will lead in that direction. They want further light. "Expound to us the parable of the darnel of the field. But he answering said. He that sows the good seed is the Son of man". And so the Lord opens up what we have already touched on. Verse 44 says, "The kingdom of the heavens is like a treasure hid in the field, which a man having found has hid, and for the joy of it goes and sells all whatever he has, and buys that
{226}
field". There are two parables that are somewhat alike. The next reads, "Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a merchant seeking beautiful pearls; and having found one pearl of great value, he went and sold all whatever he had and bought it", verses 45, 46. These two really allude to the assembly, and, therefore, our hearts ought to burn within us as we touch them. They present the greatest thing, especially the second one; that is, what the Lord saw in the assembly. How we should cherish it! He was seeking beautiful pearls but *He found* one and He was detained by that. He is arrested by it, as it were; there is nothing like it. Although the Lord Jesus is in the highest heavens, to Him there is nothing like the assembly.
J.S. Is that why He presents Himself as Son of man in that connection? He sows as the Son of man.
J.T. The Son of man is a term leading outside of Judaism.
A.R. In connection with the pearl, it says that the merchant sells all whatever he *had*, and in connection with the treasure it is whatever he *has*. Does that suggest purpose?
J.T. The idea of all that he had is historical -- all that he *had*. All that he *has* is a present matter. We ought to go on that line. All that he has is what is going on; those that are likely to be subjects of the gospel: the treasure; it is indefinite. *He* knows its value, and He does not want others to know. He *hides* the treasure, and "for the joy of it", buys the field in which it is. "Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a merchant seeking beautiful pearls; and having found one pearl of great value, he went and sold all whatever he had and bought it". But whatever He *has* would be the present time; it occurs in verse 44. It is an immediate transaction.
H.H. That is an interesting thought -- connecting the treasure with the gospel.
{227}
J.T. It contemplates the gospel; what accrues from it. Paul and Barnabas would be governed by this. Hence the *teaching* in the assembly for a whole year, (@Acts 11:26).
J.A.P. Is this the same as Paul referred to in Colossians? He says, "*I* became minister, according to the dispensation of God which is given me towards you to complete the word of God, the mystery which has been hidden from ages and from generations, but has now been made manifest to his saints, to whom God would make known what are the riches of the glory of this mystery among the nations, which is Christ in you the hope of glory". (@Colossians 1:25 - 27). Is that what he refers to here; what has been hidden all down the ages?
J.T. I suppose the idea would be there, but the application of it in a practical or concrete way would be, "Your life is hid with the Christ in God", chapter 3: 3. The Colossians had to learn that because they were in danger of making a show of what they had received. They would mingle with the philosophers as Christians often do and make a show of the ministry and the like. So he says, "Your life is hid"; yourselves, in effect, but your life. The real life of Christians is hidden. It is not to be made a show of in this sense at all, although it ought to be a testimony, of course; but it is not to be displayed as a mere toy or adornment. It is for God and for Christ. It is a hidden matter.
J.T.Jr. We have to keep out of public sight as much as possible.
J.T. It is not building a cathedral -- you may build a "room" but it is only to accommodate the brethren.
A.B.P. Does the word "as unknown, and well known" cover it?
J.T. Yes; and the upper room at Jerusalem would mean that. They were well-known, but when they came from the mount of Olives, after the Lord Jesus went up to heaven, they went to the upper room in Jerusalem;
{228}
they did not build anything like what is called a church. They just contented themselves with an upper room, and evidently it was in a house.
A.P.T. Is there a delightful significance in the fact that the Lord, speaking in verse 44, brings the *thing* into view first: "The kingdom ... is like a *treasure* hid in the field", but in verse 45, a *person* comes into view first: "... like a *merchant*"
J.T. Yes; it is a person, but a *merchant*, that is, one with skill, able to discern and value what he was looking for. He was looking for beautiful pearls. "And having found one pearl of great value, he went and sold all whatever he had and bought it". The pearl, therefore, as was remarked, refers to purpose. It is a deliberate matter. The assembly was in the Lord's mind in becoming man. It antecedes Israel. Someone once said to F.E.R., 'Why do you make so much of the assembly? and he answered. What is there to make anything of except the assembly?' And that is the truth here.
H.H. It is worth as much now as when He bought it. It raises the question as to what we are doing in relation to the assembly.
A.B.P. At the treasury the Lord saw the rich casting in their gifts and He saw also the widow. Does that enter into this?
J.T. No doubt it is suggestive of what the assembly is. I mean to say, her soul was taken up with what is of God. It was the treasury of God -- not simply the money, but the treasury of God, which now would be the assembly.
Question Would you say the true preacher today is digging up this treasure which is hid in the field?
J.T. Quite so, not making a show of it or of what he is doing but serving in a lowly way -- "your life is hid" -- and gathering the converts up when the time comes so that they should be in fellowship, and as in fellowship, under reproach.
{229}
A.R. Do you think these parables suggest our day? Was the Lord looking forward to our day?
J.T. The Lord undoubtedly looked down the line, and I am sure He is especially interested in our day, not to think of ourselves, but of Philadelphia's day. That is the day. We read in @Numbers 7 that each prince had his day. There were twelve days and each man had a day to present his offering, and that was to express his love for God and for Christ. But these parables cover the whole dispensation.
H.H. Philadelphia would be the pearl?
J.T. It would, in character. It is characterised by keeping Christ's word and not denying His name: "Thou ... hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name", and so on. It is loyal to Christ and loved by Him. But the one pearl represents the whole assembly.
C.A.M. I wondered, in that connection, would it be right to connect the completion of the age in any sense with the finishing days of the assembly on earth?
J.T. I would think so; not in the character of the remnant but in what is in character as the whole assembly, the Lord clothing it with that thought. And so, "I also will keep *thee*" is the *assembly*.
He says to Philadelphia, "I will cause that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet". (@Revelation 3:9). The "thy" is the assembly. The Lord has nothing less than that in mind. "They ... shall know that *I* have loved thee". That is the assembly.
A.I. Why do you think the thought of joy comes into verse 44? It says, "... for the joy of it goes and sells all whatever he has".
J.T. I think it is what He has, in the gospel and the fruits of the gospel, what the treasure affords in the working out of it; and then verse 45 is the thing viewed as the assembly according to plan or purpose -- "one pearl of great value". The language referring to the treasure
{230}
is not so definite and direct the field is immediately before the man's mind.
C.H.H. What is the distinction between the field in verse 38, where it says, "The field is the world", and the field in verse 44?
J.T. I was thinking that the field of verse 44 is some specific field, meaning that it is the field out of which the Lord would obtain the treasure, as the western world, for instance; Japheth's world -- "that field". Perhaps it is more limited in size than the other, but it is that particular field. The treasure that the Lord has in mind in the gospel was found in the western world.
S.J.H. Would that correspond with the land of Havilah of @Genesis 2? "The gold of that land is good".
J.T. There is what corresponds in that, but, of course, we do not get the nations there. I think "that field" would allude to the division of the earth after Noah. It is a question of the division of the earth, I think. The field in verse 38 is the world. It is the whole idea without specifying any part of it, but "that field" would be more particularly some part of it which afforded material for the assembly through the gospel. I think it is Japheth's part of the world. There is the suggestion of the Lord's discrimination in the gospel field, that He differentiates certain territory. When Paul would go into Asia the Spirit would not suffer him, meaning there was somewhere else He wished him to go to, and the man of Macedonia clearly points to the West: "Pass over into Macedonia and help us". That is where the assembly came from, although at the beginning western Asia yielded much.
H.H. Not the heathen world -- the far East -- but where the Spirit has wrought.
J.T. Yes. In heathen Asia polygamy is a disgrace to humanity and detrimental to the gospel and especially the assembly. Of course, we cannot say much as to the western world now, but still the idea of one man and one
{231}
woman linked in marriage is professedly maintained there, and that is not for nothing.
A.B.P. Did Naomi have the idea when she instructed Ruth not to be found in any other than the field of Boaz?
J.T. That is a scripture bearing instructively on what is before us.
Question The Lord said to the disciples, "Lift up your eyes and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest", (@John 4:35). Would that be the field in which the treasure was hid?
J.T. It is "fields" there; general. But the idea of the field is limited except it is specified as in verse 38. But the field of verse 44 is contrasted to a city or town and is more limited (see note), therefore we have in the Proverbs, "Prepare thy work without, and put thy field in order, and afterwards build thy house", (@Proverbs 24:27).
What is said about verses 51 and 52 ought to be carried away with us. "Have ye understood all these things?" One wonders sometimes as to what we carry away. "They say to him. Yea, Lord. And he said to them, For this reason every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old". That is what he has; not in his bookcase, but in his treasure.
W.F.K. What form would this discipline take?
J.T. Well, the discipline of school education. Enoch would be the model. The name Enoch means disciplined. I believe it would be the idea from the very start of the human race, that man is to learn.
W.F.K. Every scribe is discipled.
J.T. The word 'scribe', as we have already noted, means a man who writes. David's cabinet included such an officer. We have our Bibles, and of course the thought is not that we open them and leave them in the meeting room, but carry them home and read them and there speak about the things that are read.
{232}
H.H. It says, "things new and old"; not old and new. We are tested by *present ministry*.
W.F.K. Why is it a householder?
J.T. It is a good word. It is important to the assembly that every elder brother should have that character. He has a care for things -- something he is responsible for -- and he comes to the meeting in order to fulfil that responsibility.
C.H.H. This would imply the previous instruction in Matthew? Is it like a culmination of the idea of the house?
J.T. Yes. One has often noticed how prominent the idea of the house is in Matthew, and it seems nowhere more so than in this chapter.
{233}
"LET NOT THE ASSEMBLY BE CHARGED"
@1 Timothy 5:1 - 16
H.C.MacG. It was inquired of you last week if you could help us in regard to administration in the matter of gifts distributed in the assembly, especially that the assembly should not be unduly charged. The matter was brought up in ministering to cases of need, that we should have the facts before we bring up any cases to be ministered to. You stressed in the care meeting the *importance* of the assembly, and that its dignity should be maintained.
J.T. It is to be understood, therefore, that we are not now taking up the subject of the assembly as a whole, but in relation to the administration of certain funds that are available from the contributions of the saints, so that we might see how the assembly functions in distribution. The closing verse of the passage we read was particularly in mind in the remarks that were made at our last care meeting. It is said, "Let not the assembly be charged". That is, some specific thing is in mind that is not to be a charge on the assembly. "If any believing man or woman have widows, let them impart relief to them, and let not the assembly be charged, that it may impart relief to those that are widows indeed". In view of the subject before us it may be remarked that the assembly is viewed in Scripture as functioning in several important respects. It functions above all in the service of God. The Lord Jesus Himself said that He would sing praises to God in the assembly, showing that it is a vessel capable of such service. The praises of God are sung there; the Lord Himself sings them. Then it is also said that the all-various wisdom of God is to be learned in the assembly by the angels, which is a very important matter too. It is said also that there is to be glory to God "in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages", (@Ephesians 3:21), that is, in the great service
{234}
of the assembly. Then we are told that the assembly prays, and several other features are attributed to it. For instance, the assembly is said to have 'ears', meaning that it hears what is said as to the things of God and takes up what is heard and uses it, it may be, for administration or other things, it is on the alert for all that relates to God. These are in mind, not to be treated of, but to indicate how wide the subject is. The feature now before us is the matter of distribution, or administration, of the gifts of the saints to the Levites that maintain the service of God, and to meet the need of the poor.
A.R. You have suggested the *high level* of the assembly.
J.T. That was in mind; the high level in which she is set and in which she is to be set eternally; for it is said that she comes down from God out of heaven having the glory of God, and her shining like a most precious stone; evidently to function in the millennium, and to function eternally: "unto all generations of the age of ages". Hence, it has been thought that certain impressions have obtained that the assembly may be used to meet the idea of giving to persons, who, while in fellowship and while worthy, are *not in need*. Therefore, they do not come within the range of the assembly's service in this sense. This verse that we have quoted says, covering these cases, "Let not the assembly be charged". That is, a particular charge, although admissible otherwise, is not to be made on the assembly. It is to be met otherwise.
J.A.P. Are all the brethren Levites?
J.T. Well, that is somewhat a big question, because if we go back to the types, the sons of Levi were taken account of from one month old and upward. They were *held* for service from a month old, but entered on it only at a mature age. In Numbers the total number of about twenty-three thousand was reduced in view of the service imposed upon them, to about eight thousand. (See @Numbers 3 and 4). They were to serve beginning at the
{235}
age of thirty, and they were offered as a wave-offering before Jehovah. They were divided into three kinds of service: that of Kohath, of Merari and of Gershon. They had no territory assigned to them in the land. The tithes of Israel, offered to Jehovah, were to be their portion, and they had in addition to that forty-eight cities in which to dwell. That is in Joshua, chapter 21, but the service properly is to be seen in Numbers. The question has just been asked whether we are all Levites, and what has been remarked is to show what has to be borne in mind, that those in active service were to be particularly looked after; always a charge on Israel, @Deuteronomy 14:27 - 29; therefore, they come within the range of our subject. The Levites come first in the order for consideration, and then the stranger, and then the fatherless and the widow; so that the poor, in that sense, come last.
A.Pf. Would not verse 17 of our chapter bear on what you say? "Let the elders who take the lead among the saints well be esteemed worthy of double honour, specially those labouring in word and teaching".
J.T. Quite so. Eldership came in especially through Paul. They are included in levitical work.
W.W.M. You referred to the Levites who are in active service. Would they be primarily in the minds of the saints in a care meeting in view of their current service more so than those who may have served in that capacity but are more or less inactive now?
J.T. I think the idea is those who are active, although in general they all are a charge. The whole house of Levi was a charge on the nation, because they had no land given them. They had cities but no land, so that they were to be a charge on the tithes of the whole house of Israel, and today, of course, on the assembly.
T.E.H. When a Levite became fifty years of age he was not to serve any longer, but minister in the tent with his brethren. Would that involve anything in the way of activity?
{236}
J.T. It would be whatever he was capable of. There was an earlier age too, a sort of novitiate beginning at twenty-five, showing that above and below the regular age persons may be employed according to what they have ability for. In the time of David the age was reduced to twenty, the period of service being from twenty to fifty.
T.N.W. Would you say what services are included in levitical work today?
J.T. Elders and deacons would be included, only their work is not so distinct as it was at the beginning, and thus they are not much in the minds of brethren now. There are two words used for eldership: one is the idea of bishop, which means overseer, and the other is the idea of an old person, an experienced man. Their services are usually local and hence do not involve travelling. I think the idea generally in levitical service is that persons devote themselves to the ministry, such as the gospel and the ministry of the word of God. These require gift. Levitical service took the form of *carrying* things while the children of Israel were moving in the wilderness. Each of those mentioned had to carry certain things. Now that would mean carrying things that relate to the assembly or the service of God generally, things, not in a physical sense now, but spiritual or moral things.
A.N.W. "Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that is treading out corn", (@1 Corinthians 9:9); and, "The workman is worthy of his hire", @Luke 10:7. Is this confined to monetary remunerations?
J.T. @1 Corinthians 9 enlarges on this. Paul speaks of surrendering, or not asserting, his rights in certain things which involved monetary considerations. For instance, he says that the preacher of the gospel should live of it, which would refer to monetary support. And he also says he took hire from certain churches for the sake of the Corinthians; that is, he received money from
{237}
them which the Corinthians should have provided (see @2 Corinthians 11:8).
A.P.T. The Lord used that word 'hire' Himself. About a son of peace He said, "And in the same house abide, eating and drinking such things as they have; for the workman is worthy of his hire", (@Luke 10:7). Paul also uses the word as you said.
R.W.S. Is there a certain local responsibility in regard to the Levites, or are they universal?
J.T. I would say they are universal. In the types they are attached to the tabernacle, which implies what is universal. The Levite's work is universal. They are gifted men. In the encampments in the wilderness the levites were round about the tabernacle; nearer to it than the people generally.
R.W.S. That involves the assembly herself being active in regard to those whom God is using in the service.
Question Could one be a Levite and not have a gift?
J.T. I think what we have been saying is that gift is implied. I should not like to say that a man working as an elder and caring for the brethren should not be supported. The Lord tells Peter, who was an apostle, to be a shepherd, which corresponds with eldership; Peter says he was an elder, @1 Peter 5:1. Therefore, I have no hesitation in saying that a man working in that way ought to be regarded as a Levite.
R.T.M. Would it need spiritual discernment to differentiate between what obtained forty or fifty years ago, when many were out wholly in the Lord's work, and what is current now? There are many gifted amongst us who have means and are not in the same way dependent upon the saints for monetary support.
J.T. I am sure that is true. I quite remember what you say. There were a great many who were said to be wholly in the Lord's work. I should not like to lose sight of that.
{238}
R.T.M. I should like to get a little help on how we should regard the matter at the present time when that is not so prevalent amongst us.
J.T. If it is not prevalent it may be that the saints have not provided what the Levites need. They are being provided for better now then they used to be; the question therefore arises -- if a brother has a gift and he is working with his hands, is it because he feels he is too young to take up the attitude of a general labourer depending on the saints, or is it that the saints have not been helping him? Both of these things may be true. I think that more recently the labourers have been better cared for than they used to be, but not so well as they were fifty or sixty years ago. Funds that were contributed in those days were considerable and usually devoted to men wholly given up to the work.
W.F.K. Should a Levite who has means to support himself be helped?
J.T. The obligation of the brethren is there whether he has means or not. "Let him that is taught in the word communicate to him that teaches in all good things", (@Galatians 6:6). That is, the saints are taught in the word and it is their obligation to minister to those who teach in "all good things".
V.C.L. Then you would be guided more by the measure of gift than by the employment?
J.T. I would; and if he is himself liberal and worthy he would like to distribute what comes to him; that is to say, from the point *of circulation* which is an important thing, for circulatory thoughts should characterise the Levites.
G.B.L. On what ground does a Levite refuse ministrations?
J.T. Do you mean there are those who do not accept gifts? I do not know of any. I believe in putting the thing into circulation. Circulation is a great matter with God. That is, if you get anything, put it into circulation and it enriches all who share in it. That is
{239}
the principle, I believe. Divine circulation is there and the more that is put into it the better; so that the brethren are freer and the special meetings are supported in that way, and maybe brethren are helped to get to them. All that is what I would call circulatory ministry, greatly enriching the whole community of saints.
W.W.M. The verse we read then, "Let not the assembly be charged", would mean that we would not run the overhead up in one department so that it would hinder the other departments, so to speak.
J.T. Yes. It is perhaps more difficult to understand this verse if the brethren are in affluence; but when it was written undoubtedly the brethren were not in that position, because Peter, James and John enjoined on Paul that he should remember the poor; and he said he was always forward to do it. So that, in the second letter to the Corinthians, he enlarges on the idea of giving to the poor. But as regards the Levites, he cites himself as to how he was cared for, and he says that he was short at times and that was intended to bear on all the brethren so that the Levites should not be short; that they should be supported.
A.Pf. At the beginning the administration was in the hands of the apostles. At a care meeting there are suggestions as to this one and that one being a Levite. We sometimes spend an hour or more deciding to whom we should give the money.
J.T. I would suggest that that should come in a little later in our considerations, because we have weightier matters to get to. But I am sure what you say calls out the sympathy of many of us, that we should not spend so much time on this matter; but yet time is needed. You raise the question as to the absence of care meetings in the early days; the care of contributions fell into the hands of the apostles. The money was laid at their feet, we are told. But at the same time, the second of Acts tells us, none regarded what he had as his own. It seems as if
{240}
God was giving the saints a sense of liberality at the beginning of Christianity. Paul brought in fresh thoughts as to it; so that the collection for the saints, which is enlarged upon in the second letter to Corinth, is a matter of great importance. It has come up lately, and I am sure many have received help through it; but the position at the beginning was a matter of the administration of the twelve. The apostles decided that it was not right that they should leave the word of God, which is the proper service of the Levites, and serve tables. Attending to tables meant serving physical food for the need of the saints. Hence, they directed that seven men should be chosen from among them, showing how the mutual side was stressed, that the brethren should choose them, but they were to be men full of the Holy Spirit. The apostles prayed and laid their hands upon them. It is a very important matter to keep in our minds in all these things, that the Holy Spirit has a great deal to do with deaconship.
R.W.S. The word 'charged' is also translated elsewhere 'burdened'. I suppose the assembly would be less burdened if it allowed for the natural relatives to help the needy, where there are ample means.
J.T. It would release certain monies that might otherwise be given to widows if their natural relatives attended to them. "If any believing man or woman have widows, let them impart relief to them, and let not the assembly be charged". That is to say, if there is a believing man or woman and his mother or aunt is a widow without means, well, it is his responsibility to look after her, so as to release for levitical purposes, or the poor, any monies that might otherwise go to her. "Those that are widows indeed" would have no support at all.
A.R. What about those put on the list?
J.T. That is another matter we should consider also. We ought to bear in mind what particularly led to this meeting, and that is persons proposed for monetary
{241}
ministration who are not really in need, but are recommended because they are good brothers and sisters, and the like, and that it would be nice to give them something. That is what it was thought should be corrected, and understood as needing correction by the brethren.
Rem. We have been using the *word fellowship* quite a bit in ministering.
J.T. I think this chapter helps us as to the words we should use. Here it is to "impart relief".
G.B.L. Before we leave the Levites, will you kindly say one thing about Levites who are not active? Should they be ministered to as a charge continuously?
J.T. That would be a matter of consideration by the brethren. Why is he not active? He may be over fifty, but literally that would not mean that a brother should be inactive because he is fifty years of age. It is a question of whether he is able to do anything, and if he is not doing it and he is able to do it, then I do not think he should be ministered to as a Levite.
G.B.L. If he is not able to do it for the time being should he be ministered to?
J.T. If he is incapacitated by sickness he ought to be. He is hindered, not because of his own fault, but because of physical disability.
K.W.R. Do we not all have levitical features if we are in fellowship?
J.T. We are talking about men who are workers. The Levites numbered about twenty-three thousand and the workers were only about eight thousand. These are the ones to be supported; I refer just now to our dispensation.
A.M. Would @Numbers 7 help? It says Moses was to give to the Levites according to their service.
J.T. That would help. It is a question of facts. He differentiated between the Kohathites and the other Levites. The Kohathites did not need any wagons, because they bore what they carried on their shoulders,
{242}
whereas the others needed wagons because of the weight of the things they had to carry. We have to translate into New Testament language what such weights as the curtains would be, as compared with the ark and other things that were not so heavy.
V.C.L. Would a young man who is happy with the saints locally, and who from time to time serves when asked, be one of these workers of whom you speak?
J.T. Do you mean a preacher?
V.C.L. Yes. I am thinking of a younger brother who is not given over to the service but who may serve the saints occasionally in the gospel. You would hardly think of such a one as one of these specific workers.
J.T. That is just a point for us to understand -- whether he is a gifted man. That is to say, if he works at it; not simply if he is able to do a little work, his gift not being yet established. I would think the spiritual meaning of a levitical worker is a man who has gift. God has set certain in the assembly and their classifications are given; the classes are given and they are all gifted men, @1 Corinthians 12:28 - 30.
A.R. Preaching that Jesus is the Son of God would be by a gifted man.
J.T. You allude to Paul, of course. If the Spirit of God calls him a preacher, he would be a gifted man.
J.T.Jr. We have the principle set out in Paul because he alludes to the assembly giving to him.
J.T. That is what I thought. Paul had in mind to illustrate this matter for other labourers as well as himself, and so he speaks at length about it in @1 Corinthians 9; but in Philippians he speaks touchingly about them sending once or twice. Evidently this was within a month (compare @Philippians 4 and @Acts 17). Well, he would surely mean that the brethren ought to think of all the labourers in that way, that they should be provided for, for really at times Paul did not have enough. He had to go hungry.
{243}
J.S. Would he illustrate both giving and receiving?
J.T. "In the way of giving and receiving", he says (@Philippians 4:15): this is a very nice and suggestive phrase.
R.T.M. Fellowship would come in in connection with a Levite in that the assembly provides funds for the Levite to move in service. It is a question of how far we can further a Levite in his work. That would bring in the thought of ability, as you suggest, but I was wondering whether the thought of fellowship would come in in that way in connection with our giving, enabling the servants to *continue* their work.
J.T. We were eliminating that word as used merely to express fellowship to a brother or a sister who is *not* in need, but it certainly applies to a brother in active service.
R.T.M. That is what I was trying to get clear in my own mind: if we could not use the word *fellowship* in giving to a Levite so that he might continue or even enlarge his work.
J.T. The word would be all right even in regard to a poor brother who has no gift, but not if he is not poor and that the saints just want to have fellowship with him.
T.N.W. How low would a brother be in resources before you consider him in need?
J.T. *In need* means he is destitute of needed things, (@James 2:15). "But whoso may have the world's substance, and see his brother having need, and shut up his bowels from him, how abides the love of God in him?" (@1 John 3:17). If a man has a bank account he is not in need.
T.N.W. Or a car? Something that is easily saleable?
J.T. Quite so.
E.E.H. Paul does not seem to have had a regular income. The scriptures referred to in Philippians speak of need; they ministered twice to his need.
G.B.L. How does that fit in with the scripture that
{244}
says he worked with his own hands for himself and others?
J.T. He worked with his own hands. He went beyond what a Levite needed to do. He said he had a right to eat and drink; a minister of the gospel should live of it, so that if a brother works with his own hands that does not relieve the brethren of the obligation to look after him.
C.N. It was more or less the spirit of the Corinthians that caused him to speak that way.
J.T. It was.
A.R. Paul says to the Philippians, "Not that I seek gift, but I seek fruit abounding to your account", @Philippians 4:17. He refers to assembly giving.
J.T. Then there is giving to anyone that might be in need by persons who are 'well off'. The Spirit of God says that at Antioch there were those who each gave according as any one was well off. Of course, that kind of giving is open too. Any brother can give to another as he is exercised about him as needing something that he ought to have and has not. Any brother who is well off can do that, but the assembly is not to do it.
A.N.W. They sent it by the hand of Barnabas and Saul, @Acts 11:30.
J.A.P. Should sisters that take the notes be before us in the administration of funds?
J.T. Yes; they are serving the saints.
V.C.L. On a levitical basis?
J.T. They are doing spiritual work. It is of spiritual importance, because they are themselves understanding what they are writing about, to convey it, to the brethren.
E.S. Did you once say that Mr. Darby in translating the Bible did levitical work? *He* did not say it was levitical work.
J.T. He said it was hewing wood and drawing water for the congregation. You can understand how *he* would say that. Very few can take such humble ground
{245}
in appraising their work. The translation of the Bible by him was more than hewing wood and drawing water. It was a spiritual work of immense value to the assembly.
R.D.G. Would you take it that some were abusing the liberality of the assembly and hence the apostle wrote as he did in @2 Thessalonians 3? He had a right but did not exercise it.
J.T. Very likely. We know he did take money as others.
R.D.G. There are several interesting verses that bear on it. One of them, @2 Thessalonians 3:7, says, "For ye know yourselves how ye ought to imitate us, because we have not walked disorderly among you; nor have we eaten bread from any one without cost; but in toil and hardship working night and day not to be chargeable to any one of you: not that we have not the right, but that we might give ourselves as an example to you, in order to your imitating us. For also when we were with you we enjoined you this, that if any man does not like to work, neither let him eat. For we hear that there are some walking among you disorderly, not working at all, but busybodies".
A.B.P. Does the passage we read in 1 Timothy have in mind ministering to meet need mostly?
J.T. I think so. That is why it was thought to be apropos of this meeting. Our question was one of persons who were not shown to be needy, and therefore were not subjects for assembly ministrations.
A.B.P. Does this chapter have in mind continuous need?
J.T. I think it would; persons put on the list, for instance. But at the same time a person might be in need this week and might not be next week. Something might happen to meet the need. But it would look as if the need was dealt with very systematically, according to verse 9, which refers to a widow being put on the 'list'. It would seem as if they were dealt with systematically.
{246}
The list would surely mean that certain ones were deserving of being cared for by the assembly and that they were honourably regarded; not simply in need, but their qualifications as honourable are given. So that the idea we are now on is important as keeping the assembly on its own dignity, regarding its distinction in the economy of God, that it is not a benefit society. It has a great distinction in the economy of God, and that distinction should not be weakened or obliterated by our use of it.
J. S. Being the assembly of the living God it is indeed a great vessel.
A.R. Persons on the list are brought up to the same level; they are elevated.
J.T. Quite so. The Spirit of God is really set, particularly at the moment, to bring the brethren into the idea of the dignity of the assembly. It is not to be brought down to the level of ordinary matters. @2 Corinthians 8 and 9 enlarge on its administrative glory.
G.B.L. Is it as obligatory for us to minister to "widows indeed" as ministering to the Levites? "That it may impart relief to those that are widows indeed". If we have those amongst us who have all those qualifications, is it obligatory?
J.T. It is unless they have relatives. If their relatives meet that need it does not discredit them in any way. They are still on the same honourable level.
J.A.S. If a widow has relatives not in fellowship, should she accept from them?
J.T. I do not think the brethren should think of that. It is a question of the relatives being in the assembly. If a relative voluntarily meets her need she is not dependent on the assembly, but it does not reduce her status as of the assembly or even as a subject of the care of the assembly, because an assembly widow is a woman known in heaven. She is not simply a needy person; she is a woman qualified in heaven for that distinction. That is what the Spirit of God is seeking to bring before us, that
{247}
the assembly has great distinction; not only now, in the sphere of time, but eternally. God would have us to know that and be governed by it.
Question Should we understand that the assembly is charged with ministering to the Levites and to cases of need only?
J.T. It would seem so. Do you know of anything else?
Rem. I am trying to get help?
J.T. I do not think there are any other things we should bring forward.
H.C.MacG. Is it quite in order to accept aid given by federal, state and municipal governments for need occasioned by old age and other causes?
J.T. That all comes under the provisional government of God. Even the roads on which we travel are available to us on that basis.
A.R. Persons put on the list should be thoroughly investigated.
J.T. The matter of investigation would be clearly implied in this particular chapter. If a woman is to be put on the list, how are the brethren to know if she is in need? She would tell them, no doubt, but I think there ought to be more than that. "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every matter be established", (@2 Corinthians 13:1). Things that are current in the assembly ought to be put on the principle of testimony.
V.C.L. As to the qualifications of the widow here, I was thinking of some who have had good positions and have been taken out of them by the government and might need help. They would not meet these qualifications and yet the assembly would be interested in them, would it not?
J.T. It would be hard to find one taken out of his own work and put into the service of the government, who is in need. It would be hard to prove that they are in need and that they should be a burden on the assembly.
{248}
A.R. We have some cases on the list that come up almost every month. Should they be investigated every month?
J.T. I am sure they should be investigated, because almost every day brings a change in most of our circumstances, and to make each case permanent is very difficult. I think the principle that has come into our meeting in this city, of investigating every month in view of the special collection, is right. There should be an investigation as to every person to whom we minister.
E. S. It says the widow, put on the list, must be sixty years old.
J.T. This is very special. I think the apostle is dealing with special cases here. Take Anna: although not mentioned in this connection, her history corresponds. It is a rare case.
E.S. She was very much over sixty.
J.T. The widow contemplated in our chapter was not to be less than sixty.
R.W.S. Would you enlarge on the military matter.
J.T. I think that is a subject we should not overlook -- whether we can speak much of our brethren who are in the military service as being in need. I have not found much of that at all.
V.C.L. How do you regard the Canadian fund?
J.T. As a matter of fact, it is in another country and we are dependent on our brethren there to tell us about any need. The assembly should not be charged with that fund.
C.A.M. That brings up a very interesting thing about funds. The idea seems to be divorced from the assembly as such. Two brothers usually look after them. I have often wondered about that with regard to assembly giving.
J.T. As far as I can see there is no such thought as a literal treasury connected with the *assembly*. The idea of a treasury in the assembly is spiritual, whereas in the old
{249}
economy there was a treasury in the temple where money was cast in; but it seems now you pay as you go, so to speak. It is a very simple idea of settling accounts. The special collection is nothing more than stimulating. It is one of the collections having the character of stimulation. That is what Paul means, I am certain, in this matter of the collection in chapters 8 and 9 of 2 Corinthians. In ordinary practice all is settled on every occasion. When the money is given in, it is known what is to be done with it; so that the thing is settled and we have another month to go on to.
C.A.M. That is circulation.
J.T. The Lord said. Shew me a penny, implying that He did not have one. That enters into our position. We are light travellers. One may say to me, 'It does not apply to you'; but it really does. It is a question of the state of one's mind. "Blessed are the poor" refers really to the state of persons¬ minds, not simply that they are poor monetarily, but they are poor in the sense in which the Lord was poor. "Blessed are the poor in spirit". (@Matthew 5:3). He referred to Himself or those like Him in the sense mentioned, see @Psalm 41:1.
C.A.M. That is a very valuable suggestion. If it was Monday night that Peter and John went up to the temple to pray, Peter must have given everything the day before. He says, "Silver and gold I have not".
J.T. The Lord says. Shew me a penny. He did not have money on His person, as we have noted. He says to Peter, "Go to the sea and cast a hook, and take the first fish that comes up ... and ... thou wilt find a stater; take that and give it to them for me and thee". It was just what was needed for the tax. It is a short account; we are travelling lightly; we belong to heaven.
J.A.P. I can see the assembly has no treasury, but can the brothers not take up matters if they have an exercise such as the fund in England for the special need occasioned by the war?
{250}
J.T. That is just an emergency fund. That is not ordinary.
V.C.L. Would you say that if a matter had been investigated carefully and found to be worthy and met certain spiritual qualifications, you would meet the case as it stood regardless of whether these qualifications were literally met? I am thinking of the military question and families left at home.
J.T. Give an illustration of what would be chargeable.
V.C.L. I am thinking of the insufficiency of the government allotment to provide for the requirements of a family left behind by a brother called into service. I am not thinking of any specific case except that I know there has been a great sense of difficulty encountered by such, and while there has been much private giving, can it be made chargeable to the assembly?
J.T. It is very happy if it can be met privately. Perhaps it should continue so. If the brethren who have any means at all begin to give severally, good and well, but do not freight the assembly. That is the point. "Let not the assembly be charged". It is a light traveller, as remarked. Peter says, "Silver and gold I have not". You may say. You cannot say that. Of course I cannot, but all that I have is in relation to the government of God. It is a question of holding it that way, not holding it as being rich. If God has put something in your hands in His government, it is your responsibility to use it. At Pentecost the saints had all things common, but Paul's ministry contemplates what we are saying.
R.T.M. Would stewardship enter into this matter?
J.T. It would; "... as good stewards of the various grace of God", (@1 Peter 4:10).
C.A.M. It is not a question of whether the brother has a deposit in the bank. It is a question of the spirit of the man.
J.T. He is a light traveller, so to speak, as Paul say
{251}
"... as having nothing", (@2 Corinthians 6:10). That is to say, your attitude is that you are not encumbered by this world's goods. Let those "who have wives, be as not having any". People would quarrel with that scripture, but it cannot be broken. Let us learn that.
C.N. "The time is straitened", (@1 Corinthians 7:29).
J.T. Scripture is full of these things; that we are not to be burdened; and we are not seeking to show ourselves persons of importance because of what we have.
G.B.L. Did not John the baptist say to the soldiers to be satisfied with their pay? Maybe, in God's ordering, they have to learn, as Paul says he had learned, in all things to suffer and be in want as well as to abound.
J.T. Yes.
G.B.L. That may be a soldier's lesson in God's hands, to learn to be in want.
D.P. If a brother has visible property and he is still in need, how would you meet that?
J.T. How is he in need if he has means?
D.P. A brother might have a house with a heavy mortgage.
J.T. He might be house-poor you mean?
W.W.M. It says of Barnabas he had land, but he put it into liquid assets.
J.T. Quite so. He put the money down at the apostles¬ feet.
E.S. It went into circulation.
J.T. Exactly. The apostles were representative of the Lord and the Lord had confidence in them and the brethren knew that. The converts from Peter's preaching said to Peter and the rest: "What shall we do, brethren?" (@Acts 2:37). That is important. They were persons that were reliable. And therefore the money was put down at their feet. But we do not do that now. We have no apostles; besides, Paul's teaching contemplates believers having means, although they were not to trust in them; they were to give.
{252}
E.W.S. Referring to military matters again, certain persons are a long way from the meeting and have considerable transportation expenses. Would that be better contributed to individually?
J.T. I think the more we get along on that basis the better. Let the assembly stand on its own dignity.
R.W.S. If a brother is in service with a large family at home, is that better met individually?
J.T. The more I think of it, the more I see that it is right. Let brethren learn to give individually.
A.B.P. In regard to the specifications in the chapter, do they not seem to relate specifically to those put on the list for constant care? But if need comes to the knowledge of the saints, and it is real need, the assembly should meet it, should it not?
J.T. I do not know that there is such a thing as a constant need. Suppose you would single out this person put on the list at the age of sixty. That wording does not mean that the brethren *must* put her on the list. She is not to be except at the age of sixty, but then there may be other considerations and these have to be thought of; so that she might not be in need next week although she was this week.
A.B.P. Does the chapter contemplate the kind of person that is considered as eligible for care if care is needed?
J.T. Yes, but there is more than that. The Spirit of God means something in these distinctive persons being brought forward, like Lydia and Phoebe and Anna and this person suggested here. The Lord is talking to us about important personages morally; as they are known in heaven; and the more we think of them the more we will see there is more than simply that they might have need.
Rem. The apostle says that giving and receiving yields thanksgiving to God (@2 Corinthians 9:12).
J.T. Yes. "Enriched in every way unto all free
{253}
hearted liberality, which works through us thanksgiving to God. Because the ministration of this service is not only filling up the measure of what is lacking to the saints, but also abounding by many thanksgivings to God", (@2 Corinthians 9:11,12). Then it runs on to, "Thanks be to God for his unspeakable free gift". All these things we are speaking of now revert back to God; as they are carried out God is honoured.
A.R. The idea of circulation is that the impulse goes round and round.
A.N.W. A brother who is in the army might come into view in connection with levitical service. He is not deleted because he is a soldier.
R.W. S. If this assembly dignity is held, would it not enrich the assembly and enrich the service of God?
J.T. It would; lifted up to the idea of not only giving things but receiving; "giving and receiving". Let us all learn to give. God's thought is to lift us up to the level of heaven. We will only be here a little while and we are to be educated for heaven. We are going to administer in the millennium and in the eternal state of things.
A.R. This woman we read about in this chapter has had part in the circulation. It says in verse 10, "If she have exercised hospitality, if she have washed saints- feet, if she have imparted relief to the distressed, if she have diligently followed every good work".
J.T. She would be marked by these things. Thus God honours her. She has a place in heaven.
A.P.T. The assembly is Christ's glory. Would that enter into it?
J.T. It would indeed.
A.B.P. Are the poor another class? The Lord says, "Ye have the poor always with you". Would that be distinct from these persons?
J.T. That would not mean that everyone that has ever been poor continues poor. Many things come in to alter people's circumstances as we have said.
{254}
A.B.P. Does the administration to the poor from the bag, during the life of the Lord here, find a counterpart in the assembly?
J.T. Judas is seen under reproach in the remarks made as to him in this point.
A.R. He must have loved money.
A.P.T. "He was a thief and had the bag", (@John 12:6).
J.A.P. Do we need to examine our motives in the proposals we make at the care meeting?
J.T. We are apt to be partial in what we suggest at such a time. So that as has been said, a brother may be spoken of as a good brother and a worthy brother, and it would be nice to give him something, but still he is not really in need. All that ought to be eliminated. We are dealing now with the assembly, the most exalted thing in the universe of God, and we ought to see that we belong to it and to keep it in its own dignity and position.
J.S. It says, "That it may impart relief to those that are widows indeed". Is discernment needed?
J.T. Yes. "Widows indeed" must be provided for, and they are not going to be reduced in their dignity by our conduct towards them. If we could get that into our minds we would all be helped; it is the heavenly mindedness of the assembly; the place it has in the purpose of God both now and for eternity.
A.Pf. Should we not know who the Levites are so that we do not spend too much time in arriving at who is to be ministered to?
J.T. I think it ought to be mentioned that the brethren, in coming together in care in these matters, should be more conversant as to the persons who are engaged in the divine service.
A.N.W. As to the matter of time taken up, we usually take very little time as to need.
J.T. That is because we have confidence in our brethren in the subdivisions in this city that they will not suggest persons in need beyond what they should do.
{255}
The question of investigation has been raised, and that investigation should take place before the care meeting.
A.N.W. The time seems to be taken up with the Levites themselves. Should we not be concerned as to the proposals for contributions? If each brother had a specific Levite in his mind, it would not take long to put the names down.
J.T. As regards any Levite which the local brethren in any meeting have in their minds, it would facilitate the work if they brought his name with them. If we have assembly ears we would seek to be conversant with what is going on and have someone to propose and some reason for the proposal.
R.W.S. Is it not a right principle that the amount given reflects the ability of the Levite?
J.T. I think it is right. Of course, other considerations might be brought in such as travel and the like, but these are matters, as our brother has already intimated, for discernment. If a brother wishes to go to the Pacific and thus whether the situation calls for the extra expense. All these things entering into assembly giving should be in our minds.
A.Pf. Sometimes names are mentioned of brothers who are not known to the brethren. Some whose articles have appeared in the magazines may be suggested. They might be brothers we do not know.
J.T. I have a list of such names which our brother here gave me recently.
H.C.MacG. I do not know them at all, but I have observed their names in the magazines.
J.T. You gave them to me because I should know them, and I do know most of them. Of course, the mere insertion of an article in the magazines is not much.
A.N.W. On what basis do we give to conferences and special meetings?
{256}
J.T. That is to promote ministry; of course, it is fellowship, too. These conferences are to promote in a general way the interests of the Lord. They are calculated to do that, and therefore we should support them.
Question Would it be right to minister to a true Levite that we have never seen; unknown locally?
J.T. That is another thing that enters into assembly service and testimony; that is, witness; a brother's witness. "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every matter be established". We can minister to one we have not seen on that principle.
J.S. There should be nothing selfish in what we do.
J.T. Quite so. The fact that collections are fairly large ought not to create any longing to participate in them, because the matter is very dignified.
H.G.MacG. How could we find out about these Levites? Would it be well to write to persons in whom we have confidence in other parts of the world?
J.T. And ask questions, because some make long journeys and have much information that others have not.
A.Pf. If a brother is invited to minister in a distant place, should not the brethren in that place provide for him?
J.T. That is the understanding I have. And I think visiting brothers are cared for in that way.
Rem. In writing to the Philippians Paul seems to keep the saints on a very dignified level: he refers to some "whose names are in the book of life".
J.T. That is seen in other sections of the word, but Philippians especially is on a high level. You will notice that the apostolic salutations have in mind persons who care, not so much gifted persons as persons who care for the saints. "Paul and Timotheus, bondmen of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, with the overseers and ministers", chapter 1:1; it is not the gifted persons but the overseers and the
{257}
ministers. The latter would be persons like Phoebe, although she served as a deaconess. These are the persons who seem to be in the apostle's mind and then he says, "I thank my God for my whole remembrance of you, constantly in my every supplication, making the supplication for you all with joy, because of your fellowship with the gospel, from the first day until now". And then, "Having confidence of this very thing, that he who has begun in you a good work will complete it unto Jesus Christ's day". And then again he says, "And that both in my bonds and in the defence and confirmation of the glad tidings ye are all participators in my grace". We have already alluded to the tribute which he pays to them on this very point; so that he says, in chapter 4, "But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now however at length ye have revived your thinking of me, though surely ye did also think of me, but lacked opportunity". (Meaning they had been a little slack). "Not that I speak as regards privation, for as to me have learnt in those circumstances in which I am, to be satisfied in myself. I know both how to be abased and I know how to abound. In everything and in all things I am initiated both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer privation"; that bears out what we are saying; how a man may be well off now and hungry later. "I have strength for all things in him that gives me power. But ye have done well in taking part in my affliction. And know *also ye*, O Philippians, that in the beginning of the gospel, when I came out of Macedonia, no assembly communicated anything to me in the way of giving and receiving save ye alone". We might wonder at that, that the great apostle was neglected except by these Philippians. "For also in Thessalonica once and even twice ye sent to me for my need. Not that I seek gift, but I seek fruit abounding to your account. But I have all things in full supply and abound; I am full, having received of Epaphroditus the things sent from you, an
{258}
odour of sweet savour, an acceptable sacrifice, agreeable to God. But my God shall abundantly supply all your need according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus". I think it is worth while, therefore, that we keep Philip-plans before us, because it is unique on this point. Note also the references to Timotheus and Epaphroditus in chapter 2 -- expressive of care for the saints.
A.P.T. So that chapter 4:17 is the basis of the glory in the Levites: "Not that I seek gift, but I seek fruit abounding to your account".
J.MacD. A brother in the Lord's service would draw out the bounty of the saints. It would not be simply a matter of meeting his need.
A.R. Is not a locality put on record in heaven as having given?
J.T. I would think this Philippian epistle is an education on giving -- how things are taken account of in heaven. What the apostle says reflects that.
R.W.S. He says, "Ye have revived your thinking of me, though surely ye did also think of me, but lacked opportunity".
J.T. Some circumstances that they could not surmount came in, but he must mean that they had the apostle in their hearts.
R.W.S. I was trying to reconcile the reviving as if it reflected on their forgetting him, but he says, "ye did also think of me, but lacked opportunity".
J.T. I think it shows how love regards things. He would give them credit for all possible, but yet there was some little defect, I would think, even in them, so that the apostle's standard in this epistle is on a very high level. It is Christian experience, really. That is the point in it. It is not simply doctrine as Ephesians. This is Christian experience. It is what God is working out in heavenly people down here. This matter of giving has a great part in it, and as we were saying already, not only assembly giving but individual giving to relieve the
{259}
assembly. "Let not the assembly be charged". Let the brethren do something. It is not a question of, Have you anything in the box? Love is active in meeting need, if there is more need it will act again. There is no treasury. Love is active all the time.
R.W.S. "But of doing good and communicating of your substance be not forgetful, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased", (@Hebrews 13:16). Is that personal giving?
J.T. That is what it is. "Let him that is taught in the word communicate to him that teaches in all good things". That is individual giving. You are giving to a brother because he has taught you. The matter of giving, it seems to me, is to be resolved into somewhat new settings. There should be more giving by individuals, so that the assembly be not unduly charged. The exaltation of the giving is to be stressed.
{260}
Pages 260 - 465 -- "Notes of Readings in New York" 1946 (Volume 169).
ADMINISTRATION (1)
@1 Timothy 6:13 - 16;@Psalm 33: 6 - 9; @Genesis 1:1 - 5; @Genesis 26 - 31; @Genesis 2:1 - 3; @Genesis 11:1 - 9
J.T.Jr. It has been suggested that we take up the subject of administration. In considering this subject we will have to take into account the different dispensations in which God has governed; therefore, it is a very wide subject. I thought we should begin with the One who is supreme in the administration of things. The use of the title Elohim in @Genesis 1, brings in the idea of God's supremacy. That is what is in mind at the beginning. And it was in Paul's mind in writing to Timothy, that God is the blessed and only Ruler. We had the subject of the kingdom of God in our previous meetings. That connects with things down here at the present time in moral power by the Spirit, but what we have before us now will connect more with the centre of government or administration; the origin of it. There is no change in it all the way through. It is not, of course, recognised at the present time in this sense, nor is it seen publicly either, but Paul brings it before Timothy in this way in connection with "its own time". He says in verse 15, "... which in its own time ..."; which would allude to the millennium. We will need to consider that, of course, later on, but we should have this chapter before us because it is to be in our souls that God is supreme. He has not given up the government of the earth, even though it may seem otherwise, so He is called "the blessed and only Ruler", referring to the time when Christ shall be installed in His kingdom.
So that Genesis opens up to us the way God did things at the beginning. He was absolute. Elohim is His title
{261}
of supremacy and everything flows out from that in the first chapter of Genesis.
R.W.S. It says in verse 15, "... which in its own time the blessed and only Ruler shall shew". Is your suggestion that that is future? The public showing of it is a future matter?
J.T.Jr. That is a future matter. It is a great matter, of course, for which we are looking, but the passage really is to bring before us the supremacy of God, that that thought should be in our minds at the present time.
C.A.M. Do you think that by connecting these two scriptures. @Genesis 1 and @1 Timothy 6, we get one thought -- that God knows the end from the beginning? Do you not think it would be a marvellous thing in connection with all matters of administration if we realised that God knows what the great end is going to be?
J.T.Jr. Quite so. We are to know that too; we are to rest in the fact that God is supreme in the universe.
A.R. It is not in man's hands.
J.T.Jr. It may appear to be, and we have that allusion in references to the god of this world and the prince of this world who may seem to be in charge, and in a certain sense it is so; yet it is only in the sense that God allows it.
J.A.P. Is the truth of that a part of "the good confession" witnessed before Pilate? "Thou hadst no authority whatever against me if it were not given to thee from above", (@John 19:11).
J.T.Jr. Yes; that the authority was from above. We need to see that, and we perhaps have learned something about it recently. The powers that be are ordained of God, yet God is not acting directly through them; it is an indirect matter.
A.P.T. "I enjoin thee before God who preserves all things in life", verse 13. That is a wonderful statement! Is there some thought in it of how God administers things Himself?
{262}
J.T.Jr. I would think so. Great things were to be done at the beginning and as they took shape God's infinite wisdom in doing things came out. But He *preserves* all things in life.
R.W.S. When Paul says that "there are gods many, and lords many", he adds, "yet to us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things, and we for him", (@1 Corinthians 8:6). Is He not thus the Originator of government and all else?
J.T.Jr. I think that is the view we should have of our subject at the beginning; that God is the great Centre from which all is being done, and nothing is happening without being allowed by Him.
A.R. Would you say something about @Genesis 1:1. "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". He administers in the heavens too.
J.T.Jr. We need to see that side also. Angels, for instance, evidently were created before man, and they ministered. They are part of the ways of God, in His ordering, and they had to do with things in relation to the earth. They had to do with the children of Israel. They form part of God's administration. We know that Satan had a place, and that he was cast out, according to @Ezekiel 28. That passage evidently alludes to him, so that this idea is very extensive as it takes in everything in creation.
W.F.K. It says that God preserves all things in life. Does that mean that God will carry everything through in living conditions?
J.T.Jr. I suppose so. God has to say to the preservation of things. It is part of His administration. "The God who has made the world and all things which are in it, *he*, being Lord of heaven and earth, does not dwell in temples made with hands, nor is served by men's hands as needing something, himself giving to all life and breath and all things; and has made of one blood every nation of men to dwell upon the whole face of the earth, having determined ordained times and the
{263}
boundaries of their dwelling, that they may seek God; if indeed they might feel after him and find him, although he is not far from each one of us: for in him we live and move and exist; as also some of the poets amongst you have said. For we are also his offspring". (@Acts 17:24 - 28).
C.A.M. One mark of the present world administration is that there is no recognition that the heavens come first. The statement in (@Psalm 33:6) is, "By the word of Jehovah were the heavens made".
J.T.Jr. In that psalm there is an appeal to fear Jehovah: "Let all the earth fear Jehovah; let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him". It is a great matter to get into our souls that God is supreme in everything. The creation is alluded to in those verses.
A.R. It says in @Luke 1:26 that Gabriel was sent of God.
J.T.Jr. The angelic side is very interesting to follow through, how God operated in that way and especially in the incoming of Christ; so that angelic ministry forms a great part of administration in divine things.
F.H.L. In @Revelation 12 Michael and his angels cast out the great dragon.
J.T.Jr. It is the end of Satan's influence in heaven. The heavens are cleared by Michael and his angels. The idea of angelic ministry runs right through.
A.B.P. The Lord Jesus, in teaching the disciples to pray, used the expression, "Let thy will be done as in heaven so upon the earth", (@Matthew 6:10). Does that imply that heaven is under divine control?
J.T.Jr. I would think so. The general bearing of it is that the angels did His will. We read of those who disobeyed and left their first estate. They were dealt with, being cast into "eternal chains under gloomy darkness", (@Jude 6). That forms part of the administration.
A.P.T. Angelic service is functioning now. "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?" (@Hebrews 1:14)
{264}
That is part of the present administration?
J.T.Jr. I think it forms part of the divine way of carrying things through. We do not know much of that side of things but Scripture shows that angels are used of God for that purpose. There is a wide field for consideration in our subject, as we can see, and I suppose the greatest part will be when we consider Christ and the assembly. So that we need to see how God operated in the beginning and proceeded from one thing to another until He arrives at His masterpiece in administration in the assembly.
R.W.S. God, in His infinite wisdom, has seen fit to allow another will than His to assert itself, first in heaven, and then on earth.
J.T.Jr. Well, there are the two lines; one, the mysterious operations of God's dealings, what He permits; and the other, the side of responsibility. The responsible side is seen with the angels, and it comes in in relation to ourselves and man's failure in relation to what God has required from man.
R.W.S. That could not be a reflection against God's administration. Does it not show how His government operates despite failure?
J.T.Jr. Quite so; and how He meets it.
J.C. God is said to be the *only* Ruler. Unless we administer under His hand, room is not made for the proper blessing and help.
J.T.Jr. We need to have that embedded fundamentally in our souls; that there is a supreme Ruler -- "the blessed and only Ruler". Paul's soul is filled with it -- there is none other.
A.B.P. Would the word in @Ephesians 4:6 link on with what is before us? The apostle speaks of "one God and Father of all, who *is over all*, and through all, and in us all".
J.T.Jr. That would correspond with what is before us, and our psalm would show how we are to be in fear
{265}
of Him: to be in awe of such an One as He. Our passage says: "dwelling in unapproachable light, whom no man has seen, nor is able to see", (@1 Timothy 6:16). That is to impress our souls with His greatness.
D.P. Nebuchadnezzar was brought, through discipline, to the thought that the heavens do rule.
J.T.Jr. Yes; he had to come to that. Later in our inquiry we may see how government was given to the gentiles. It is another aspect of what we are inquiring into, but it is quite a bit ahead of us. But, as you say, he had to learn that way.
C.A.M. Does Matthew's gospel, which deals so much with the King and administration and stresses the ordinances of the heavens, show that we must start with the creational realm of things to apprehend the true idea of administration?
J.T.Jr. I think so; we need to see things as they were in God's mind at the beginning. Great matters were undertaken in creation and infinite wisdom entered into every detail that was carried out. It says, "For *he* spoke, and it was done; *he* commanded, and it stood fast", (@Psalm 33:9). You get the idea of supreme *speaking* and supreme *commanding*.
R.W.S. So that if tonight we acquire a greater fear of God, which is said to be the beginning of wisdom, it would help to develop this beginning of our subject.
J.T.Jr. Exactly; the apostle thought of it in connection with the confession of Christ before Pilate. This great thought came into his soul, that God is the only Ruler, that He will see to it that things are judged properly, and that all will come out in its own time in Christ's kingdom.
A.R. The Lord said, "let thy will be done as in heaven so upon the earth". (@Matthew 6:10). God rules both spheres.
J.T.Jr. We see in Genesis how immediately things
{266}
came in to disturb, but God carries on in His thoughts. We can hardly understand all that is in mind in this relation in these early chapters of Genesis, but there is much to inquire into. In chapter 11 there is a scattering, that is in God's government. In the preceding chapters we see how God came in and acted in relation to His own thoughts.
D.P. Is this great thought of the supremacy of God's government seen in the beloved apostle's testimony before Agrippa? He was in the knowledge of God as supreme.
J.T.Jr. I am sure that is so, and it is perhaps what filled the heart of many a young brother who has recently testified before the authorities; they have had some insight into the supremacy of God as affecting their own lives.
Question After God had spoken to Job in relation to creation, he said, "I know that thou canst do everything, and that thou canst be hindered in no thought of thine", (@Job 42:2). Would that be recognising the supremacy of God?
J.T.Jr. I think so. He learned it through discipline, the way most of us learn it, if we do. God is operating in His own interests in our souls.
A.A.T. Paul enjoins Timothy to keep the commandment. Is that connected with this thought of administration?
J.T.Jr. It would be; in the sense in which we are to be obedient here. The idea of commandments is that we are to be subject to them. So that the blessed and only Ruler has subjects and those subjects are the saints at the present time.
W.W.M. Would you say that God has in mind the blessing of men in relation to the scattering? It says in the psalm we read, "he maketh the thoughts of the peoples of none effect", (@Psalm 33:10). His scattering is to put man in a position where He can bless him.
{267}
J.T.Jr. I suppose the scattering in @Genesis 11 was because of man's evil intent, but God would be ready to bless in spite of that. It is remarkable that the idea of blessing comes in immediately after the creation of man in @Genesis 1. It says, "And God blessed them". That is one great administrative feature -- blessing.
J.S. He scattered them in Jacob and gathered them in Judah: "I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. Judah -- as to thee ... to him will be the obedience of peoples". The scattering was in the wisdom of God and the gathering is in Christ.
R.W.S. Is this administration connected with the heavens and the dwelling connected with unapproachable light?
J.T.Jr. In the sense in which we are speaking of it, heaven is God's centre; the centre from which He is operating. Later on, of course. He will set up His throne here. That will come later in our consideration, but in Genesis, God is operating from His own sphere. So that we get the creation by the word of God. "For *he* spoke, and it was done; *he* commanded, and it stood fast". That carries with it the administrative idea. The thing was *done*. Things must be done. "*He* spoke, and it was done". Then it says, "*he* commanded, and it stood fast". These are ideas connected with administration. Things which God has done will stand. With regard to man it says that He created them male and female. He blessed them, and He gave them dominion. That is delegated authority or administration. The idea is not opened up there in its real meaning. We get the indication that God's idea is that there should be dominion committed to the man and the woman. That idea is there immediately.
A.B.P. Do we learn this principle of speaking and commanding in an experimental way? Something is accomplished in our souls through the gospel -- the speaking -- but if it is to abide, there must be recognition
{268}
of the commandment; we must come under the lordship of Christ and be obedient to the truth.
J.T.Jr. Yes; the world system today largely is carried on by speaking. Governments lay down policies and then commandments are enacted. How many there are! But think of it in connection with God. There is no idea of change with Him. There is supreme speaking and supreme commanding, and there is no change in it. It remains as over against all the governments of the present time and what they are doing.
W.F.K. The passage we read speaks of the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, and then goes on to the thought of the blessed and only Ruler.
J.T.Jr. I think the blessed and only Ruler refers to God. Of course, it applies to Christ too, in that we could not leave Him out of it. But in this setting it refers to God as supreme in bringing about Christ's kingdom. The Lord awaits the time; it is the Father's time, really.
T.N.W. The King of the ages is referred to in chapter 1 -- would you say a little as to that?
J.T.Jr. "Now to the King of the ages, the incorruptible, invisible, only God, honour and glory to the ages of ages. Amen". As Paul's soul is filled with the sense of the mercy shown him he breaks out in this doxology to God.
C.F.E. "Let all the earth fear Jehovah". Is that operative in our hearts today as coming to the truth?
J.T.Jr. I think it is to be seen in the saints; we fear Him; we stand in awe of Him. What a great thing it is that there are those who fear Jehovah and stand in awe of Him!
R.W.S. Would this bear on our meetings for prayer? If things which are going wrong in the world might affect the testimony, can we not appeal to God, in the consciousness that He is the supreme Ruler, to change things for the sake of the assembly.
{269}
J.T.Jr. I think so. In the beginning God had a relation with the earth through government; that is, in Adam and Eve and then in Noah. There was a direct relation in the government of things here, but that did not continue.
A.R. Man and woman were given dominion over "the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the heavens, and over every animal that moveth on the earth".
J.T.Jr. God gave them complete dominion. He blessed them, it says: "God blessed them; and God said to them. Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth, and subdue it; and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the heavens, and over every animal that moveth on the earth". (@Genesis 1:28). That is. God was in relation to them in the government of things here, and so it was with Noah. But that is not so today. We need to see when the position changed, if we can discern it in these chapters.
J.A.P. At the first prayer meeting recorded in the Acts they "lifted up their voice with one accord to God" saying, "The kings of the earth were there, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord and against his Christ. For in truth against thy holy servant Jesus, whom thou hadst anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the nations, and peoples of Israel, have been gathered together in this city to do whatever thy hand and thy counsel had determined before should come to pass". (@Acts 4:26 - 28). God had determined the whole matter. Does that support what has been said?
J.T.Jr. Yes; the title 'Lord' in verse 24 is 'despot'; it means that God is supreme in everything. We need to see that in regard to what God is. The saints at the beginning were accepting what was being allowed by God.
A.P.T. Also the expression "*thou* art the God" in @Acts 4 refers to the title Elohim which is used in @Genesis 1. The footnote says, Elohim, the One who is God. It is wonderful how the truth comes to light in that
{270}
chapter and how they feared God. It links with @Genesis 1, for it was Elohim who made "the heavens and the earth and all their host".
J.T.Jr. Yes, they were in the recognition of that. God is going to govern through the saints, but whilst it appears that He is allowing the worldly governments to go their way, the saints know that God's counsel is behind it all. The idea comes out in Revelation, also. The souls under the altar say, "How long, O sovereign Ruler ..." chapter 6:10. They recognised God as the sovereign Ruler.
A.B.P. In 1 Timothy the word is, "to whom be honour and eternal might", chapter 6: 16. We are to be responsive in heart to that One in the consciousness of His despotic rule, would you say?
J.T.Jr. Quite so.
A.A.T. The opening words in @Genesis 1 are, "In the beginning God ..." The footnote says. God in the absolute.
J.T.Jr. That is the idea. He is supreme in everything, so we get the working out of things in the creation. Things were done. "Let there be light. And there was light". A majestic statement! God spoke, but *the thing was done*. So it says, "For *he* spoke, and it was done; *he* commanded, and it stood fast". It is a question of the working out of things. We learn from @John 1 that the Son had to do with everything that was made.
A.R. It says in @Genesis 2:1, "And the heavens and *the* earth and all their host were finished".
J.T.Jr. The thing was *finished*, and it was all good. The administration was perfect in carrying everything out.
R.W.S. Do you have in mind that a change in administration came in?
J.T.Jr. The idea of government comes into Genesis in relation to Adam and Eve. God gave them dominion. There was a relation between them and God in government.
{271}
And then, later. God found Noah alone righteous in all the wickedness, and He gave government into his hands. At that time capital punishment was introduced. And God changed the food for man, giving him flesh to eat. It was God's direct government in these relations, but the matter changed after that.
A.A.T. Is it not so that all animals are subject to man? God put man in administration over that sphere of things.
J.T.Jr. It would be so abstractly, I suppose, but it is not really so, because ferocious beasts are not subject to man, except they are tamed. Naturally it is not so because sin came in; something happened.
T.E.H. It says of the Lord Jesus in @Mark 1:13, that He was in the wilderness with the wild beasts. Evidently, in Him, there was control over the wild beasts.
J.T.Jr. They did not attack Him. No doubt they discerned that He was different.
A.B.P. Would you say that although dominion was given to Noah, it hardly compared to what was given to Adam? Would the greater thought be seen in Adam?
J.T.Jr. Yes. Death was the penalty for disobedience. Man was driven out of the garden and the cherubim placed there; so that God's government had to come in in judgment; and then the mark is put on Cain. Judgment comes in again in the flood. So we see God acting in that dispensation in that way.
C.A.M. Dominion was given to Adam and Eve, primarily, looking forward to Christ and the assembly.
J.T.Jr. Quite so. We may consider that later. The idea of Christ and the assembly is one of the greatest parts of our subject. It is foreshadowed here to show it was in God's mind and He comes to it later.
C.A.M. That is a very establishing thing; the suggestion is initial.
G.B.L. Does the book of Ruth show by contrast the
{272}
solemnity of trifling with this principle? Elimelech's name means, 'Whose God is king'. The book shows declension from that but divine government coming in sovereignly and reaching through to David.
J.T.Jr. That is right. The reigns of David and Solomon are the answer to failure in administration in the Old Testament. Through that era God governed the earth directly through Israel.
A.R. Man had dominion before sin came in.
J.T.Jr. And God blessed them. It was God's attitude. It is a great thought to get into our souls. The curse came in because of sin; it came upon Adam and Eve; they were driven out. And it came upon Cain; the mark was there. And it came upon the whole earth in the flood. God brought the flood upon the whole scene and closed it up in judgment.
A.R. @Genesis 9:6 says, "Whoso sheddeth Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be shed".
J.T.Jr. Exactly. God tells Noah that He will require man's blood from man. You get there one great principle of government. It has come down to our time. Where did capital punishment come from? It exists because of what God established at the beginning.
F.H.L. If administration and government were established there would be rest. God rested on the seventh day.
J.T.Jr. It is very important that we come to that. The work had brought in rest. When you think of "all his work", it means something had to be done. There must be skill; there must be energy. That is what came out in what was done. The whole creation is an expression of God's eternal power and divinity.
C.A.M. The one who pronounces capital punishment is doing it as a representative of God. In himself he is a man, but he represents God.
J.T.Jr. That is right; so that the powers that be are ordained of God.
{273}
J.A.P. Was Adam doing things well in naming the creatures?
J.T.Jr. This idea of how things were done came out in Adam and Eve too. I suppose we should see that God did things in a glorious way so as to give character to anything we do. We should have in mind how God did things.
D.P. Was there breakdown on the part of Pilate in his administration of government?
J.T.Jr. There was. He had power to set the Lord free; he could have set Him free righteously. Government broke down in him.
A.R. In @Genesis 1 it is said that God did things. In chapter 2 it is Jehovah Elohim.
J.T.Jr. Chapter 1 is God as supreme. That is what we need to get into our souls first in regard to this great subject -- that there is One who is supreme -- and Christ Himself comes in in relation to that as we shall see later.
A.B.P. Is the thought of God's supremacy suggested in @Hebrews 1, where, in speaking of the Son, it says, "by whom also he made the worlds", verse 2?
J.T.Jr. I think that is the force of it. It is "by whom". It is instrumentality; the thing was done.
A.B.P. The mind is carried through to God as supreme in relation to it?
J.T.Jr. Quite so.
W.F.K. It says that God divided the light from the darkness. What part of the administration would that be?
J.T.Jr. I suppose it is a question of what was suitable in the realm of things in which God was going to operate. There is the darkness and the light; the night and the day. It is a question of God's plan in creation -- what the night and day mean. Certain things were worked out in these periods. The Lord said that there are twelve hours in the day. It was a question of His testimony, and of work to be done.
{274}
F.S.C. Is God dwelling in unapproachable light, whom no man has seen nor can see, really darkness to us until Christ comes into it?
J.T.Jr. I think that means it is inscrutable. We have no part in that at all, nor can have. It is God in the absolute.
W.F.K. God separates, or distinguishes, between the children of light and children of darkness.
J.T.Jr. Moral darkness came in later in connection with evil. Men love darkness rather than light. It is a moral idea, but here it is God dividing the thing in a creational sense. We have our nights, and it is a question of what is worked out in the night with God -- "And there was evening, and there was morning -- the first day". That is the way things operate in our souls.
C.A.M. So that we look back to the first chapter of the Bible in faith. That is really how we understand it.
J.T.Jr. Quite so.
R.D.G. In dividing the light from the darkness we have the sun, the moon and the stars, looking forward to Christ and the assembly.
J.T.Jr. It is a question of administration, whether through the sun in the day or the moon at night. We should get the thought of God as supreme in our minds in relation to rule; then delegated administration in the man and the woman, and then in Noah. Over against that we have evil coming in, and God acting in regard to it. The cherubim are set in the garden to guard the way of the tree of life, and the mark is put upon Cain, which is still apparent, even in our day. It is a governmental thing. Part of the administration is to mark off a man who slew his brother -- the murderous element that slew Christ. It comes down in God's administration even to the present time.
R.W.S. It makes God more wonderful to us as we see the way in which He meets changing conditions -- the age of innocence, and then the era of conscience, and
{275}
the period of human government. He can meet conditions in each of these ages.
J.T.Jr. It is a question of discerning the dispensation in which we are and understanding the dispensations generally. We can hardly think of the period of the garden as a dispensation, but it was a separate and distinct time. God drove man out of it in His governmental dealings; then He had to take account of the evil which came in through Cain, in relation to a brother. This principle comes in early in the ways of God, as to what He thought about such a thing.
W.C.R. Was the breakdown of Adam and Eve in that they did not maintain dominion over the created things?
J.T.Jr. The whole position broke down in that way, so you get no more reference to dominion in regard to them. The curse came in. It is on the ground; it is on persons; it is on Cain. But it is part of God's administrative dealings in a world of wickedness ending in the flood.
C.A.M. The question might come into the mind, Why did God allow the whole question of good and evil to exist? Why did not God, who is from eternity to eternity, remove it at its first showing? But is it not infinite wisdom on His part to work the thing out so that we might have an apprehension of His infinite grace in a way we could not have understood it otherwise?
J.T.Jr. I think so. When we come to Noah, it is a question of the world as it exists today, because it has come down from Noah. The flood came in and destroyed the world that then was. Noah therefore begins a new position, and government is on another line. In chapter 11, men planned to build a city and a tower. It is called Babel. It is confusion. God changed their language; and that has come down to us today. It was part of God's governmental dealings; He changed the language
{276}
of men and scattered them over all the earth. It is a definite change in the ways of God. He came in to check the evil through a change of language, and through scattering. We have another point of view from this chapter onward.
C.F.E. Is chapter 11 a climax reached in the ways of God?
J.T.Jr. I think it is, in that it is not a question of direct government any longer. The god of this world has taken hold on the hearts of men, and has controlled their thoughts. That is really the present condition of the world today.
R.W.S. It says that they journeyed from the east. Is it suggestive that man's aspect is westward? He is scattered and his age is reduced sharply.
J.T.Jr. And the idea of great cities comes up -- Babel, for example -- and what man is doing in them. It seems to be an important point, that God has, you might say, given man over to his evil, and he is still going on in it today. God acts through governments, like Egypt, for instance. God checked that government. Yet, it was not His government. He was not directly ruling through Egypt or any such nation. He had given them up to a reprobate mind, it says in Romans. They were given up because of the evil.
A.B.P. Is there another feature of God's rule running through the era of which we have been speaking, which is seen in Enoch, and also in the ark? God asserts His right to discriminate and make a difference, so that, out of the confusion. God translates an Enoch and preserves eight souls in the ark.
J.T.Jr. Yes; I suppose the latter is figurative of what is going on now.
A.P.T. The words used by men here are identical with the words of God in chapter 1:26: "And God said, Let us make ..." Here it is, "Come on, *let us build* ..." It is like a counterfeit of proper administration.
{277}
J.T.Jr. I think it is. There is the idea of counsel, which is another important feature in administration, but here it is in relation to evil. This also is carried down, like the counsel of Ahithophel, and the gates of hades. It is counsel against what is of God.
A.P.T. The footnote to verse 2 says that they 'pulled up their tent pegs'. How does the administrative side enter into man's will against God?
J.T.Jr. Man's will enters into the make-up of his city and his government, and yet God is behind it all. Man cannot go as far as he likes. We have seen that in recent times. Certain governments have not been permitted to go as far as they thought to go. God uses one against the other, but He is not ruling directly through any.
G.B.L. The introduction of devastating weapons to check evil has inspired awe in nations. These things may seem to be over-severe, but does not God allow them in order to stop evil?
J.T.Jr. It is all part of the system. We see that, in principle, in Sodom and Gomorrah.
A.R. In chapter 11 God came down to see the city and tower.
J.T.Jr. It is a great matter in administration to get first-hand knowledge of things.
J.H.H. God took them up on their own counsel. They said, "... lest we be scattered over the face of the whole earth", but it says later, "And Jehovah scattered them thence over the face of the whole earth".
J.T.Jr. That is remarkable. Moses speaks of it in @Deuteronomy 32; "When the Most High assigned to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the peoples according to the number of the children of Israel", verse 8. That evidently alludes to this chapter. He divided them in relation to the inheritance of Israel.
{278}
C.N. After the scattering of chapter 11 Abraham comes into view.
J.T.Jr. That is very important and I suppose we should consider the call of Abraham at our next reading. The call is a separate thought from government. It is an important change in the ways of God. He called Abraham out, but He left the world to go on its course. He was not governing directly through Abraham. He took on Abraham. He was calling out a people, and this carries through to David.
R.D.G. On the day of Pentecost there were representatives of every nation under heaven at Jerusalem and God momentarily suspended the restraint so that all heard the testimony in their own language.
{279}
ADMINISTRATION (2)
@Genesis 9:24 - 29; @Genesis 11:27 - 32; @Genesis 12:1 - 3; @Genesis 14:18 - 20; @Genesis 18:16 - 28; @Genesis 19:14 - 16, 24 - 26
J.T.Jr. Our subject is administration. We had before us the last time the thought of God as Supreme -- "*He* spoke, and it was done; *he* commanded, and it stood fast", (@Psalm 33:9). Elohim, in @Genesis 1, expresses the thought of the Supreme. We also saw delegated authority in Adam, linked on with God's attitude in blessing, and then the curse, the flood, and the confusion of languages, arriving finally at Abraham. I thought we might begin this time with the God of Shem. We have not had such an expression before. God is not referred to in relation to Adam in that way. It comes in in regard to Shem; God in relation to a family -- one family. We saw how Noah was set up in government after the flood. These verses show how he failed personally, and yet he could recover to give us this prophecy, which we may say, governs the whole position in regard to the peopling of the world, through his three sons. The whole world has been peopled through these three families. I thought also we might take note of what is "*after the flood*", (@Genesis 10:1). It speaks of what occurred after the flood: the distribution of the isles, verse 5, the dividing of the earth, verse 25, the distribution of the nations on the earth, verse 32. All have in view God's government. So that we have in Shem a new line of thought in regard to the position; that is. God in relation to one family, which works out through Abraham. We might therefore look at these scriptures along those lines. Abraham was to be made a *great nation*. That idea is in mind. And then we get the relationship of Abraham to the general public position in chapter 14, in regard to a world war, and how Melchisedec is brought in to give us the thought of the fulness of the kingdom -- the administration of the fulness of time. And then Abraham
{280}
speaks to God as the Judge of the whole earth in relation to His dealings with Sodom and Gomorrah; and finally, we see the judgment of Sodom and Gomorrah from heaven.
We might consider Noah first, I think, as to what is in mind in regard to him.
A.R. Do you think Noah's prophecy as to Shem, Ham, and Japheth is worked out in @Acts 8, 9 and 10?
J.T.Jr. Ham is first there. The Ethiopian eunuch is blessed first (@Acts 8). Here Shem is first. It is the "God of Shem". Shem, therefore, is in mind in regard to this matter of administration. God was going to take up one family, which He did, and He was in relation to that family peculiarly.
C.A.M. God's ways are universal. The whole earth is in view, but nevertheless there is something special in the mind of God. He is selective, and He has something special in mind to work out His thoughts.
J.T.Jr. Yes; man's sin was dealt with in the flood, but it comes to light again after the flood; that is, there is no change in the flesh; so that God moves in another way. He selects one family to bless, which comes out more definitely in Abraham, and there is no question about it. They will be blessed. There is no condition in it.
R.W.S. In verse 21 of chapter 10 it speaks of Shem as the brother of Japheth *the elder*. God is not operating on the lines of nature in selecting Shem.
J.T.Jr. No, He is acting sovereignly, taking up one family, which, of course, is the Jew. But it is to show that God carries through His thoughts in His own way. This line culminates in the kingdom under David and Solomon, and in the fullest sense, in Christ. He appears, in type, as Melchisedec to give us the character of the glory of the kingdom that is soon to come in. These things are all in mind in these chapters in Genesis.
A.N.W. There is encouragement for us in connection
{281}
with Noah. As far as administration is concerned, he failed, having lost control of himself, but he is recovered to furnish us with this beautiful prophecy.
C.W.M. Would there also be the indication that there was the fear of God in Shem's family, so that God is not ashamed to be called their God, on the principle of @Hebrews 11?
J.T.Jr. Quite so; there would be something in Shem that would correspond with God's selection. His name means 'renown'. There would be seen renown, subjectively, in Shem. And then we get the histories of the various families -- Shem, Ham, and Japheth. But in chapter 10: 1 we have Shem, and then again in chapter 10: 21 he is reverted to again, so that is the line that is in mind now. The world is allowed to go on in the characteristics that come out fully at Sodom and Gomorrah, but over against that we have Shem's line.
A.B.P. Is Shem the head of the line which receives the blessing that comes to Abraham and finally arrives at the nations?
J.T.Jr. I think he is. God said that all nations of the earth shall be blessed in Abraham. Shem held the central point in the division of the earth. Japheth evidently went northward, and Ham, southward; so that Shem evidently occupied the central position. He was in the centre of operations, in a way, and everything stood in relation to that.
A.N.W. Would not Japheth indicate enlargement, bringing in the nations?
J.T.Jr. I suppose it would. Shem is mentioned in both connections in this prophecy -- "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Shem", verse 26. And then in verse 27, "Let God enlarge Japheth, and let him dwell in the tents of Shem". That is, Shem is the predominant thought, and Japheth is to dwell in his tents, so it refers to God's operations in Shem, and everything else is around that.
C.N. There is no blessing attached to Ham; it is,
{282}
"Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Shem" so that it seems as if Shem is definitely picked out from the very beginning for blessing.
J.T.Jr. I thought that, as distinctively coming out in Abraham; so that God is called the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob and the God of Israel, that is. God stands in relation to Shem's line. God identified Himself with that family and He is carrying out His thoughts in relation to that family.
A.R. Would you say that God has rights on the earth to operate just as He wishes? He can destroy as He wishes, as in the flood, and over against that He has the right to bless one family. He asks nobody about the matter.
J.T.Jr. Quite so, what Ham did, I suppose, is descriptive of one side of the whole position. It alludes to the corrupt character of things that has gone on all the time, a line of evil all the way down. It comes out in its full force at Sodom and Gomorrah. Evil developed to such an extent that God came down to see about it.
R.W. S. There is an interesting allusion in @Deuteronomy 32:8. It says: "When the Most High assigned to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the peoples according to the number of the children of Israel". It would seem that God is operating now on the line of Shem, Abraham and those who followed.
J.T.Jr. That is an important scripture to bring in here because it shows that the division in Genesis was according to the arrangement God had in mind for Israel. It was all planned out; so Israel was the centre of everything and was to be the centre of everything really under David and Solomon.
W.F.K. Would Japheth dwelling in tents be God's way of preserving him for future blessing -- taking up the gentiles?
J.T.Jr. I suppose that in the fullest sense it would
{283}
allude to the nations coming into blessing in relation to Israel; Shem is the central thought; everything is in relation to him. But the line of demarcation which we have in Noah's prophecy and in the facts which preceded it alludes to what is right in Shem and Japheth -- right principles. Ham suggests the working of evil and man's occupation with it, with which the world is filled today. Sodom and Gomorrah were the full expression of it at that time.
A.N.W. In relation to what you said about Israel having the central place, I thought the Lord had that in mind in speaking with the Samaritan woman. He said to her, and only to her. Salvation is of the Jews. But this other matter as to Ham is serious and a very important matter. How that has shown itself on moral lines!
J.T.Jr. The first thing is the breakdown in Noah, a man who was entrusted with government. God gave the government into the hands of Noah and his sons. And now we find him, in that position, losing control. I think we should look into this a little -- that is, the matter of losing control.
A.P.T. Would the actions of Shem and Japheth be indicative of a principle of administration -- to rightly judge and cover and circumscribe evil?
J.T.Jr. I think that is what is in mind; not to extend the thing but to circumscribe it and these two sons set out that principle. But Noah is before us first of all, as failing in government. He became occupied in the wine business, and he took too much of it. There is nothing against There is no such idea, but the man who was using it was out of control.
A.B.P. It says in @Hebrews 11 that Noah condemned the world, but later he became unfaithful in his own personal deportment, which is very solemn in relation to administration.
{284}
J.T.Jr. That is right. In a sense we have all condemned the world in the position we have taken up but how are we controlling ourselves?
J.A.P. There is an interesting note to @2 Timothy 4:5: "Be sober in all things", which reads: 'This implies not watching actively, nor being awake; but that sober clearness of mind resulting from exemption from false influences -- not muddled with the influence of what intoxicates. So we think of one when we say. He has a sober judgment'.
J.T.Jr. Noah did not regulate himself. There is nothing wrong with the proper use of wine. Melchisedec brought it out. This incident is to show that we are to be in control of ourselves. Jehovah had said: "Of every tree of the garden thou shalt freely eat". There was no prohibition except with the tree of the knowledge of good and evil but the point is that if we lose control of ourselves we expose ourselves to evil. That is what Noah did; he exposed himself.
C.N. Would you say that Shem and Japheth chose another course? They went backwards.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; that is the principle that we need in regard to matters that come up -- how to deal with them so as to not extend evil. It must be dealt with, of course, but it is not to be spread. It is a vicious thing to spread evil.
A.N.W. Does not that characteristic provoke the blessing?
J.T.Jr. Quite so; the blessing comes in in that relation; but there is also the curse, which is a solemn thing. God does not like that line of things which spreads evil. He would have us to be like Shem and Japheth, taking another way.
R.W.S. Do you think this spreading of evil would extend down through Canaan? It was Ham who sinned, but Canaan is made a bondman.
J.T.Jr. That is the way that Noah dealt with it, in
{285}
Ham's posterity, and it would show what is cursed. The line of things that is cursed is connected with what is evil. How much people are occupied with evil, in large cities especially. That is what is cursed; the thing lies in that.
A.N.W. Ham was the father of Canaan. We know the development of Canaan, and all that is the extension of the wickedness of Ham.
J.T.Jr. Canaanite means a 'merchant' (see note @Zechariah 14:21). The evil probably developed along the line of commerce, and all the evil connected with it. The great commercial systems of the world are largely built up on what is questionable. Avarice and selfishness are in them. In every country there is on the one side, capital, and on the other labour. We have with the latter the development of trade unionism.
A.P.T. In the last chapter of Zechariah it says, "there shall be no more a Canaanite in the house of Jehovah of hosts", chapter 14:21. That links on with the idea of trafficking and merchandising, and the things of God are corrupted by such practices.
J.T.Jr. Prominent men in the commercial world are often identified with the professing church as elders, etc. Their money and prestige mean much to the church.
A.A.T. I notice that in the last verse of @Genesis 5 it says that Noah begot Shem, Ham, and Japheth. The footnote says that Ham means black. Is that moral blackness or skin darkness?
J.T.Jr. It is a question of the meaning of the name. "If the light in thee be darkness, how great the darkness". "The lamp of the body is thine eye: when thine eye is simple, thy whole body also is light; but when it is wicked, thy body also is dark", (@Luke 11:34).
Now, if we pursue the line of Ham and his posterity we find that Nimrod's name means 'rebel'. He evidently had to do with the building of Babylon; so that Ham's line is connected with the building up of the
{286}
world which reached a climax in chapter 11. Evidently all the sons were involved in the building of the tower.
A.R. When the Lord was here He dealt with the Canaanite in the temple. He overthrew the tables of the money-changers and the seats of the sellers of doves. Mark tells us that He suffered no one to carry a package through the temple (chapter 11:16).
J.T.Jr. We are coming on to an important division of things in these chapters, and it is well for us to see that God is separating one family. He has in mind the line of faith. It is a principle of separation, and if we do not get that into our souls, we are apt to be worldly-minded and live in the world.
C.N. So that later, when God proposes to establish Shem, he exterminates the seven nations in the land of Canaan. All Canaan was to be cleared to make room for Shem.
J.T.Jr. Quite so, evidently the Canaanite spread himself in the land. He took charge of that territory. The seven nations were there, and it was therefore a question of exterminating them but it was not until David's time that the land was fully subdued.
A.I. Why do you think Shem is mentioned in chapter 10, as the father of all the sons of Eber?
J.T.Jr. I suppose Eber is the root of the title Hebrew. It is the name Shem's line acquired. They were despised. Shem's line is important in chapter 10, because it speaks of the earth being divided in the days of Peleg. Something happened in the ways of God in the earth. And then, in chapter 11, we find that after Peleg, life was shortened by about one-half. God was reducing man's life on the earth.
C.A.M. The end of Proverbs shows that those who have to do with administration should refrain from strong drink. There is nothing wrong with wine, of course, for it says it is to be used, in the same scripture, but the matter of rule is a great test, do you not think?
{287}
J.T.Jr. It is; we should be in our right senses as exercising rule; whether it be in our homes, or attending to business, or amongst the saints, it is important that we be in our right senses as controlling matters. If we allow things to over-stimulate us, the senses become warped and we lose control. Wine is used as a figure of many things that may excite us.
A.R. God brings in the generations of Shem, in verse 10, after the scattering at Babel.
J.T.Jr. God is moving on different lines; He is taking up one family and He is operating in relation to that family. He is called the God of Shem, and then later the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob. So it is now a question of what God is going to work out in one family. The world itself is going on as before. The world goes on in Egypt in these chapters, and it is demonstrated in Sodom and Gomorrah. The world is left to go on its course, and men are ruling in it.
A.R. Would you say that chapter 12 suggests that God is going to enlarge the matter? He says to Abraham, "I will make of thee a great nation, and bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing", verse 2. A nation is in view now.
J.T.Jr. That is the thought -- that a great nation would be the outcome, but on the principle of separation. This is an important point for us to consider. It is much needed at the present time. Separation from the world is a basic administrative principle.
W.F.K. Abraham had to leave his kindred and his country and to come out the way God had appointed.
J.T.Jr. That is what we need to see now -- that separation comes in at this point. It is the way God is operating.
A.P.T. Would you say that there is no difference in the principle on which God administered, as recorded in these chapters, and what He is doing at the present time?
J.T.Jr. Quite so; it is the same principle. He has
{288}
carried the principle of separation right down to our time. We have it in 2 Timothy, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity", chapter 2: 19. It is the principle of separation. I will never understand what God is at if I do not start there.
R.W.S. It involves separation, not only from evil things as seen in Sodom, but from what men may ordinarily regard as good things, too. In @Genesis 12:1 the word is, "Go out of thy land, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house".
J.T.Jr. Quite so; yet, it alludes to what is in the world. What is in mind is separation from the sphere where the rule of man is going on. Nations are alluded to in the previous chapter; they are all set up, you might say. In chapter 10: 32 we read, "These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations, in their nations. And from these came the distribution of the nations on the earth after the flood". The nations are set up in their several spheres. It would be the earth as it was known at that time, but nevertheless it is the nations set up and man ruling in them. The rule of man is going on in the various nations but the believer cannot have part in that. God tells Abraham to go out of that; Abraham had no part in it.
A.P.T. Chapter 11 speaks of one language; the same words. In a sense, that is what is all around us. The filthiness of the flesh is seen in every nation.
J.T.Jr. The same things are working in every nation. The desire for rule is in every land. Someone becomes prominent in it, and so we have a Nimrod. The beginning of his kingdom was Babel. Think of the kind of man Nimrod was! Think of the kind of rule that was going on! And yet God was allowing it, and He was allowing such men to become prominent, but He says to Abraham, 'You come out of this'. It says later that they served other gods beyond the flood (see @Joshua 24:2) but now they are to be in a new position.
{289}
A.R. God called Abraham alone and blessed him, we are told. I suppose the same thought applies to the assembly -- it is called out.
J.T.Jr. That is the idea; and we are to know what that means. We hear people say that the Lord is with them, or that He is here, or there. But where was God in relation to this matter? He said to Abraham, in effect, 'You get out of this. I am the God of Shem'. We need to see the principle which God establishes at once in these chapters. It is the principle of separation from evil.
D.P. Would you say that the working out of good and evil has been centred in families and persons? Evil shewed itself in Ham, and good shewed itself in Shem. Those wicked men who surrounded the cross of Christ were marked by the features of Ham. We need not think that Ham refers only to a particular race. He typifies persons in whom evil is working.
J.T.Jr. Ham apparently went out and disclosed the evil. He published it. Ham stands for that kind of thing -- persons occupied with evil and spreading it.
J.A.P. So that Paul says to Timothy: "But profane, vain babblings shun, for they will advance to greater impiety, and their word will spread as a gangrene", (@2 Timothy 2:16,17). The word to him was to cut "in a straight line the word of truth".
J.T.Jr. Well now, we see that in the ways of God, He is taking up one family; He is taking up Abraham, but it is Shem's line. So the Lord comes in on that line; we think of it in regard to Christ. We get our renown from Christ; Luke's line is from Shem. So He is the One who gives us renown; everything centres in Christ.
A.R. In chapter 12 Jehovah says, "I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee; and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed", verse 3. God has in mind that families are to be blessed through one man.
J.T.Jr. That is the idea; the blessing is going to
{290}
extend to the nations; and that is reiterated over and over again, and we may say that He has done it. The blessing of Abraham has arrived at the nations, we are told. But what is developing here is really the beginning of God's plan to rule in a nation. The idea comes out in Melchisedec, when he came to meet Abraham, but it is not seen fully until the reigns of David and Solomon.
A.B.P. It says in @Romans 1: "Wherefore God gave them up also in the lusts of their hearts to uncleanness", verse 24. Does that head up in Sodom? So that, on the one hand. God gave up certain people to their unclean-ness, but on the other hand. He called Abraham out.
J.T.Jr. I think that is the principle. "By their fruits ye shall know them", (@Matthew 7:16). And so Sodom and Gomorrah are examples. There is Egypt also, where Abraham went later, and he got damaged there. He did not belong there.
J.S. Scripture speaks of Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.
J.T.Jr. Yes; that is brought up in Revelation. Sodom and Egypt are linked together there. I suppose it is for us to see that we do not get any help in going down to the world. Abraham got no good out of it. In fact, it is possible that his wife acquired Hagar there. If God says to get out of the world and I go back into it, there is nothing but damage for me there.
C.N. In @Numbers 23:9, when Balaam spoke of the people, he said: "Lo, it is a people that shall dwell alone and shall not be reckoned among the nations". And then in verse 21 of the same chapter it says, "Jehovah his God is with him, and the shout of a king is in his midst".
J.T.Jr. That is very fitting, because it shows that God had not changed His thoughts about His people. They were to dwell alone; that is what we need at the present time. We are in a critical time in our cities, as to separation.
{291}
C.N. Is the effectiveness of the authority that God has vested in the assembly, which is represented in the 'shout of a king', dependent upon this principle of separation?
J.T.Jr. Quite so. If we are not separate, we shall not understand who Melchisedec is.
W.C.R. How do you account for the fact that Lot went out with Abraham, but finally settled down in Sodom?
J.T.Jr. I suppose that is like a good many defections among us. Persons go along for a time and then move away as attracted by some feature of the world. They do not stay with Abraham.
A.R. The matter of Abraham being called out is very important. We should not overlook it, for the word assembly means 'called out'. We are called out from everything that is iniquitous around us.
J.T.Jr. That is an important principle -- the separation of a people from the world. It is a cardinal principle with God, and it comes all the way down to us at the present time.
A.N.W. Abraham did not go with Lot. Lot went with him, but he never went with Lot.
A.Macd. Would dwelling in tents help us to maintain separation?
J.T.Jr. Quite so; we are ready to move. So we see that God is not governing directly through Abraham. Government was not committed to him. Nor did God govern directly through the nations that are left. He was waiting the time when He would govern directly, and that came to pass through David and Solomon and will come out more definitely in the millennium. The word to Abraham is that he will become a great nation. God is going to make a great nation out of Abraham.
J.E. Family relationships test us very much in maintaining separation.
J.T.Jr. Lot was a relative of Abraham, but you may
{292}
be sure that Abraham did not go down to Sodom to the marriages of Lot's daughters.
A.N.W. It says of Lot that he went as far as Sodom. It seems a tendency sometimes to see how far we can go, how much we can do, without doing anything overt, but the thing is to keep clear entirely.
J.T.Jr. You wonder about some who go off and leave the blessing. You can understand how Abraham would have said to Lot, God has said to me that He will make of me a great nation and that I am to be a blessing; "thou shalt be a blessing", (@Genesis 12:2). It is what a Christian is to be.
W.C.R. According to the footnote the word Lot means 'veil'. Would that have any bearing on his history?
J.T.Jr. There was probably some secret condition in him that allied itself with Sodom and Gomorrah. There is always something you can trace these things to.
A.R. "Thou shalt be a blessing", came out in the fullest way in Christ. One Man upon the earth affects the whole earth. That is what came about when the Lord Jesus was here.
J.T.Jr. It says of Abraham, "I will make of thee a great nation, and bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing". What God was going to do with Abraham was based upon the principle of separation. He was not leaving him in Babylon. He called him alone and blessed him.
A.P.T. We need help on the present bearing of this appearance of Melchisedec to Abraham.
J.T.Jr. It illustrates how God approves the movements of His people. I think it is to show that God has His system available all the time. It is in mystery, of course. It says that Melchisedec met Abraham and brought out bread and wine; that is a fine picture for us to realise at the present time.
A.B.P. Coming in after the slaughter of the kings
{293}
would suggest that God has not given up kingship. He is holding it in reserve.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; it is there all the time. Melchisedec only appears for a moment, as it were. It is just a matter of three verses, and then he disappears, we might say. Well, we are to know something about that; the incoming of Christ in this way into our circumstances.
C.A.M. I suppose we should make up our minds that every increase of light from God will involve that separation takes on an increased meaning. Lot's move to Sodom necessitated separation from him but the result of Melchisedec's service is that Abraham separated from everything worldly. He separated from every worldly link after this light.
J.T.Jr. We want to see what Abraham's position stands for. He was not well known, you might say. Abraham was moving out really in relation to another world. On the other hand there was a world war and then the slaughter of the kings. A great slaughter has taken place in our times. Think of the slaughter that has been going on! Well, have the brethren been recovered? That is the point now, that Abraham recovered his brother. He showed remarkable skill as a military man. "He divided himself against them by night, he and his servants, and smote them".
W.F.K. He went into this war to save a brother.
J.T.Jr. That is right. I suppose in a way he represents a priest. We do not get Aaron's priesthood in this book, but this is a priestly move.
R.W. S. Would you say a little more about the way the matter of Melchisedec works out in our circumstances?
J.T.Jr. I would think that when we move like Abraham in regard to our brethren that we are in the way to receive some unexpected help. This was an unexpected thing, I suppose, for Abraham. He had gone a long way to get his brother. And how far we have to go sometimes to seek to recover one who has gone
{294}
into Sodom and then, through some governmental act of God, has gone even further away. That requires the movements of a priest, according to the Aaronic service. Although you do not get Aaron's ministry opened up in Genesis, yet it is there in a certain sense in Abraham in seeking to recover his brother. The purpose of the Aaronic service, as stated in Hebrews, was "that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins".
A.P.T. It says in @Hebrews 5:2: "... able to exercise forbearance towards the ignorant and erring".
A.N.W. Melchisedec seems to come in, in the attitude of blessing, to intercept the king of Sodom.
J.T.Jr. Quite so, this unexpected visit of Melchisedec is to bless Abraham; it is not for intercession; he does not need that. Lot needed intercession, but Abraham had a priest who was blessing him.
A.R. Abraham needed sustenance: Melchisedec brought out bread and wine.
J.T.Jr. What resources there are -- bread and wine!
A.P.T. It seems to strengthen him for the test. The king of Sodom says, "Give me the souls". The priestly service of Christ helps us in relation to tests which arise.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; the title of Melchisedec is intended to instruct us in regard to what Christ will be; that is, it is the fulness really of His glory as a king. He is said to be king of Salem. He is a Priest; He is a Priest on the throne. It is Christ's millennial glory that is coming in here, at this juncture, to show Abraham that this system is already working.
A.R. Melchisedec is said to be "priest of the Most High God" and Abraham says, "I have lifted up my hand to Jehovah, the most High God, possessor of heavens and earth", (@Genesis 14:22).
J.T.Jr. That really connects with the millennium, because in a way God is now shut out of the earth. In that day God's will is to be carried out both in the heavens and on the earth.
{295}
A.P.T. Abraham uses the same words which are used by Melchisedec. Is there something in that for us? We can lift up our hands not to do anything contrary to the principles which are opened up to us in the truth.
J.T.Jr. Yes; Abraham recognises the position of Melchisedec. Abraham was in the secret of what God had in mind. And so are we. We know that Christ is going to reign in His glory. Abraham was in the secret of that and he was not overcome by temptation; he would not surrender one iota of his position of separation.
A.R. What is meant by the title "Most High God"?
J.T.Jr. There is nothing higher; it is moral elevation. He is absolute.
C.N. This great system is operating. Melchisedec gives Abraham bread and wine, and Abraham gives him the tenth of all.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; Abraham's victory is called to our attention. And we should be in the sense of that, also. When the enemy comes in like a flood, we are to raise a standard against him, especially on the line of separation.
C.N. The blessing is important. It reads: "Blessed be Abraham of the Most High God, possessor of heavens and earth. And blessed be the Most High God, who has delivered thine enemies into thy hand", verses 19,20. He blesses Abraham first.
J.T.Jr. That is the character of the millennium. Christ's influence and blessing will be felt by all. But then God gets His portion, also. "Blessed be the Most High God".
A.N.W. That is the power by which Abraham met the temptation. He was consciously blessed and enriched by the One who possesses the heavens and the earth.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; he is not turned aside.
R.W.S. Our souls are to be steeped in the glory and power and love of this system, which, as you indicate, is in operation today. How could we leave it -- to whom could we go?
{296}
J.T.Jr. Quite so; we want to have an increased sense that Christ is blessing us. It is a separated people, like Abraham was, that get the blessing.
G.V.D. It is most helpful to see that separation does not involve a void, but we are linked on with something positive. The first feature in (@2 Timothy 2:22) is righteousness, which is the meaning of Melchisedec's name.
J.T.Jr. That is good, king of righteousness and king of peace.
A.R. Would the service of Melchisedec have man in mind?
J.T.Jr. Well, he comes in here to give Abraham the sense that he is approved of God. The bread and wine are brought in as heavenly food for our souls; that God is pleased with us as we get the victory over the world and seek the recovery of our brother. We should go to great lengths to recover a brother. It is the mysterious or secret side of the assembly that is in mind. Abraham is approved by God. Melchisedec appears here, but he is not publicly seen again, you might say, until these features come out in David and Solomon.
W.F.K. Abraham is satisfied with the blessing. He does not want anything from the king of Sodom.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; nor should we.
A.Pf. Is it because Lot is regarded as a righteous man that Abraham expends such energy in his recovery?
J.T.Jr. I suppose so. He is a brother, you know, even though he is a worldly man. He had become mixed up in the world and the most of his family was eventually lost in it.
C.W.M. He really gets no moral gain out of his recovery.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; he went back there again.
A.R. Why did Abraham give Melchisedec the tenth of all?
J.T.Jr. It would show that Melchisedec was greater. He ministered to Melchisedec, Levi being yet
{297}
in Abraham's loins, we are told in @Hebrews 7. It is to bring out the greatness of Melchisedec: "consider how great this personage was". I suppose it would suggest the greatness of Christ as coming into our position at the present time, but He will soon come in publicly in all His glory.
R.T.M. Is it the greatness of the priesthood of Melchisedec?
J.T.Jr. It is; the priesthood of Melchisedec is greater than the Aaronic priesthood. There is no question of intercession. It is a question of blessing entirely, the greatness of God's blessing to man.
D.P. Does the priesthood of Melchisedec relate to God's purpose?
J.T.Jr. I think it does. @Psalm 110:4 says, "Jehovah hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec". The public vindication of Christ is soon to come in. His glory will be seen on the earth and all shall acknowledge Him.
A.P.T. In @Hebrews 7 it says he was "assimilated to the Son of God".
J.T.Jr. I suppose that would mean that Melchisedec himself was not so great as Christ. He is assimilated to the Son of God. Melchisedec was a mysterious personage. Christ is the One who is in mind.
C.A.M. Whatever God gives, there is a return to Himself. A tenth of all is secured.
J.T.Jr. Well, now, when we come to chapter 18, you might say, three divine Persons are seen in relation to Abraham, in the three men who came to his tent. What is before them immediately is the judgment of Sodom and Gomorrah, but before that takes place they speak to Abraham of Isaac. Abraham is really being instructed in regard to what God has in His mind, and he is able, you might say, to shine in this position.
A.P.T. It is interesting to notice the extraordinary place Abraham has in verse 16. It says, "Abraham went
{298}
with them to conduct them". Is that not extraordinary?
J.T.Jr. Abraham shines in conducting these men. I suppose it suggests the importance of the three persons in Abraham's mind that he conducts them on their way. And so it says, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" verse 17. And we, too, want to be in what God is doing.
W.F.K. Does Abraham get an impression of true administration? "Will not the Judge of all the earth do right?" verse 25. Do we learn from God the way to do things?
J.T.Jr. I think we do, and I think that God's approval and His estimate of Abraham come out here. Abraham was really coming up to God's thoughts. He says, I know him. Then He speaks of Abraham's household, which is a very important matter, that they will do righteousness and justice. These are principles of administration, and Abraham is recognised in that light by God.
J.A.P. The word 'conduct' is used in @1 Timothy 3:15: "that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth". We are to know how to deal with evil.
J.T.Jr. Quite so, we need to know how to conduct ourselves. Abraham shines in this chapter; he is coming to God's thoughts about him.
W.F.K. Is he acting now as a priest? He intercedes for Sodom.
J.T.Jr. I think so. God is bringing out of Abraham what is in keeping with His own heart. Abraham is rising up to God's own thoughts about things.
T.E.H. That is what the Lord would look for in His disciples in @John 15. He disclosed to the 'friends' what was in His heart.
J.T.Jr. A friend is in the secret of things. So it is now a question of what God is doing at the present
{299}
time. He would not hide it from us. He would tell us about it.
A.P.T. He is called a friend of God (@2 Chronicles 20: 7). The footnote there indicates that it really might be rendered, 'who loved thee'.
J.T.Jr. Abraham shines here that we might take pattern from him. Jehovah says that he will command his house after him. The word is: "I know him that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice". It is not what Abraham is saying; it is what God is saying.
J.S. Would you regard him as a believer, fully established, at the plains of Mamre?
J.T.Jr. He brings out what the heart of God is. He says, "Far be it from thee to do so, to slay the righteous with the wicked, that the righteous should be as the wicked -- far be it from thee!" verse 25. He is bringing out God's own thoughts.
A.R. In verse 22 he remained yet standing before Jehovah.
J.T.Jr. Abraham knew God and he was bringing out God's own thoughts about conditions; that God was not going to slay the righteous with the wicked. "Will not the Judge of all the earth do right?" That is what Abraham is saying; he knows Jehovah as the Judge of all the earth.
R.W.S. Abraham is like God here. It says, "He will command his children ... to do righteousness and justice". But Abraham says, "Will not the Judge of all the earth do right?" He learned from God what righteousness is.
J.T.Jr. Yes; he learned righteousness and judgment from God Himself and that is what is needed in administrative matters. God says, in principle, I will make a great nation out of this man, but he will set out in himself the great principles of that nation.
{300}
T.E.H. May we fail, in this characteristic, in our meetings for care? We may let things slip by when they should be taken up, and so we may miss the blessing.
J.T.Jr. There was no thought in Abraham's mind of overlooking the wicked; it was a question of the righteous; that the righteous should not be destroyed.
T.N.W. What was mentioned as to the blessing is brought out in verse 19: "... in order that Jehovah may bring upon Abraham what he hath spoken of him".
J.T.Jr. What is in mind is that God might bring in this great nation of which He has spoken. Now just a word about the judgment of chapter 19: "And Jehovah rained on Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from Jehovah out of heaven", verse 24. It is from Jehovah out of heaven. It is an administrative matter, but a most solemn thing to consider; it is the execution of judgment on wicked persons. Sodom and Gomorrah were utterly destroyed. It points to what God is soon to do in the present order of things.
A.B.P. Would you say that it has a direct bearing on us, in that what we may not allow to go in our baptism, but continue to cling to, may be dealt with in a very serious way?
J.T.Jr. So that Lot was here in this city. He was difficultly saved. It points to many who are linked up with this world.
A.P.T. It says of Lot's wife that she looked back. Is that not a dangerous view to take?
J.T.Jr. The Lord tells us to remember Lot's wife. What a solemn word! That is for us -- that we may not look back.
A.R. We hear much about the atomic bomb, but God used fire and brimstone.
J.T.Jr. I suppose all that has happened recently only points to what God can do. In a sense God has judged things in these awful wars. He is not oblivious to the
{301}
wickedness that has been going on. But He is not yet openly entering into judgment in this way.
D.P. There is a word of comfort in @2 Peter 2:9: "The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of trial, and to keep the unjust to the day of judgment".
T.E.H. In the epistle that treats of the gospel, we have the allusion to heaven and the wrath of God being revealed upon all impiety, and unrighteousness of men holding the truth in unrighteousness. Is that helpful in relation to Sodom and Gomorrah?
J.T.Jr. It is not there against persons; it is against things. This type shows the final dealings of God in relation to the world, and so Sodom and Gomorrah are brought up continually in Scripture as examples. They were reduced to ashes and left to witness to the destruction of ungodly men.
A.N.W. Jude says they lie there as an example.
{302}
ADMINISTRATION (3)
@Genesis 25:5 - 11,19 - 23; @Genesis 27:28, 29, 37; @Genesis 35: 23 - 26; @Genesis 49:8 - 12, 16,22 - 27
J.T.Jr. We saw the last time we were together how God took up one family, and that is the point of view now in this subject, how God has that one family in mind and carries through with it. These chapters cover considerable ground, but salient points as to administration are suggested in the passages read. We see how Isaac stands in relation to the subject. Everything was committed to him by his father. It says, "And Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac". It is suggestive of the great truth: "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand", (@John 3:35). Thus the line runs through Isaac, not Ishmael. Then Jacob is taken up, and we see his origin in connection with Esau. We should note that the line runs through Jacob. His name means, supplanter and we need to see what that suggests. Then his name is changed to *Israel* which is the name of the nation that is connected with the government of things on the earth. Then we have Jacob and his twelve sons. Twelve is the administrative number and runs right through Scripture. And then the individual characteristics of the twelve are seen in Judah and Joseph especially, and also in Dan.
We might say a word for a moment in regard to Machpelah, because it alludes to the side of administration that has to do with those who have left this scene, having died in faith. We do not have any record of burials before Sarah's, and therefore the allusion to this reminds us of how the matter comes up immediately when it is a question of the family. We should see that that is an important side of things that was looked after right at the start of this family. Machpelah is the burial place of the saints. We can rest in the knowledge that our loved ones are all cared for, and that follows the
{303}
statement that everything is put into the hands of Isaac.
C.A.M. Is it your thought that burial is in view of the resurrection world? There is something buried there that belongs to another world?
J.T.Jr. I thought that. The Lord refers to the position of Abraham in @Luke 16, and He speaks of the care of the dead. He speaks of the angels carrying Lazarus. We have spoken about the angelic service, and we may be sure that what happens when the saints die is a very wonderful thing. The angels carried Lazarus into Abraham's bosom. So that those who fall asleep are cared for. We need have no more fears about them. It is a great administrative idea that death is in the hands of Christ. He has the keys of death and of hades.
A.P.T. All being put into Isaac's hands would connect with @John 3, where the Father commits all to the Son. Then what you are saying as to Machpelah would connect with @John 5.
J.T.Jr. They are all awaiting the voice of the Son of God. The Lord is in full charge of the matter. "Departure and being with Christ ... is very much better". The apostle says, "absent from the body and present with the Lord". Machpelah suggests all that; that all is taken care of. There is nothing left out in regard to those who have fallen asleep.
R.W.S. There is no blessing outside of the Son's realm, because it says: "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand. He that believes on the Son has life eternal, and he that is not subject to the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him", (@John 3:35,36).
J.T.Jr. The wrath of God would be alluded to in @Luke 16. The rich man is seen in suffering. The Lord shows us that the position for him is suffering. On the other hand, the bosom of Abraham suggests the thought of comfort and delight.
{304}
C.W.M. So that the Lord speaks of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob as living: "God is not God of the dead, but of the living", (@Matthew 22:32).
J.T.Jr. That is very interesting. He is the God of the living. Jacob says, in the end of this book, that Abraham and Sarah were buried in Machpelah, and also Isaac and Rebecca. He says further, "there I buried Leah". And that is where Jacob was buried. So that, as you say, God is God of the *living*. Machpelah suggests that line of things, that the saints who have fallen asleep are, in that way, in relation to God.
A.R. Chapter 23 gives us the location. It is "opposite to Mamre: that is Hebron, in the land of Canaan", verse 19. It is in relation to Hebron.
J.T.Jr. Quite so, it is connected with what is outside of the world, and it is purchased for a possession. It alludes to the way things have been secured through Christ. It is all in relation to those who have fallen asleep, that they are secure. At the outset of this family this great matter is looked after. There is nothing omitted in all that is to take place in this family.
C.N. Joseph, in Egypt, insists on his bones being taken up with the children of Israel. No doubt he had this same burying place in mind.
D.L.P. Would Abraham view Isaac as able to meet everything that might arise in the administration of affairs that were transmitted to him?
J.T.Jr. I think that is in mind. Everything is handed down. Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac. And things are handed down to us with a view that all is to be kept. Nothing is lost of what Abraham had. All is seen in connection with Isaac now.
A.N.W. It is evidently in that relation that Jehovah blessed Isaac: "And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his son Isaac", verse 11.
J.T.Jr. You mean that God came in signally after the death of Abraham to confirm Isaac?
{305}
A.N.W. Yes; I thought it was to help him in his administration.
R.W.S. Do you think there is some defection in the administration when Ishmael is found with Isaac and later when he appears at Abraham's burial?
J.T.Jr. The relatives usually turn up at the burials. You can hardly keep them out; in fact, they have a right there as these chapters would show, but then the principle of separation is clear.
A.B.P. Are the details which are recorded in chapter 23 important in linking on the idea of administration with the provision of a burying place? The place would not be accepted by Abraham as a gift; it must be purchased; the boundaries are clearly defined; it is secured in the presence of the sons of Heth and those that went in and out at the gate. Does all that emphasise that it is taken on as an administrative matter?
J.T.Jr. I think so. The title is clear. There is no question as to the title to the ground; the deed is clear. God has done that and we can rest in it, in regard to those who sleep in Jesus. It is a great thought to get into our souls. To understand much about the dead is beyond us naturally. But as we think of what Christ has done for them we can rest in that.
W.F.K. Is Isaac a type of Christ as the heavenly Man?
J.T.Jr. Yes, and everything is put into His hands. We have in John, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand". Isaac prefigures this. "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest", (@Genesis 22:2). It was a question of Isaac as being loved, and that is really the position in John's gospel. The Lord is there in that position -- in the Father's bosom -- and all things are in His hand, and especially in regard to the communication of things. Things are to go on in life. Isaac carried the thing forward in life to Jacob.
F.N.W. Is that amplified in the passage: "My sheep
{306}
hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me; and I give them life eternal; and they shall never perish, and no one shall seize them out of my hand. My Father who has given them to me is greater than all", (@John 10:27 - 29)?
J.T.Jr. That fits in here. It would connect also with Joseph as the shepherd.
A.Pf. Would you clarify the idea of the burial place. Is it like "Blessed the dead who die in the Lord", (@Revelation 14:13)?
J.T.Jr. Yes; that is the idea. There is security in it. There is to be no more fear in our hearts as to death.
A.A.T. We have referred to @John 3:35: "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand". At a previous meeting we spoke of the economy connected with that. Is that the same thought that you have in mind as to administration?
J.T.Jr. It is in the sense that we await the incoming of Christ for the fulfilment of all this as to Isaac. We are taking up administration as it came out in the ways of God. It is a question of the way government worked out. God took up Abraham to make a nation of him. God was working out His thoughts in government here. He was not governing directly yet, but He was moving on to that, and we have Isaac as the residence of everything which is passed down from Abraham. Everything is there in Isaac.
G.P. Herod had John the baptist beheaded but his disciples buried him.
J.T.Jr. The burial would show that he was taken care of. The brethren took care of Stephen. We take care of our dead too. Devout men carry the saint to his burial. It is a sight for heaven. Well, the Lord takes the matter over from that point in regard to the bodies of the saints. And so we have Michael disputing with Satan over the body of Moses. It shows what went on afterwards; that things were taken care of.
{307}
A.N.W. There is a beautiful word in @Romans 14: 9, "For to this end Christ has died and lived again, that he might rule over both dead and living".
R.W.S. Is there the same administrative power or government in Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and the sons? Do you look upon it as increased or diversified in any way?
J.T.Jr. I think it has not diminished. The thing is maintained on the level on which it was given to Abraham; that is, the promises and counsels were made to Abraham, and then they were confirmed to Isaac and then to Jacob. I think you see the working out of God's thoughts in government in the way the thing developed in Isaac, then in Jacob and then in his twelve sons.
C.N. Does chapter 26: 4 help in what you say? It says, "And I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and unto thy seed will I give all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth bless themselves".
J.T.Jr. Yes; God speaks now to Isaac about what is in His heart in connection with His counsels, and also as has been remarked, in chapter 25, God blessed Abraham's son Isaac. He is now confirming him, and Isaac has to stand on his own feet, and so it says that he dwelt at Beer-lahai-roi. Then we have his two sons, Jacob and Esau; and I think we should now consider what is in mind as to them. They have the same father and the same mother, but are very different.
C.F.E. Is the thought of expansion brought in here in the two sons of Isaac, and the two nations of which Jehovah speaks to Rebecca?
J.T.Jr. Well, I think it has in view our identification of what God is doing. There are two nations, but we need to identify the line of the testimony. That line is in Jacob, and we want to see what that means now. They both have the same father and the same mother. You might say. Why should there be a son like Esau? It says
{308}
that Rebecca loved Jacob. It does not say here that God loved Jacob, but it says that Rebecca loved him. She is really identified with God's work, because it comes out later that God loved Jacob. He loved him all the time, and it is for us to see what this means.
C.A.M. I suppose she got the secret from the Lord. What a wonderful thing it is to be in the secret with God!
J.T.Jr. I think that is the point. What secrets do we have in our souls about things relating to the testimony?
C.A.M. I suppose the truth is that there may be many amongst us of whom we may be wondering how matters may turn out with them, when we think of our inward soul exercise as to them.
J.T.Jr. Quite so.
C.A.M. God has the key to the matter, has He not?
J.T.Jr. Well, exactly, and the secret should be in our souls. It is a matter of what God is going to identify Himself with.
R.W.S. Would the discernment be more difficult in the case of Esau than with Ishmael? Esau had the same father and the same mother.
J.T.Jr. It is more difficult. There is the same parentage, but you have one kind of son in Jacob and you have another kind in Esau. What we have to judge is. What does it mean?
T.E.H. The prophetic word to Rebecca would help in making a distinction.
G.A.L. Would the struggle turn us to God?
J.T.Jr. There is *a* struggle, and it goes on a great deal of the time; and it comes out that Jacob's name means Supplanter. Israel means a Wrestler or a Prince. What is now in mind is to see what Jacob really is, and whether we are ready to take that on.
J.A.P. Is there a key in the thought of strength? It says, "And one people shall be stronger than the other
{309}
people", verse 23. Does that connect with @Romans 1:4, "... marked out Son of God in power"?
J.T.Jr. "One people shall be stronger than the other people, and the elder shall serve the younger". The strength lay in Jacob. The elder shall serve the younger, is sovereignty. It means that God is going to act in His own way, and we cannot go against that. We will be fighting against God if we try to set aside His sovereign movements. Before the boys had done anything, this was decided.
J.H.E. Paul had to learn that his strength was perfected in weakness (@2 Corinthians 12: 9) and that it is, "not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit", (@Zechariah 4:6).
J.T.Jr. Exactly, and that is what Jacob really came to, for *he* was weakened. God weakened him and changed his name to Israel. He was going through as knowing God. It is a spiritual matter. We come on to what is administrative as connected with a nation when we come to Israel. It is the name that goes through.
Question Are you linking this with the truth of @Romans 7?
J.T.Jr. It would be like that. It is a struggle against the flesh. Esau really represents the flesh. What is going to supplant it? What is going to get it out of the way? It is a spiritual matter to get the flesh out of the way.
J.S. Rebecca makes it a matter of prayer.
J.T.Jr. She is a wonderful type here of the assembly. We are not speaking of that now, although we will probably have to revert to it, because she is a wonderful type of assembly administration, but our thought now is to get the direct application here of what God is doing to establish a nation to govern things in this world.
C.N. Are we to learn to displace the first man and be ready for the second? Is that the teaching?
J.T.Jr. That is the idea. God's choice is a sovereign matter. God has chosen Christ. He has chosen us in
{310}
Christ, too. He has not chosen the flesh. The flesh is set aside.
C.N. "The first man out of the earth, made of dust; the second man, out of heaven", (@1 Corinthians 15:47).
A.P.T. True administration according to God will be seen later in this nation, will it not?
J.T.Jr. Exactly; God has not given that up. I think these chapters show how He is establishing the initial thoughts, and what was set up under David and Solomon really is the outcome. God did not divert from what He had in mind.
W.C.R. Is that why the names "of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel", are in the gates of the heavenly city?
J.T.Jr. Quite so. It comes out there. God's thoughts run right through to the end.
D.P. Would the personality of Jacob affect the public administration? Isaac had one personality and Jacob another. Jacob worked things out on moral lines. He would make things most practical for us.
J.T.Jr. I am sure he does. The practical side comes out in the intervening chapters which we have not time to read, but we know what the history was. In chapter 35 we have, "And the sons of Jacob were twelve". That position is arrived at. Then, finally, in chapter 37, one man is singled out of the whole family; that is, Joseph.
J.C. Rebecca said to Jacob, "On me be thy curse". She was in the secret with God. @Romans 7 involves being in secret with God.
J.T.Jr. It is a question of the struggle and seeing that the flesh is set aside in us. We learn how to govern ourselves and come under instruction, especially the instruction of the mother Rebecca suggests. Jacob hearkened to her; he was subject to her.
A.B.P. In @Hosea 12 it tells us that Jacob took his brother by the heel. Is it mentioned in a commendatory way there?
{311}
J.T.Jr. I think it is. He is supplanting Esau. We have to get the flesh out of the way.
A.B.P. In Genesis the naming of Jacob seems to suggest a readiness to pre-judge a matter when it breaks out. Behind it there had been a secret struggle. Rebecca knew about it and had the mind of God in relation to it. We can hardly judge of matters that break out until we know the underlying circumstances.
J.T.Jr. Well, it should be the exercise of Rebecca to tell her husband. We cannot be sure that she did not. If Isaac was acquainted with what was said to her he was not helped by it. He loved Esau because it suited his flesh; but he was recovered to the right position through his wife. The subjective condition amongst us may help to save the whole position.
T.E.H. It says in @Romans 7, "So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law". Does that mean that I become serviceable in my mind before I finally arrive at the administrative side of things?
J.T.Jr. Quite so. Isaac is now before us. It is a question of his communicating things to Jacob, but Jacob comes in in this chapter to show that God is moving sovereignly and He is making a selection. The elder shall serve the younger. He carries that principle through and nobody is going to change it.
A.P.T. The blessing really came through Isaac, although he did not want it to come that way.
J.T.Jr. It comes that way. Isaac had it, and he blessed Jacob. Think of what he made him! Think of what he says to Esau about him! He commits everything to Jacob. So he says to Esau, "I have made him lord over thee", (@Genesis 27:37). He could not change it.
R.W.S. "Also blessed he shall be". He does not change his mind at a time when we might think he would. "Blessed he shall be". Nothing can change it.
A.P.T. In incidents like this there may be the
{312}
possibility of diverting from God's administrative idea. It might be said. Look at what he did to Esau. That would be lack of spiritual vision on our part.
J.T.Jr. The thing to see is that Isaac blessed Jacob. He did it, and what he conveyed to Jacob remained.
J.H.E. Everything is 'Yea and Amen' in Christ.
A.N.W. It is striking how Isaac not only blessed Jacob, but he said, "Cursed be they that curse thee, and blessed be they that bless thee", verse 29. A further blessing comes on those that bless the Jacob element. While Esau shows strength, it is in a lawless way: "And it shall come to pass when thou rovest about, that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck", verse 40. The character of Esau's strength is lawlessness.
J.T.Jr. I think it is important to see that the blessing comes through Isaac in spite of his failure. What had been committed to him by Abraham is committed to Jacob. There is no doubt about it. He says, "I have made him lord". *I* have done it.
Question Did he do it instinctively or under the overruling hand of God?
J.T.Jr. You could not say it was not a spiritual matter, because Isaac is conveying something from God. He is doing it in a spiritual sense -- conveying something that is going to remain.
J.A.P. He did it by faith, according to @Hebrews 11.
J.T.Jr. He had the full idea in his mind of what God had conveyed to him.
A.B.P. God confirms the word, in part, through Balaam: "Blessed is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that curseth thee", (@Numbers 24:9).
J.T.Jr. The curse in verse 29 would show that it is positive; that persons may be on that line; that instead of coming into the blessing, they are cursing, and really that was Esau's line. It showed itself in Doeg and others; the way they would act in regard to the people of God.
{313}
J.G. Do we see the positive side working out when Jacob crossed his hands wittingly in blessing Ephraim and Manasseh?
J.T.Jr. That brings out another matter in regard to Jacob; that he was really greater than Joseph, and he was greater than Pharaoh. Jacob maintains what has been committed to him right through. It is the spiritual line. He crossed his hands.
A.R. Edom is still a hater.
J.T.Jr. It is a line of things that comes very close to us. It is the working of the flesh amongst us over against the sovereign line of what God has chosen. It is what flows out from fleshly feelings over against the sovereign movements of God amongst His people.
T.E.H. Would you say love makes way for administration? First Abraham loved Isaac, and then Jacob is loved. It seems to make way for administration.
J.T.Jr. That is a fine thought. Love is to operate in the family that God is choosing. That comes out in John's ministry. The kingdom is a love kingdom. It says of Solomon that Jehovah loved him. There is no kingdom like that amongst the nations at the present time but God had it in Israel, and He has it now in the assembly.
A.N.W. Paul, in the epistle to the Colossians, says, "... the kingdom of the Son of his love".
A.R. The line in John's epistles is that you either love or hate.
J.T.Jr. And Cain is brought in there.
C.N. There is a very reassuring word in @Genesis 28:4. The blessing of Isaac is repeated, and it says, "And may he give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee and to thy seed with thee, in order that thou mayest possess the land of thy sojourning, which God gave to Abraham!"
J.T.Jr. Yes, and Isaac's charge to Jacob fits in with the exercises of the present time in regard to marriages. Abraham had great consideration for the marital line.
{314}
Rebecca now brings it forward, and Isaac rises to it. He takes Jacob and charges him as to getting a wife and where she was to be found. He charges him about this important matter.
A.N.W. It really seems like a second blessing. It is a very beautiful word, "And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and said to him. Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan", (@Genesis 28:1).
J.T.Jr. It came in first in Abraham and then in Isaac. The heavenly line is to be maintained. Isaac has been alluded to as the heavenly man. We want to maintain things on the heavenly level. We are not to let them out of the family; God says, as it were, I want everything in the family.
C.N. Is administration further seen in verse 5? It says, "And Isaac sent away Jacob".
J.T.Jr. Quite so; you might say that is the way things work out if one is with God. The matter will originate with Him, and we will be subject, ready to be sent to the very place to which we should go.
W.F.K. When Isaac failed, through blindness, did Rebecca carry on the administration?
J.T.Jr. I think so; the thing is maintained in her, because she acts at once to offset what Satan was at. Satan is behind these things to try to interfere with what God is doing, and Rebecca meets the thing at once and moves in line with the love of God, for it says that she loved Jacob.
A.R. The father and mother were united in this matter.
J.T.Jr. Isaac comes to it. He is in his full spiritual senses now.
A.R. Mixed marriages can usually be attributed to failure in the parents.
J.T.Jr. I think it is lack of faith and lack of spiritual power in the house.
{315}
T.E.H. In @Daniel 2:49 it says, "And Daniel requested of the king, and he appointed Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego over the administration of the province of Babylon. And Daniel was in the gate of the king". If we are prepared to go through suffering as Daniel did, under the conditions that we face today, then we are prepared to be with him in the gate.
J.T.Jr. His name connects with Daniel Dan means Judge. It says in chapter 49:16, "Dan will judge his people". So the idea of judgment comes in with Dan and it shows up in Daniel. What a judge he was! He became president. His name means. God is judge.
A.P.T. Would Elimelech really be responsible for the wives that his sons took because he took them down to Moab? He and his wife went down there in a crisis. Is there something in that?
J.T.Jr. I think so. What happened? The sons never came back. They died. That is a sorrowful matter. Naomi came back empty. So it shows what might happen if we do not come under a charge. This idea of a charge is important. The Lord charged His disciples.
It means that something is conveyed to persons. He communicated something in charging them. That is really the whole idea in these men: Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Something is carried right down through each of them, and this truth as to marriage was to be maintained  in Israel.
G.A.L. Paul says to Timothy, "This charge, my child Timotheus, I commit to thee", (@1 Timothy 1:18).
A.N.W. Esau saw that Jacob had obeyed his father and mother. Young people nowadays arrive at an age when they think they need not obey their fathers and mothers any more. Here is a full-grown man who obeyed his father and mother in regard to this important matter.
R.D.G. Esau sees that and becomes an imitator but
{316}
only adds to his own confusion by marrying into the family of Ishmael.
J.T.Jr. Ishmael has twelve princes; he has his administrative line too. Persons may say, 'They look all right; Abraham is the father'. Isaac says, in effect, 'You go where I direct you'. It is a matter of a charge. This communication has come right down to us at the present time. It is to govern us as to marriage. These chapters lead us to the change of Jacob's name. Jacob gets his name changed to Israel, implying that he is a prince and a wrestler. What wrestlings we have had! They are going on all the time. The battle is on and Esau and that line of things is against us. It is a matter of wrestling; having power with God and with men. The administrative position comes before us immediately after the change of name in chapter 35. We have Jacob and the twelve.
A.B.P. Would Ishmael and his twelve princes, or dukes, represent a system having a form of godliness but denying its power?
J.T.Jr. I think it would; what the Lord had to do with. They said. We have Abraham for our father. Ishmael could say that.
A.B.P. It would be the system that the Galatians had to combat.
J.T.Jr. Wrong mothers; it is a legal system. All that came out in Jacob's family really is the result of struggle. The struggling that is going on amongst us should lead us to self-judgment. It should lead us to Judah's line and if Judah's line shows itself amongst us we will get right individually and help others to get right.
J.S. We are to acquire power on moral lines.
J.T.Jr. Quite so. The royal tribe is suggested in Judah, but what comes out in him before that is that he judged himself. He was ready to die for his brother. That is the true basis of government, that you are ready to die for your brother.
{317}
A.P.T. The flesh having any place will break down administration.
J.T.Jr. I am sure it will. There will be an exposure of evil feelings. How that showed itself against Joseph! Think of the evil feelings of his brethren against a brother who had a secret revelation from God as to what was going to take place.
A.P.T. God would help us to judge the flesh, so as not to interfere with the normal administrative side of the truth.
J.T.Jr. And to see where love is. It is a love line. It comes right through Abraham and now to Joseph Jacob loved Joseph We want to fix our view upon what Joseph represents, because he is lovable.
J.H.E. What help we will get from our great Lover! John says, "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us; and *we* ought for the brethren to lay down our lives", (@1 John 3:16).
J.T.Jr. One person is singled out of all the twelve *sons of* Jacob as being loved. That is what marks him. He is hated by his brethren on this account and when he begins to prophesy their hatred is still greater.
R.W.S. "These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph ..." (@Genesis 37:2).
J.T.Jr. We know that is Christ typically. We know that the Lord is alluded to here, and also the hard way that He came, going through sufferings; going through all the trials of His pathway, and being rejected. Having gone through that way He is exalted. But now at the present time, we need to see that what is being singled out by God is what is lovable. I mean that if we want to apply this at the present time and be in administrative matters, let us be lovable; let us not afflict anyone; let us not irritate the saints. We want to be lovable.
F.N.W. In @Revelation 21, where administration is seen in its glory, the city is described as the bride, the Lamb's wife. The love side runs right through.
{318}
A.R. Paul says that if we do not have love, we are nothing.
J.T.Jr. (@1 Corinthians 13) is a love chapter. The apostle is talking about himself, that if he does not have love, he has nothing. It is a question of what *I* have. If I do not have it, I am nothing. Joseph set out the principle of what was lovable.
E.E.H. It seems to be in Jacob's favour that he loved Joseph, as if his love was directed differently from Isaac's.
J.T.Jr. Jacob is on right lines.
A.R. Why are we so tested in our localities as to this matter?
J.T.Jr. I think it is because we are not judging ourselves. We may be thinking of the thing in others instead of judging ourselves. We need to see that we are expressing something; that there is something with us that is expressive of love.
A.P.T. In @Romans 13:8 it says, "He that loves another has fulfilled the law". In that way the thing has to come out in ourselves.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; the struggle is alluded to in @Romans 7. You might connect that with the first chapter we have read. If you go that way you begin to see that the love of God has been behind it all, in your heart, and you are moving now in relation to your brethren.
A.R. Galatians says, "For the whole law is fulfilled in one word, in Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself", chapter 5: 14.
W.F.K. Though Joseph's brethren hated him, yet he loved them.
J.T.Jr. Quite so, and he became the administrator in Egypt, which perhaps is the greatest thought as to administration that we have in Genesis. The book ends with Joseph as a type of Christ as Administrator. We are getting accustomed to that word now in the world,
{319}
but God had these thoughts long ago. He had the food matter under control so that everybody was fed. They had plenty of food in Egypt; there was no shortage, because Joseph was handling it.
C.A.M. And what made all the difference between then and now is that there was love. We cannot stress that too much. Joseph's system connects with the gospel by John. The great power and influence there was in the disciple whom Jesus loved. He could get on with his neighbour because he was closer to Christ than anybody else.
J.T.Jr. I think that we have to learn the hard way. Joseph had to learn the hard way, but he had love to bring him through it. He arrived at a point where he was made supreme; he was in charge of everything, and he was able for it. He was not only to be in the position, but he could fill it out.
S.J.M. David went down to help his brethren in the valley of Elah. They chided him, but they did not turn him back.
J.T.Jr. That is helpful, because his name means, *Beloved*. God's administrators are to be lovable people. They do not hurt people; they are to bring in good conditions, and plenty of food to eat.
A.P.T. The Lord Jesus says, "The Father loves the Son". It is the Father's settled disposition as to Christ; and then it says later, "On *this account* the Father loves me", (@John 10:17). He loved Him because He was lovable.
J.T.Jr. Our Administrator in heaven is the greatest expression of love Himself, and He is thinking of our needs, and of feeding us.
J.S. He has food for the whole world.
J.T.Jr. He has food for everybody. That is the greatest thought of administration in the book. Joseph has control and the king of Egypt says, in principle, Whatever he tells you to do, do it. Regulate yourself by
{320}
G.A.L. Joseph came under the control of his father, under the administration of love. Does it show that love is greater than administration?
J.T.Jr. It was what he was personally there, not what he was as administrator. The personal side came out, that he loved his brethren.
C.N. There is a very beautiful word in chapter 37: 15: "And a man found him, and behold, he was wandering in the country; and the man asked him, saying. What seekest thou? And he said, I am seeking my brethren".
J.T.Jr. What a thought that is! Seeking his brethren! Some think that they will move away from the brethren. They say that they are not coming back. They do not understand what they are saying or what they are leaving. They are leaving the brethren. Joseph sets out the true idea. He asks. Where are my brethren? I want to go to them.
J.A.P. It is said of Joseph, "From thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel", (@Genesis 49:24). Do you think that Peter takes on that idea from what the Lord said in @John 1:42: "Thou shalt be called Cephas (which interpreted is stone)"? In the end of the gospel he is commissioned to shepherd the sheep.
J.T.Jr. Yes, I think the stone suggests what is permanent. Love abides; it never fails.
R.W.S. The topmost stone in Peter's ministry is love. We have that long column of additions in @2 Peter 1:7 which ends with "... in brotherly love love". Paul, and John, too, finish with the topmost stone of love.
J.T.Jr. Along with this we have Judah, who comes in in the blessings of chapter 49. It shows that royalty is in mind, and what the royal line is; that God has royalty in His mind, and it comes out in this family that He has selected. There is no greater idea of royalty than what is seen related to Israel. I suppose much in the
{321}
world took character from that. We have had a wide selection of scriptures before us, but we arrive at the thought of royalty in Judah and of one man administration in Joseph One man is separated from his brethren.
W.F.K. Is administration seen in Dan also?
J.T.Jr. Dan carries the idea of judgment. What is greatly needed in administrative matters is judgment; our being able to segregate and distinguish matters which differ and not to mix them up. "Dan will judge his people", (@Genesis 49:16). We are to separate matters and judge them according to the law. I think Dan means that.
{322}
ADMINISTRATION (4)
@Exodus 3: 11 - 14; @Numbers 12: 1 - 10; @Exodus 7: 1 - 18
J.T. As the brethren finished with Joseph at the last reading on the subject of administration, we should now look at Moses, who affords a wide scope for us in the consideration of this subject. His work is very comprehensive, reaching on to the administration of our Lord Jesus Christ. It covers the Pentateuch except Genesis; that is. Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy. He does not personally enter into what is set out in Genesis. For brevity and conciseness it is thought we should consider what characterised Moses personally, and then what characterised him officially. Personally he was marked by administrative ability early. Fleeing Egypt he linked up with Jethro the priest of Midian and married one of his daughters. He took care of the sheep of Jethro. This was an administrative service which characterised his life. Many others of Israel were marked by this, such as David, pointing to the fact that administration lies in connection with persons. Moses brought the sheep, which are typical of persons, as remarked, to the backside of the desert, to the mountain of God, to Horeb, making way for the great field of administration which the mount of God suggests, including the unfolding of the law, which took place there, and the tabernacle.
The law, the tabernacle and the general ordering of the tribes of Israel are the great features of Moses- administrative services. Then we should further consider the extraordinary relation to God in which Moses is seen. Aaron is with him in this in measure, but not altogether. He is seen as Moses- prophet. The subject before us therefore involves direct representation of God and not simply an official person to do what he is told to do. Jehovah said to him, "See, I have made thee God to Pharaoh". Not a god but *God*, showing he had, as
{323}
we might say, divine prerogatives. The idea of prerogatives enters into the truth of administration, for God has prerogatives and they are seen in this remarkable setting as imparted to Moses. In representation he is God, and Aaron is his prophet, showing what a wide range of authority he had; and it was effective. We spoke of what he was as caring for Jethro's sheep and how faithful he was in that, and how he led them to the mountain of God, but now he is personally representative of God and as such is envied and opposed and persecuted. This is another side of our subject that is most important and it all points to the Lord Jesus Himself.
In his official capacity as representative of God and also personally, Moses is particularly honoured by the Spirit in @Numbers 12: "But the man Moses was very meek, above all men that were upon the face of the earth. Then Jehovah spoke suddenly to Moses, and to Aaron, and to Miriam, Come out ye three unto the tent of meeting. And they went out, they three. And Jehovah came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood at the entrance of the tent, and called Aaron and Miriam; and they both came forth. And he said. Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you, I Jehovah will make myself known to him in a vision, I will speak to him in a dream. Not so my servant Moses: he is faithful in all my house. Mouth to mouth do I speak to him openly, and not in riddles; and the form of Jehovah doth he behold. Why then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant, against Moses? And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against them, and he went away; and the cloud departed from off the tent. And behold, Miriam was leprous as snow", verses 3 - 10.
These great facts should be before us in view of the service of this great servant of God, and especially the peculiar honours and peculiar nearness to God into which he is called, having almost, we might say, divine
{324}
attributes. He was a man like ourselves, of course, but one specially favoured by God in the prerogatives given him, which no other man such as he had. He was very near to God and we are to learn what such nearness implies, how it centres in the Lord Jesus, and how the assembly is, above all, near to Christ -- the assembly of God in Christ Jesus.
I think what has been said will help us to understand, perhaps, what this great subject is as vested in such a man, that it all points to the Lord Jesus, and to ourselves as of the assembly as having part in it.
J.T.Jr. Would you say there is an advance in the subject from Joseph to Moses?
J.T. Quite, Joseph, I would say, is to be regarded in a family sense although in an administrative sense too. It is a very interesting comparison. Joseph more particularly represents the family line. Moses is a servant *par excellence* according to the passage in Numbers; but another thing is that he is made God to Pharaoh. Joseph says God had made him a father to Pharaoh, which would be relative. It fitted, however, with the great beneficial place he had in Egypt. He was a father to Pharaoh. But Moses was *God* to Pharaoh; not simply a god but *God*. I think that would help as to the distinction between the two positions; and then the abstract sense in which God is presented in the early part of Exodus, involving that Moses came to know God as no other had known Him; that is, in the abstract idea -- the "I AM" -- as he says in the passage read in chapter 3. When he inquires as to what he is to say to the people, the word is, "Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel: I AM hath sent me unto you", meaning that name of God in His Being: I AM; that is, He is eternally I AM, having no beginning or end. It is Deity. He is revealed in this way to Moses.
R.H. It says repeatedly in relation to Joseph that God was with him. Would "I AM" be more than that?
{325}
J.T. I think it would. He is brought into, you might say, eternal relations. We cannot say that deity is attributable to Moses, but it is very noticeable how he stands related to God in His infinite Being, and that he is operating in *that* light.
A.R. God came nearer to Moses than He did to Joseph He was in the bush here.
C.A.M. I think you called attention to the fact that Genesis culminates in a family setting. Would you say now that we are commencing another line of things in connection with the revelation of God?
J.T. That is a point for us to notice, that we are bordering on revelation. We are considering the area that God was operating in here, and how divine attributes are applicable to a man. I think that is the way the truth stands in Exodus.
C.A.M. It awakens in us the great idea of how great God is, as we start such a line as this.
J.T. And that He is not content to be alone. He is alone. God is one and needs not to be related to any one. In His essential being He is sufficient to Himself, but He is pleased to be related with His creatures, and Exodus brings out how that is.
A.P.T. Is it not interesting and helpful to notice that when Moses gets this revelation, he is thinking more of the people than of Pharaoh?
J.T. Yes; it is a primary thought that God would speak to His people, and then He would speak to Pharaoh, because Pharaoh affected His people adversely. It is in the light of that, I think, that we have Exodus. Pharaoh was favourable to Joseph, but this Pharaoh is not favourable to Moses, hence "Jehovah said to Moses, Pharaoh's heart is hardened", chapter 7: 14. What will God do in the presence of that? Pharaoh is adverse, but adverse in a hardened heart, and hence the extraordinary administrations in the ten plagues. They are extraordinarily suitable to the moment, tempered somewhat
{326}
with mercy, and yet so as to effect the complete destruction of Pharaoh, and, we might say, his kingdom, in principle. Administration is required in adverse circumstances which serve to bring out the resources that God had to meet every exigency. This came out in Moses¬ service in Egypt.
C.A.M. It is a marvellous thing that God, in His absolute greatness, should be using what is adverse to make Himself known. It seems to serve a purpose.
J.T. Well, I think we get light on these points, because we have to do with the world, and we have the word in view of it, "Behold then the goodness and severity of God", (@Romans 11:22). So that we need to have in mind that God is severe although He is good.
A.R. God makes Himself known as Jehovah in this chapter. He does not remain alone.
J.T. Yes; the title is used in Genesis, but God was not *known* thus in the Genesis period; it is in Exodus that He is known, and it points to the abstract idea of God. It is what He is abstractly, and then that He can come into concrete relations with His creatures.
A.N.W. As to the thought of God, the Lord refers to @Psalm 82 saying, "If he called *them* gods to whom the word of God came ...", (@John 10:35). Is the word 'gods' the same as Elohim?
J.T. Yes, as in @Genesis 1. It is also applied to man as in the place of judgment; to that extent they are representative of God; but not in the full sense of the word to Moses -- "I have made thee God to Pharaoh". The word there is evidently more than is implied in those to whom the word of God came and who are called gods. The latter would just simply mean that they were made representative of God as even a gifted man now is to some extent representative of God. It is the person to whom the word of God came. Of course, the word of God came to Moses, but that did not in itself constitute
{327}
him God. He is formally constituted God *to* Pharaoh by the direct word of God.
C.A.M. Is it the greatest way in which God could be represented by a man? You have said the head of a household is representative of God. Moses, as constituted God in this way, would be the greatest expression of representation.
J.T. Because it is put just as if he were a divine Person, and the passage in @Numbers 12 shows how important that is, because "the form of Jehovah doth he behold". Of no one else is that said. Many were prophets, but this is not said of any but Moses, that "the form of Jehovah doth he behold". Moses was unique in this way as a servant.
A.R. It says in @Exodus 3 that he was afraid to look at God. In what way would God be there? "Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look at God", (@Exodus 3:6).
J.T. He is coming on now. The following part of the chapter shows that God is bringing him on to higher levels; but still he had seen God in the bush.
J.A.P. What is the difference between Moses being God to Pharaoh, and what he was to the people of Israel?
J.T. He is never said to be God to them. It is a given power before Pharaoh. God is pleased often to elevate His people for immediate purposes; not for permanent or eternal reasons, but for the sake of advantage which a title may give to a man. Sometimes we hear of persons being elevated in rank because their governments would give them increased power. It would be to the advantage of the government that they might have that increased power; not simply to the advantage of the man. So Moses is made God; not a god, as was said, but God; so that he is directly God to Pharaoh, and does things in a divine way as God would do them, and what is in mind in reading so much of chapter 7 is to bring out the power of Moses- authority. His authority was represented in
{328}
the staff being turned into a serpent. Jehovah says, in verse 15, "take thy stand by the bank of the river in front of him; and take in thy hand the staff that was turned into a serpent. And say unto him, Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has sent me to thee, saying. Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness; but behold, hitherto thou hast not hearkened. Thus saith Jehovah: In this shalt thou know that I am Jehovah -- behold, I will smite with the staff that is in my hand". Notice this, Jehovah said "in my hand", whereas in truth the actual holding of the staff was in Moses- hand, showing how completely identified God was with His servant in order to afford His servant increased power so that the staff was now said to be in Jehovah's hand, and Pharaoh would have to reckon with Moses accordingly. Now notice the staff already is spoken of as Aaron's staff, whereas when we come to this verse, it is God's own staff in His own hand, whereas in truth it was Moses¬ staff and in Moses- hand; but Moses is completely identified with God.
J.T.Jr. This is a direct action by God in administration. He is acting directly through this man and especially through his hands. Over against this there is the public government of the world represented in Pharaoh as the king of Egypt.
J.T. I thought we should see how this all has been seen, in principle, during the past few years when our young brothers have morally represented God to the authorities. Our position corresponds, in that way, with the position Moses occupied before Pharaoh, except that now it is mysterious, and we are little or hardly known, whereas Moses was well known in Egypt. Then the government itself is representative of God, so that they are God's ministers to believers for good, as @Romans 13 says. That is to say, those who are directly engaged in government are said to be "God's minister to thee for good".
{329}
A.P.T. When the President asserts authority, he says, "... according to the authority vested in me". He gets his authority through the constitution and also the Congress, but it is really from God. He would not know that it was from God.
J.T. Perhaps not; perhaps some of those in authority may, but we know, and we pray for them. We know that he does represent God although he may not know. We shall see that when we come into the study of the truth of administration in the hands of Nebuchadnezzar or in the hands of the Romans, or the Greeks. It was passed over into those hands, and yet retained its divine authority. That is because they are "God's minister to thee for good", (@Romans 13:4).
A.P.T. Did Moses understand the position in this chapter?
J.T. He would understand it and act accordingly, because as we proceed to investigate what was said about the plagues, we see that Moses understood well enough what they meant, and he threatened Pharaoh with what they meant. And moreover he went from Pharaoh in great anger as if he were an equal with Pharaoh; as if Pharaoh had to do with him. Furthermore he became greater and greater in the eyes of the Egyptians, showing how authority becomes real in the hands of those who exercise it.
C.F.E. In chapter 3: 12 God says to Moses that they were to serve God upon the mountain, but in chapter 7: 16 the people are to serve Him in the wilderness. What are the two thoughts there as to service? The passages read, "When thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain", and then, "say unto him, Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has sent me to thee, saying. Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness".
J.T. I do not think there is very much difference. The service in both cases is to God, only one is in this
{330}
mountain which would denote a certain place taken on by God, whereas the other is just the wilderness. It is just a historical fact, but very important, that the service is to be carried on outside the realm of Egypt. They were not to serve in Egypt properly. They were to serve in the wilderness. God is saying, I will have My service, but I will have it where I please. Pharaoh is not going to force God into any disadvantage. If God wants the wilderness for service He will get it.
F.N.W. Is the culmination of Moses- greatness seen in chapter 11:3 It reads, "Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt". Does that link on with @Numbers 12 -- "The man Moses was very meek"?
J.T. I was thinking of that a moment ago. He increased in power, which would be expected if God made Moses God. He was not simply a servant, but he was made God to Pharaoh.
A.N.W. Then, too, he takes a very exalted stand in Deuteronomy. He says, "Jehovah thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me", chapter 18:15. That is very exalted, but perhaps it may not arise from the position we are speaking of here.
J.T. That is important and it is very good to bring it up now. It is the Lord Jesus Himself that is in view prophetically there.
R.H. Would this thought of his being God link representatively with the name Jesus in the beginning of Matthew?
J.T. Quite so. Hence, what we have said is true, that all our inquiry points to Christ. The retrospective view from Christ back to a person in earlier days greatly helps in the understanding of things.
J.T.Jr. Moses had to start right from the bottom, with everything against him; whereas Joseph came into a system of things more favourable. He was put right
{331}
into the top position. Everything in Egypt was against Moses and also unbelief in the Israelites.
F.H.L. Did they not both have a secret history that led to God taking them up? You referred to that at the outset.
J.T. Certainly Moses had a secret history, and, indeed, the history began when he was very young -- in the ark of bulrushes. He advanced gradually and so we are told how old he was when he actually entered on the service in this chapter. He was eighty years of age. Another matter to be considered in the administrative service of God is that a man should be mature.
A.N.W. We would like to hear you say more about administration in relation to shepherding. That seems to be new to me.
J.T. It is very obvious that it is a great part of it; the saints are in the hand of the Lord as a Shepherd, and Moses and Aaron represent that. God led them like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron. Jehovah led them like a flock. That is a most precious side of the administrative service of any of us. It is seen in David and, of course, in the Lord Himself, the great Shepherd of the sheep.
C.F.E. The shepherding side is the personal side.
J.T. Quite so. But still he is a servant in it too. Moses served his father-in-law in a personal way, but only to indicate what he could do and what he was qualifying for. He was to feed and shepherd God's flock.
S.W. One must qualify and measure up to a certain standard in personal service in order to be fitted for public service.
J.T. So we are hopeful in regard to all the young brothers that are coming in from the forces and camps, that God will take them on, and we are hoping that they are ready for it, because there is great need for them. And so it is that all the sons of Jacob had that training.
{332}
You will all remember how Joseph selected five out of the whole number, and these were to appear before Pharaoh, and that is exactly what is going to happen now in the brethren serving in the forces. They are to appear before Pharaoh; that is, before the Lord as to the kind of service they are going to continue in, and the point that is made is, that the five sons of Jacob that Joseph chose to present to Pharaoh were shepherds. They were told to tell Pharaoh that they were shepherds, and that they had been always occupied with cattle. That was their occupation. Pharaoh says, "What is your occupation?" Joseph told them to say, when Pharaoh used these words, that they were shepherds; that their occupation was with cattle; and surely it was that they should continue in that; and hence although the Egyptians abominated cattle, yet Pharaoh said, 'I have cattle', showing what a mixture there was even in Egypt. When the question of occupation came up the Hebrews were not in reproach, because Pharaoh had cattle. He said, 'I can use them' and he did use them; and I believe that is what is going to happen. The brethren who have been engaged in military service are being trained, and now the Lord is going to continue that, only in another sense. It is another kind of thing; that is to say, to look after the saints.
A.R. Paul speaks of shepherding the assembly of God in @Acts 20.
J.T. That shows how the military side is turned into service in the younger men, to look after the saints. They are to be elders. There are two words used for eldership. One is because the man is old and experienced, and another is that he is able to superintend. It is important to know how to superintend even though it be a small matter. The idea of a bishop is one who does that.
R.H. Would care for the church of God be shepherding?
{333}
J.T. That is what I was thinking. Eldership does not so much convey skill or authority as the word for bishop does. The word for bishop represents the idea of a superintendent; one who can look after others and tell them what to do. He is not to rule over them, but to tell them what to do, and how it is to be done well.
C.A.M. When you think of the saints as sheep and the flock of God, would it be right to say you are thinking of them in a suffering character? Moses had a lot to do with them in a military way too.
J.T. The military side is in Numbers. Over six hundred thousand of them became soldiers. It was a big army and Moses was commander of all of them, but they were segregated and governed according to the principle of Numbers. It was a question of getting things right, teaching Ephraim to walk, to maintain military order and to serve God.
A.N.W. Do I understand we are not to confine our administration to the collective assembly position, but it also devolves upon us as individuals?
J.T. I think so; wherever the work is to be done. "Whatever thy hand findeth to do, do with thy might", (@Ecclesiastes 9:10). We sometimes have to come down to small things; not always standing on our dignity as elders or bishops We do work that needs to be done. And so whatever came to his hand, Paul would do, even if it were gathering sticks to make a fire.
D.P. How do you reconcile Moses caring for the sheep with his authority in dealing with Pharaoh?
J.T. Well, I think we have been dealing with that in measure. If Moses is made God to Pharaoh, well then he will deal with Pharaoh as God, and so we have severity in the ten plagues. It is said, as we have already alluded to it in verse 17 of chapter 7: "Thus saith Jehovah: In this shalt thou know that I am Jehovah -- behold, I will smite with the staff that is in my hand upon the water which is in the river, and it shall be
{334}
turned into blood. And the fish that is in the river shall die; and the river shall stink; and the Egyptians shall loathe to drink the water out of the river. And Jehovah said to Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take thy staff" (we are coming down to a lower level now than Moses, it is Aaron) "and stretch out thy hand upon the waters of the Egyptians -- upon their streams, upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their reservoirs of water, that they may become blood; and there shall be blood throughout the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood and in vessels of stone. And Moses and Aaron did so, as Jehovah had commanded; and he lifted up the staff, and smote the waters that were in the river before the eyes of Pharaoh, and before the eyes of his bondmen; and all the waters that were in the river were turned into blood. And the fish that was in the river died; and the river stank; and the Egyptians could not drink the water of the river; and the blood was throughout the land of Egypt", verses 17 - 21. You can see the difference there between the service of Moses and Aaron against Pharaoh, and how Moses treated the sheep. It was a real thing. Moses was really God in that sense. He was constituted God to Pharaoh and acted against him, and eventually Pharaoh was destroyed. The severity was gradual.
S.W. Would not Moses leading the sheep to Horeb be a type of the assembly coming under administration?
J.T. I would think that. The children of Israel were constituted the assembly, typically, in Numbers. Numbers is the great book for the order of service in the tribes. They were segregated into four groups of three under leaders. There is a great point made of leadership in Numbers, and then, too, priesthood in Eleazar, because he represents the great idea of priest. It was not only in his father, but spiritually he represents the great idea of priest in the assembly. It is the grace of the Lord in acting amongst us. And the book of Numbers
{335}
runs right on to the military side first set up under four leaders, in the South, and West, and North and East. And then there is the service of the Levites, which is the service of God in the sense of hard work; not simply military, but hard work, looking after the things that relate to the tabernacle. All that is administrative, but under Aaron or Eleazar. Eleazar was "prince of the princes of the Levites".
R.H. How does this matter of the plagues work out now? Is it one of testimony now against the world?
J.T. I think so. You will notice that there is a certain element of grace seen throughout until the hardening of Pharaoh becomes unbearable, refusing to let the people go and asserting his rights over against God's rights; God is against that, and He uses Moses against it. It is said that Moses "went out from Pharaoh in a glowing anger", chapter 11:8, showing that he was advancing in power against the evil.
C.A.M. Do you look at all this as going on amongst the saints in view of their leaving this world?
J.T. Well, that is a good suggestion. "There shall not a hoof be left behind", so that when we baptise our children, that is in mind. We are not leaving one of them behind; they all are to go out.
R.H. It speaks in the Psalms of the effect of these signs on the people and I wondered if that might be the case now. The administration of Christ amongst us and our judgment of the world would be in view of the salvation of the saints.
J.T. That would all be in mind. We begin with baptism, and it is all in view of our going out of the world. Presently we shall be taken up to meet the Lord in the air, to complete supremacy, and come out in the coming world, because our testimony is not ended in this world. It is here, but it is in the future world too -- the world to come. We shall administer there as well.
{336}
J.T.Jr. The character of the judgment is changed in Exodus over against what we have had in Genesis. We had the flood, which was one act, and then the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, which was also one act. Here it is a protracted idea; the lengthening out of the plagues. Is there a change in that way which might correspond with what is happening in our times?
J.T. I think it is tempered with grace. We shall see that in the examination of the plagues; they are tempered with grace. God is patient and gracious, even to the Egyptians who took sides against Pharaoh.
A.N.W. "He that feared the word of Jehovah among the bondmen of Pharaoh made his bondmen and his cattle flee into the houses", chapter 9:20.
J.T. That is good. I am glad you brought it up, showing how God's government is now tempered with grace and mercy. It is not peremptory. When the people were to go into Canaan, the Canaanites were to be destroyed. Joshua was given a mission of destruction, but under Moses it was not that, and under David it was subjugation. The time for destruction really has not come.
F.S.C. There never was any hope for Pharaoh, was there?
J.T. Well, he hardened his heart. That is the definite statement of Jehovah in chapter 7:14. "And Jehovah said to Moses, Pharaoh's heart is hardened: he refuseth to let the people go". That is a fixed matter, and God is dealing with him from that point onward, but at the same time all is tempered with mercy, because something of God is going on in the Egyptians; that is shown in the very beginning of Exodus. There was something going on in Pharaoh's daughter.
E.E.H. In what way does the staff enter into assembly administration today?
J.T. It is a symbol of authority, but it was what Moses *had*, you know. That is. God takes up whatever
{337}
marks us according to what we are constituted governmentally. Whatever marks us. God says, I will use that but I will use it in My own way. And so the staff is changed into a serpent, but it is changed back into what it used to be; showing the change is in Moses. The serpent is changed back into a staff again. The man Moses is the great servant; the great shepherd. It is the product of what comes out of God's discipline in the saints. We come to a *man*: "For God is one, and the mediator of God and men one, the man Christ Jesus", (@1 Timothy 2:5).
A.R. Did Paul have the right to use a staff?
J.T. He hesitated to use it, but he said he would come. "What will ye? that I come to you with a rod; or in love, and in a spirit of meekness?" (@1 Corinthians 4:21). That is what he asked the Corinthians and the government of God requires that the rod must be used.
W.W.M. It says in Romans "For the scripture says to Pharaoh, For this very thing I have raised thee up from amongst men, that I might thus shew in thee my power, and so that my name should be declared in all the earth. So then, to whom he will he shews mercy, and whom he will he hardens", chapter 9: 17, 18. So that what is adverse gives God an opportunity for His name being owned in all the earth.
J.T. That is good. What you have quoted is typical language transferred into New Testament language. We are at home in our own language. It is very good, too, to see how Romans develops us from the hardest features as set out in the flesh into the most lovely spiritual features in chapter 12.
A.R. I was wondering if Mr. Darby's ministry, in principle, overthrew the world.
J.T. Well, quite so. I suppose the apostolic ministry did that at the beginning of Christianity. It broke down the world. It was a question of God in the apostles, but we have to leave that for we shall hope to have some
{338}
readings in the New Testament. We will get into our own language and our own ways there. The apostolic epistles are the final word in everything. The gospels are not final. The final word in everything is the apostolic epistles. You might say Paul's word is final everywhere, for it is through him the word of God is completed. It is the completion of the word of God. So that we come down to our own apostles. "Your apostles" they are called in Peter, and we feel when we are dealing with them that we are at home, we understand the language.
A.P.T. The Lord seems to give great stress to Moses: "But if ye do not believe his writings, how shall ye believe my words?" (@John 5:47). The Lord supports his ministry.
J.T. That is good and shows pretty much what we are dealing with; how Moses was constituted God. The Lord measures Moses- writings with His own; in fact, putting Moses- writings above His own, which is remarkable; as if God would do that for us; put words into our mouths for a purpose even maybe for a little while to accomplish something. We might have a brother help us and the Lord may remove him. I mean to say that He is sovereign in what disposition He makes of us; He uses one after another.
F.H.L. "For he persevered, as seeing him who is invisible", (@Hebrews 11:27). Is that coming to light from this point on?
J.T. "Seeing him who is invisible". That is a good point; so that it is a question of seeing God; and in a way we see God in Christ and we see God in one another, because we are enjoined, "Be ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children, and walk in love, even as the Christ loved us".
F.N.W. Is the greatness of Moses carried forward in the latter part of Exodus? Aaron seems to drop out of the picture and Moses does all the speaking.
J.T. When we consider Deuteronomy we will see
{339}
more of that. At our next reading we should come to Deuteronomy and we will come to eulogy in the last chapter.
A.R. Had you something to say about @Numbers 12?
J.T. We cannot comment on that now. The thought will be to get on into Deuteronomy as we see how Exodus, Numbers and Leviticus work out; but Deuteronomy is final. We see how Moses places the tribes; how he writes his song before he dies, and when he is about to die he is as strong as he was when he was young: "his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated". We can all reckon on the extended mercy of God in our circumstances if we are needed; and he was needed. Aaron lived one hundred and twenty-three years, but he is not said to have retained freshness and energy in his old age as Moses did.
{340}
ADMINISTRATION (5)
@Exodus 28: 1 - 26; @Exodus 25:1 - 9; @Deuteronomy 33: 1 - 5; @Deuteronomy 34: 1 - 12
J.T. In further consideration of the subject of administration we should look at Moses as administering the law, his building of the tabernacle, his blessing of the tribes, and, finally, what may be called the eulogy of Moses by the Spirit in the last chapter of Deuteronomy. Reference was made at our previous reading to @Numbers 12, and it was suggested that something further might be said as to it. It belongs to the section in our subject that is personal. "The man Moses" comes before us and this brings up the whole question of manhood, for he was a type of Christ. Moses, like David, was, in measure, a man after God's own heart who did all His will. And we are reminded by the facts recorded that he was envied, which is a common thing where a man is being used of God. The instruction for those of us who are in the service in any way would be that we should follow the example of Moses, who was meek and lowly, reminding us of the Lord Jesus who said, "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and *I* will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me; for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest to your souls", (@Matthew 11:28,29). So that an administrator in the things of God has in Moses an example that points to the Lord Jesus, as in all such persons. Every one of them converges on the Lord Jesus.
J.A.P. In @Hebrews 3 we have Moses as faithful in all God's house, the reference being to @Numbers 12.
J.T. Moses is brought in there by way of contrast. He was a servant in God's house but Christ is seen as *Son* over God's house. I think that is the distinction that should be made on that point, because Hebrews is contrast, even if it be Moses. It alludes, as you say, to this chapter of Numbers, which brings out the
{341}
character of the man and how great he was as to his office, so that no prophet compared with him. He beheld the form of Jehovah. Jehovah says, "the form of Jehovah doth he behold", (@Numbers 12:8). This enlarges on what we had as to Moses being constituted God to Pharaoh. It brings out how personally qualified he was as a man.
J.T.Jr. Does meekness need to be understood also in relation to what is said of him as going out from Pharaoh in a glowing anger?
J.T. It reminds you a little of the expression 'the wrath of the Lamb' in Revelation. This is a remarkable phrase, because the idea of a lamb is not wrath, it is meekness. But what need there is for wrath in the book of Revelation, for the Lord will be stirred up as the Lion of the tribe of Judah, and His wrath comes!
A.Macd. Does that fit in with the Lord's entry into Jerusalem, meek, and mounted upon an ass, and then His entry into the temple and His zeal for Jehovah there?
J.T. Yes; at that time He made a scourge of cords and cast all the sellers of oxen and sheep and doves and the money changers out of the temple, showing how the Lord can turn from meekness to wrath. Any one of us who is in the service ought to learn to turn to indignation if necessary. If there is some conduct that is obnoxious to heaven, we should be indignant, as the apostle says to the Corinthians, "but what vengeance ...", (@2 Corinthians 7:11). He speaks of their vengeance in executing judgment on the incestuous man; and yet that man was restored, showing how wrath in that sense is essential and useful in bringing about repentance.
R.H. Would shepherding with an iron rod be a similar idea?
J.T. Just so.
L.V.D. God speaks of Moses as being faithful in all His house. Both qualities would come in, meekness, and indignation to those ignoring the rights of God.
{342}
J.T. So Moses says, "He that is for Jehovah, let him come to me. And all the sons of Levi gathered to him", (@Exodus 32:26). Then there was a heavy slaughter. That conveys the idea. He was faithful in all God's house, even to severity.
R.H. God is prepared to defend a meek man.
J.T. Is it not comforting that God defends a man who is like Himself, who corresponds to Christ?
A.R. This chapter is a warning to all of us as to how we speak about the Lord's servants.
J.T. Just so.
F.H.L. Meekness is one of the great features of the kingdom, according to Matthew. The Lord was operating in those qualified to inherit the earth.
J.T. And it is in that gospel that He said of Himself, "I am meek and lowly in heart", (@Matthew 11:29). That section of Matthew is the turning point in the Lord's history and ministry on earth. It is where He was rejected; therefore He had recourse to what should happen. "Woe to thee, Chorazin! woe to thee Bethsaida! for if the works of power which have taken place in you, had taken place in Tyre and Sidon, they had long ago repented in sackcloth and ashes", chapter 11:21; this shows, that at that point, the Lord being rejected. He asserted the righteous judgment of God, and at the same time, in the same section. He asserts His own meekness, saying, "I am meek and lowly in heart". He is the Centre of everything there as always. So He opens up to His Father: "At that time, Jesus answering said, I praise thee". He is speaking to His Father as if there were a secret voice that He had heard. "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes. Yea, Father, for thus has it been well-pleasing in thy sight. All things have been delivered to me by my Father", verses 25 - 27. That is, He is beginning over again, but He is beginning in
{343}
meekness and at the same time He asserts the kingdom throughout chapter 12, which follows; "and behold, more than Jonas is here", verse 41. This means there was power there in the kingdom. All that is linked up with a meek man.
R.H. In @2 Corinthians 10, the apostle entreats the saints by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, and then goes on to say that he was ready to avenge all disobedience when their obedience was fulfilled.
J.T. That is a good scripture to bring in here.
T.E.H. Timothy is exhorted: "In meekness setting right those who oppose ..." It is to be done in meekness.
J.T. Just so.
A.A.T. When there was a personal attack on Moses, he was very meek, but in dealing with the golden calf his anger burned.
J.T. Three thousand were slain at that time. The sons of Levi came to Moses¬ side and defended the rights of God, and hence the great judgment executed.
R.H. In verse 4 of @Numbers 12 it says, "Then Jehovah spoke suddenly to Moses, and to Aaron, and to Miriam".
J.T. Suddenly is another word to be noted. It is found also in Luke. "And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host", chapter 2:13. God was acting urgently when the need was there and when His pleasure was involved. And so @Luke 24 says, "two men suddenly stood by them in shining raiment", verse 4. These two men came suddenly on the scene to assert the resurrection of Christ to the women who were there. It is therefore a question of being urgent when urgency is needed. And so here, Jehovah called these three out suddenly. He was going to execute judgment on Miriam. It was a question of a sister and two brothers. They were three members of one family; two of them opposed in envy against the other, showing how
{344}
natural relationships often intrude into the things of God. The natural link did not save them from being opposed.
W.W.M. Would you say that the forty years¬ experience Moses had in the wilderness would have brought about his meekness, because when he started out he was not so meek? Between the time he slew the Egyptian and the time Jehovah spoke to him at the mount of God forty years had elapsed.
J.T. Yes, indeed; showing that there was progress with Moses through the circumstances of the forty years. It should be a concern to us all the time as to whether or not we are progressing. It is not how we are progressing in public matters, but how we are progressing in the service of God.
A.R. God must have been near to Moses. He says, "Mouth to mouth do I speak to him openly", (@Numbers 12:8).
J.T. This would show the intimacy there was between God and His servant. John, the beloved disciple, uses that expression, saying, "... not with paper and ink; but ... mouth to mouth"; meaning that the relations between him and the one to whom he wrote were very close, as remarked. Such proximity to one another is proper to Christians in holy fellowship in such meetings as these. It is what we have come to. It really amounts to what is said in (@Hebrews 12:22): "but ye have come to mount Zion; and to the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem; and to myriads of angels, the universal gathering; and to the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven". The dignity of the brethren is displayed at these meetings. What happy seasons these are and they should be so because of the quality of the persons present.
A.I. Would "mouth to mouth" involve the service of God?
J.T. I think so. We are speaking to one another of the things of God. There are two things; we speak to
{345}
God and we speak to one another. We are speaking to one another now and it is a question of the kind of mouths we have, because, in this same book we have, "Who gave man a mouth?" How attractive it is according to God! Man is His masterpiece in creation, and the organ of speech for communication one to another is remarkable. The conversational idea evidently began with Paul and those with him at Troas and it was after they had broken bread, @Acts 20:11. Before they broke bread, Paul discoursed to them, which is a different thought.
J.T.Jr. Would this chapter show how God dislikes any interference in His administration or with that of the assembly?
J.T. How often we have had persons among us taking sides with those under discipline, thus disregarding assembly discipline. It is one of the most painful things we have to contend with and it promotes ill feeling and even division in the households of the saints. So that God is assertive of His rights in such matters, if anyone interferes with His administrative discipline. It is not uncommon that someone thinks he loves more than all the brethren, whereas he is not loving at all in disregarding the administrative righteousness of God in discipline.
R.H. The attack against Moses takes the form of what is personal. It is not in connection with a principle; it is in connection with the Ethiopian woman which Moses had married.
J.T. No doubt alluding to who she was, as if Moses did not have a right to marry whom he pleased. The Lord is defending that, and it widens out to the brethren as under reproach. The Lord would defend us, especially when we are under reproach in the Lord.
Rem. The root of the attack on Moses seems to have been jealousy of his authority.
J.T. Quite so. No doubt there was a bit of pride in Miriam that was hurt because she should have such a
{346}
sister-in-law as the Ethiopian woman, and Aaron shares in this same sentiment. How easily this sort of thing comes up!
R.D.G. Would it seem evident that Miriam was to blame for it? Aaron is not rebuked as she was.
J.T. The evil of pride was in her, but both Aaron and she were in it together. *They* spoke against Moses.
R.H. Would it be right to link this with a condition in a locality that we might be inclined to discredit? The Ethiopian woman had to be recognised as the wife of Moses.
J.T. Quite so. If it is a locality where the brethren are poor and there is no distinction after the flesh, we may be under reproach because of that; and generally the saints are of that class, because @1 Corinthians 1: 26 contemplates this: "consider your calling, brethren, that there are not many according to flesh, not many high-born" Then a list of things is given, each of which would bring us under reproach, in that sense.
A.N.W. It is interesting that God takes the occasion of the attack on Moses to bring out his faithfulness, "he is faithful in all my house".
J.T. "Why then were ye not afraid ... ?" (@Numbers 12:8). God brings that out; how readily we speak against each other and especially in regard to servants that are prominent!
F.S.C. It would seem as if it were an old matter. They said, "Has he not spoken also to us?"
J.T. Yes, and they were assuming to be on the same level as the minister and to some extent they were, because the three are put together in the minor prophets; and the three were engaged in the service of God, and in a certain sense they had a status in the service, but they were not on the same level as Moses in God's account, showing there are grades in God's service, which is an important matter.
{347}
Now, we should consider the law in @Exodus 20. There is a point which we have often noticed, but it is important that it should be noticed now, because, in this chapter it is a question of God's rights in love. There are persons who love Him and He is speaking about them. The saints come under God's eye, because they love Him. "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha", (@1 Corinthians 16:22), which means accursed at the Lord's coming. This is a solemn matter but Jehovah is able to say here, "... shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments", (@Exodus 20:6). It is not those that *should* love Him, but those who *do*, showing there are those that love God whom we might not have noticed. He has them in mind in making this royal law, which it is called, and of which Moses himself would say as to it: "From his right hand went forth a law of fire for them. Yea, he loveth the peoples, all his saints are in thy hand, and they sit down at thy feet; each receiveth of thy words", (@Deuteronomy 33:2,3). It is very beautiful that Moses is able to speak thus.
R.H. Deuteronomy refers to "the myriads of the sanctuary" and Exodus to "thousands of them that love me" . What would be the link there?
J.T. I think Deuteronomy's reference is fuller and more abstract and refers to the manner in which God came. The allusion is to the holy myriads and it is God's love for the people, not their love for Him as in Exodus. Deuteronomy therefore contemplates in this part of the book, the work of God as based on the truth of the brazen serpent as set out in the book of Numbers. The brazen serpent contemplates the possibility of the work of God, "What hath God wrought!" (@Numbers 23:23). Deuteronomy is the work of God; Deuteronomy is to bring out what God hath wrought. That is, in this sense, the only thing worth speaking of.
{348}
C.N. So in @Deuteronomy 33:4 it is a question of "the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob".
J.T. Yes; that is the law of the inheritance; how valuable it is! And so the "royal law", as James calls it. Our chapter in Deuteronomy is based on the work of God; what God has wrought; whereas in Exodus and Numbers a larger number is contemplated. There were probably two million people in the whole congregation, but they were not all the subjects of the work of God. And so it says in the New Testament, "For not all are Israel which are of Israel", (@Romans 9:6), showing, I think, that those who are really Israelites are those that are wrought in by the Spirit of God and they only will be taken account of. That is all God will have eventually.
A.R. Dan leaps out of Bashan according to Deuteronomy, whereas in @Genesis 49:17 he is an attacker. In Genesis he represents antichrist.
J.T. In Genesis Dan is an adder by the way and bites the horse's heels and the rider falls backwards. That would be Dan in a bad sense whence antichrist comes, showing the sort of thing that will eventually rise up, but it will be overcome, and the real Israel will come to light. The real Israel would be what is set out in the tribes in this chapter. In verse 22, it says, "And of Dan he said, Dan is a young lion; he shall spring forth from Bashan". Here, it is the work of God that is viewed in Dan, not the antichrist as in @Genesis 49, where his father speaks of him. This is the work of God. "At this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought!" God is entitled to speak only of that.
E.E.H. How does the giving of the law in @Exodus 20 fit in with the idea of administration? Is it intended for regulation?
J.T. I was thinking that. The law and its result, in a responsible sense, are contemplated in the whole chapter. "And Jehovah said to Moses, Thus shalt thou
{349}
say to the children of Israel: Ye have seen that I have spoken with you from the heavens. Ye shall not make beside me gods of silver, and ye shall not make to you gods of gold. An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me, and shalt sacrifice on it thy burnt-offerings, and thy peace-offerings, thy sheep and thine oxen: in all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee. And if thou make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone; for if thou lift up thy sharp tool upon it, thou hast profaned it. Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon", verses 22 - 26. This paragraph is the result, in the mind of God, in the Israel of responsibility (which is the Israel of the Old Testament), and the Israel to whom Christ came, and the Israel that is being set up according to Deuteronomy, presently. But @Exodus 20 refers to the Israel that was; the responsible Israel, and what God brings out of it. He discriminates between the altar of earth (what we must have or there can be no worship at all) and the altar of stone, which is Christ risen. This means that the service of God can go on in a low or shallow condition amongst the saints; whereas if there is an altar of stone the highest level of worship would be reached. But if you do not have the altar of stone, you can carry on the worship of God on the altar of earth, showing how considerate God is that we might all be in fellowship, because the very youngest is in fellowship (if he is in it) as well as the eldest.
C.A.M. When we bring God into our administrative matters it would result in this answer to God's heart in sacrifice in some measure.
J.T. I think so. God is very considerate of us. We have a goodly number here today, but there is a great variety, and we are graded from the shallowest or weakest up to the most spiritual, so that the instruction here would include all. All are carried on in fellowship
{350}
although only some can worship at the altar of stone, but all have the status of worshippers according to what we have here, even if it is only the altar of earth.
S.W. In @Exodus 20:21, it says, "And the people stood afar off, and Moses drew near to the obscurity where God was". Moses was made conscious of his ability to stand before God personally in that way.
J.T. Quite so; all is based on what we have already said as to what he was personally. Then later in chapter 24: 2, Moses alone was to come near; and then in verse 12, Jehovah says, "Come up to me into the mountain, and be there". It is in this position that he received the instructions as to the tabernacle. That is where he learned God. God came out in all His administrative services. Moses knew how to stand in His presence.
S.W. God would have us to be conscious of this fact.
J.T. "Moses and Aaron among his priests". That is, Moses was a priest as much as Aaron and more, so that he had a right to go into the presence of God at any time. According to @Numbers 7 he went in to speak to God but God spoke to him, showing that He changed the matter. God spoke to him first which brings out the gracious feelings that God had toward Moses in the position He had given him.
C.N. Would you say a little more about these two altars? One seems to be compulsory and the other optional. In verse 24, it says, "An altar of earth *shah* thou make unto me", and then in verse 25, "And thou make me an altar of stone".
J.T. All that is very good. We have already touched on it a little. The compulsory side refers to the humanity of Christ; even though we may not understand much as to His deity we must have the altar of earth; whereas in the second passage, the 'if' requires that we know Him risen from the dead, and as the Son of God -- "marked out Son of God in power, according to the
{351}
Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead", (@Romans 1:4). These two altars show how the truth stands as to our worship and how the feeblest are recognised. We are distinguishing between two altars, but both together cover very many genuine Christians. All have a right to worship according to the first requirement. If they do not have a right to it they are not worshippers at all. Worshippers are genuine Christians. They are recognised as worshippers, but the'if in relation to the second altar brings in those who are advanced in the truth. In the use of the altar of stone, we have more spiritual and intelligent persons contemplated. So that we have graded conditions in the worship of God, but all having the status of worshippers.
A.P.T. The Jewish Christians that Peter wrote to would understand a little about the stone side.
J.T. They would, indeed. "... yourselves also, as living stones ...", (@1 Peter 2:5). I think what we are saying is most important, because you are thankful if the young Christians here understand that they really have a status before God as having faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, even though they may not have advanced very much. In Leviticus we have a case of a person who can only bring a little meal, @Leviticus 5:11 - 13. He is accepted in the sin-offering without blood. That is important. There is a distinction made in regard to the sin-offering of a person not having sufficient to meet the full requirement. The man with a handful of meal is accepted under certain circumstances as before God, and the meal does not mean that death is brought in. It is simply humanity, or the order of Christ as Man. That establishes a ground of acceptance under certain circumstances.
A.P.T. @Luke 18: 13 says, "O God, have compassion on me, the sinner". He would not be established very far in the truth but that would be the idea.
J.T. Yes; God would take account of him. The
{352}
Lord says, "This man went down to his house justified rather than the other".
C.A.M. The thief on the cross seems only to have offered the meal. "This man has done nothing amiss", @Luke 23:41. That would correspond with the fine flour you were referring to.
J.T. He did not go on to the death of Christ, but the Lord says, "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise", verse 43.
R.D.G. Would Elijah's measure be seen in that he was able to build an altar of twelve stones? @1 Kings 18:30 - 39.
J.T. That is good, but it was really a time of *reparation*. He repaired the altar. That is what is meant. It is a great matter to repair things, provided you bring it back to the full thought. If there has been failure, reparation should bring us back to the full thought. The eleven apostles were not the full thought but they were reparable. They added another that was of the same kind as themselves, so the full thought is recognised, and the Lord appeared not to the eleven, but to the twelve, (@1 Corinthians 15:5).
R.H. Is the altar of stone more the Colossian presentation?
J.T. That is good, I have often thought of that too. We have referred to @Romans 1:4:"... marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead". In Colossians we have: "... in which ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead", chapter 2:12. That is the status we are in, according to Colossians, and it brings us into Canaan in our worship.
A.I. Why is profanity mentioned in relation to the altar of stone?
J.T. "For if thou lift up thy sharp tool upon it, thou hast profaned it", verse 25. That would shut out all that
{353}
is expended in science and refinement in the service of God publicly in certain sections of the profession. Tools are essential to manufacturing trades, and they serve to bring out the skill of man, whereas the use of them here is profanity. The stone is a question of what Christ is personally. "They no longer saw any one, but Jesus alone with themselves", (@Mark 9:8). We do not need anything else but that for worship. It is the real worship, too. It was "Jesus alone with themselves", when they came down from the mount.
J.A.P. Would you say there was a worshipful attitude with the centurion? "Truly this man was Son of God", (@Matthew 27:54). Is that the altar of stone?
J.T. I would say that. His expression, "Truly this man was Son of God" would show that the light was shining, even for that centurion. It was what he observed in what happened before his eyes. What a thing it is to see and feel the light shining; the light of the glory of Christ!
J.T.Jr. The speaking is from heaven. "Ye have seen that I have spoken with you from the heavens", (@Exodus 20:22). But it had in view the setting up of the tabernacle, so later we have speaking from between the cherubim that overshadowed the mercy-seat, (@Exodus 25:22).
J.T. Speaking from the mercy-seat would mean that God had drawn near and this is fully seen in the Lord as man here. The full thought of the divine system is in mind. Speaking from heaven, while distance is there, conveys authority. Consequent on Christ's return to heaven, the word is, "See that ye refuse not him that speaks ... from heaven", (@Hebrews 12:25). This is contrasted with the oracles speaking on the earth.
C.N. Say a word as to "Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar", (@Exodus 20:26).
J.T. It goes with the tool of which we have been
{354}
speaking. It is nature being exposed. God abominates that in His service.
R.H. Colossians speaks of being "vainly puffed up by the mind of his flesh", chapter 2:18. That kind of mind would inflate and is the kind of thing that is forbidden.
A.R. There were winding steps in the temple. What is the thought there?
J.T. That is all inside; it is all covered, where things are secret, and the same idea does not come in here. This is open. This is what is going on publicly. The law is being given. God is coming out and asserting His rights in love (because that is the point) and yet He is concerned about things being seemly and right. It is the public worship of God. One meaning of the idea of worship is that it is public. The Lord says, "Ye worship ye know not what; we worship what we know", (@John 4:22). That is public worship, and of course. God is concerned that everything should be right.
Then the offerings are alluded to in @Exodus 20: "... and shalt sacrifice on it thy burnt-offerings, and thy peace-offerings, thy sheep and thine oxen: in all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee", verse 24. This is a precious thought in regard to the altar of earth, but in chapter 25, in relation to the building of the tabernacle, it is the heave-offering. There is an allusion there, in the note, to the heave-offering in @Leviticus 7: 14. Our passage reads: "of every one whose heart prompteth him, ye shall take my heave-offering. And this is the heave-offering that ye shall take of them: gold, and silver, and copper, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and byssus, and goats¬ hair, and rams¬ skins dyed red, and badgers¬ skins; and acacia-wood; oil for the light; spices for the anointing oil, and for the incense of fragrant drugs; onyx stones, and stones to be set in the ephod, and in the breastplate. And they shall make me a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them", verses 2 - 8. That is, the
{355}
offerings required are what is needed for the tabernacle in which God is to be served. It is a question of the kind of thing needed in this offering. And it is a heave-offering, which would mean the heaving up of the affections. It would mean, typically, that there is a real living state of things amongst the saints springing up into everlasting life.
F.N.W. Would the heave-offering be seen in @John 4 in the woman? Would she be a product of the administration of Christ as referred to in the end of chapter 3?
J.T. Just so; "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand". That is a very good connection. The fourth chapter of John would bring out the feminine side, which no doubt (if not openly, certainly secretly) alludes to the assembly, where we have the feminine side. It is intelligently seen there in her, for her body is to be used. "The water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life", (@John 4:14).
A.R. Would you say how we can furnish the material for the ephod and the breastplate?
J.T. It says: "And this is the heave-offering that ye shall take of them ... stones to be set in the ephod, and in the breastplate". That points to the affections of Christ. It is a unique thing provided for in the service of the sanctuary in chapter 28, when we come to the priesthood. Precious stones would represent what would be most excellent in the offerings of the saints, and I believe Ephesians and Philippians would be that. These are the epistles that contemplate what is more excellent. It says, in @Philippians 1: 10, "that ye may judge of and approve the things that are more excellent". In Ephesians we have, "... and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge", chapter 3: 19. Then, in @2 Corinthians 5:14, we have, "The love of the Christ constrains us". These are things which are more excellent.
{356}
C.A.M. Would you say that in exercising assembly administration there is such a thing as going on from the responsibility side to the privilege side? There would be that distinction perhaps between chapters 20 and 25.
J.T. Just so. And then there is addition in chapter 35. We do not have time to go into all the detail, but just to get the general view. Chapter 35 is an addition to this chapter as to the materials that were offered. So the word is, "And Moses spoke to all the assembly of the children of Israel, saying. This is the word which Jehovah has commanded, saying. Take from among you a heave-offering to Jehovah: every one whose heart is willing, let him bring it, Jehovah's heave-offering -- gold, and silver, and copper, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and byssus, and goats¬ hair, and rams¬ skins dyed red, and badgers¬ skins, and acacia wood, and oil for the light, and spices for the anointing oil, and for the incense of fragrant drugs; and onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate. And all who are wise-hearted among you shall come and make all that Jehovah has commanded: the tabernacle, its tent, and its covering, its clasps, and its boards, its bars, its pillars, and its bases, the ark, and its staves; the mercy-seat, and the veil of separation; the table and its staves, and all its utensils, and the shewbread; and the lamp-stand for the light, and its utensils, and its lamps, and the oil for the light; and the altar of incense, and its staves; and the anointing-oil, and the incense of fragrant drugs; and the entrance-curtain at the entrance of the tabernacle; the altar of burnt-offering, and the copper grating for it, its staves, and all its utensils; the laver and its stand; the hangings of the court, its pillars, and its bases, and the curtains of the gate of the court; the pegs of the tabernacle, and the pegs of the court, and their cords; the garments of service, to do service in the sanctuary, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and
{357}
the garments of his sons, to serve as priests", verses 4 - 19.
I think the sabbath prefaces all this and gives light to it. How much we need to get rest, spiritually, in order to have to do with these exalted things that are used in the sanctuary of God. We need to be restful, because many of us are not equal to the thoughts of God because we are tired out. We have too much to do and are affected in this way, not only physically but spiritually and we become jaded. There is, perhaps, too much taken on and we miss a time of rest and quietness in the Lord's presence. The point for us is that we make use of the rest of God. It is necessary for God to have us with Himself. "For in six days Jehovah made the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed", (@Exodus 31:17).
A.P.T. There is much that happened after chapter 25, for there was the sin of the golden calf involving the general breakdown of the people. That all enters into the matter, necessitating a better and deeper understanding of the holiness of God.
J.T. Yes. If we are not growing we become stunted and we are not in liberty in the divine service. Hence there is the need of spiritual restfulness of which so much is made in the type before us in @Exodus 31 and 35.
A.R. Please say a word about the creation. There is an added word in @Exodus 31:17 that is not in Genesis, "... and was refreshed".
J.T. Yes, God was refreshed. You only get it there. We need that refreshment. It is the principle of providing things for the sanctuary of God. These are the exalted things that the epistle to the Philippians especially contemplates.
A.Macd. Would you say just a word on the fact that they had to be restrained in chapter 36.
J.T. That is another thing. It is well to be balanced. Many of us add much that is not necessary. If our wills at all enter into the service of God it only does harm.
{358}
A.Macd. Would that fit in with your thought of restfulness?
J.T. I think it does. What I am saying is most important.
A.N.W. Do you mean that we take on too much in business or in our homes, or do you mean we may take on too much levitical work?
J.T. We have to discern what is hindering us in our service to God, even if it is weariness. God may come in, as He does very often, and we are less tired when we go out of the meeting than when we go in. But we have to watch tired and jaded conditions.
A.P.T. Does @John 4 indicate there is no cessation of the Lord's service to the Father on account of His weariness?
J.T. He sat just as He was by the well, wearied with His journey. Christ was there and He carried on. He took advantage of the presence of the woman to open up the greatest things in spite of His weariness. We have the availability of the priestly service of the Lord. He attends to us in our weariness so that we need not be denied through it.
A.N.W. He says, "My yoke is easy, and my burden is light", (@Matthew 11:30).
J.T. That would suggest to us that we can go on, and that we are not tired out. Of course, one can overcome tiredness by the grace of the Lord; the high-priestly grace of the Lord enables us to overcome. But we have to keep in mind that we are not to allow ourselves to become run down physically. The Lord knows what we need and He provides rest as we seek it.
A.P.T. What do you make of Mark's gospel where it says, "For those coming and those going were many, and they had not leisure even to eat", chapter 6:31? He says, "Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place and rest a little".
J.T. They were with Jesus. They were not playing
{359}
tennis. It was not a holiday that the Lord contemplated -- or to have recreation. The Lord saw what they needed and that was to be *restful*. Rest a *little*, not very long, but a little.
R.H. It says, "they sit down at thy feet, each receiveth of thy words", (@Deuteronomy 33:3).
J.T. That is restfulness. The Lord told the people to sit down on the grass when He was going to feed them.
A.N.W. Deuteronomy is most attractive.
J.T. What Moses says of the tribes is very beautiful because it is a question of the work of God, and then chapter 34 eulogises Moses, which we should notice. Although he never entered the land, in the ordinary sense, he saw it all from Jehovah's point of view. God honoured His servant here at the end of his course, and he died in full natural vigour.
C.A.M. You were recently stressing the completion of the word of God. @Deuteronomy 34 really completes the personality of this remarkable servant.
J.T. You feel how suitable that there should be a tribute paid to him such as is given here. The completion of things is largely characteristic of Matthew, the assembly gospel. Every subject is finished, not only what relates to Christianity, but what relates to the nations and Israel.
C.A.M. That is very impressive and instructive.
J.T. So that we do not want to leave our subject unfinished now, but we can only touch on it briefly. We have already said as to @Deuteronomy 33 that it is a question of the work of God. "What hath God wrought!" Moses can bless the people according to God. There is no discrepancy. In Jacob's blessing there are discrepancies as we have already noted in Dan, but here it is *all* Israel. And then in chapter 34 we are told the view that Moses got of the land: "And Moses went up from the plains of Moab to mount Nebo, to the top
{360}
of Pisgah, which is opposite Jericho. And Jehovah showed him the whole land, Gilead to Dan, and all Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah", verses 1,2. If we consider the antitype, heaven is shown us with people in it. It is not a bare idea or a peopleless realm; it is a peopled realm. Heaven is viewed in Scripture as a peopled realm; not empty. So that what Moses sees is not simply the bare land but "the whole land, Gilead to Dan"; that is, the tribes are named as there, and that, of course, is where the glory lies: "Nor what is next Thy heart can we forget; Thy saints, O Lord, with Thee in glory met". That is not simply heaven in the abstract, but heaven with people in it! That is what Moses saw: "the whole land, Gilead to Dan ... unto the hindmost sea, and the south, and the plain of the valley of Jericho, the city of palm-trees, to Zoar. And Jehovah said unto him. This is the land that I swore unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying. Unto thy seed will I give it: I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not go over thither. And Moses the servant of Jehovah died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of Jehovah. And he buried him in the valley in the land of Moab, opposite Beth-Peor; and no man knows his sepulchre to this day", verses 2 - 6. Jehovah buried him. The whole matter is a tribute to Moses. No other man was shown the land as he was, and no other man was buried by Jehovah as he was. And then it goes on to tell us about his age: "And Moses was a hundred and twenty years old when he died; his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated", verse 7. That is another thing for the servants to be concerned about; that their voices do not give out, nor their hearing and eyesight; but that we may be able to go on in our service to the saints. Moses was as able to serve at the end as he was earlier. "And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains
{361}
of Moab thirty days; and the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended". And then we have another tribute given: "And there arose no prophet since in Israel like Moses, whom Jehovah had known face to face; according to all the signs and wonders that Jehovah had sent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land; and according to all that mighty hand; and according to all the great terribleness that Moses had wrought in the sight of all Israel", verses 10 - 12. That is what I would consider the eulogistic tribute to Moses, which is very suitable and beautiful.
Ques. It was said of the Lord that He spoke with a loud voice and gave up the ghost. Is there any relation in that to Moses- strength?
J.T. Quite so; you mean that the Lord died in power. Everything converges in Christ; even if we speak of the physical power of Moses at one hundred and twenty years, it points to Christ. He did not die an ordinary death; He died in power.
S.W. Is there any connection between Moses being shown the whole land here, and the apostle John being taken up into a high mountain to see the new Jerusalem coming down out of heaven?
J.T. What John saw would be greater. Moses saw the land of the tribes.
F.N.W. Is there a final administrative touch seen with Moses? He imparts something to Joshua in the way of wisdom: "And Joshua the son of Nun was filled with the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him", verse 9. His administration was to be carried on.
J.T. That is another very important matter to be noted -- that what he was administratively is carried down to Joshua, aiding him in his administration when the time came for it.
T.E.H. Who wrote chapter 34 of Deuteronomy?
J.T. I do not know. You also wonder who wrote
{362}
the last verses of the book of Joshua, and other passages. We have to leave these things with God.
R.H. Is the blessing to be regarded as the great end of administration? Would the blessing in chapter 33 be the spiritual end?
J.T. What a great man Moses was to speak of the work of God in such a beautiful way without any discrepancy in it. What God wrought is perfect, so that new creation is touched on here.
J.T.Jr. Moses is brought into the New Testament on the mount of transfiguration with Elijah. This would show how such men were honoured later by God after their testimony was over.
A.R. In what way is new creation seen here?
J.T. Just in the description given. It is what God has wrought. "At this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought!" (@Numbers 23:23). It runs on into our own order of things. "The old things have passed away; behold all things have become new: and all things are of ... God", (@2 Corinthians 5:17,18).
R.H. Is that why the thought of excellency is mentioned in @Deuteronomy 33? It refers to "the sword of thine excellency", verse 29.
J.T. I think that the nearer you come to the end of the things with which we are dealing, the nearer you get to excellence and refinement. I believe the epistle to Philippians deals with this side of our subject.
{363}
ADMINISTRATION (6)
@1 Samuel 16:11 - 13; @2 Samuel 8:1, 2, 15 - 18;@1 Chronicles 23:1 - 6; @1 Chronicles 29:1 - 12, 23 - 25;@2 Chronicles 1:7 - 13
J.T. The phase of our subject tonight is the administrations of David and Solomon. It seems right to read these scriptures so that at the outset the brethren should have in their minds the magnificence of the administrations depicted, particularly in David and then in Solomon. It is not simply that these two men are mentioned as great administrators, but we can see that with both, Christ was in the mind of the Spirit. We, therefore, having the Spirit of Christ, are able to enter into the matter from the outset in having these scriptures before us.
A point of importance to notice is that in 1 Samuel, in approaching the truth as to David, the history of king Saul is recorded first to show how successful he was, although the spiritual eye can see that he failed, even at the outset, in not finding the asses. He failed in other incidents also, but particularly in the charge given to him to overthrow the Amalekites. He did overthrow them, but in doing so he disobeyed the word of Jehovah and failed in the most manifest way. He was told to destroy the Amalekites and all that they had, but instead of that he saved the best of the cattle and king Agag himself. He spared them because it was a question of the best, and it refers to nature's best being spared. And so a solemn word has to be said as to him by Samuel in chapter 15:10, "And the word of Jehovah came to Samuel, saying. It repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king; for he is turned away from following me, and hath not fulfilled my words. And Samuel was much grieved; and he cried to Jehovah all night".
Then, when he said he had hearkened to the word of Jehovah and considered he had done very well, whereas
{364}
he had disobeyed the word of the Lord, Samuel said to him, "Has Jehovah delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in hearkening to the voice of Jehovah? Behold, obedience is better than sacrifice, attention than the fat of rams. For rebellion is as the sin of divination, and self will is as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of Jehovah, he has also rejected thee from being king". This is all set out before we reach David the king, as he is called in Matthew; but it is surely that we all, as having part in this great service of administration, might aim at being faithful in pursuing the truth in our services. In doing so we are manifestly fulfilling the word of God. Our ministry should take the character of the word of God. So David, in contrast to Saul, is set before us here as one who is characterised by fulfilling the word of the Lord. It is said of him, in @Psalm 89:20, "I have found David my servant; with my holy oil have I anointed him". And so it is said in chapter 16: 12, "And he sent and brought him in. And he was ruddy, and besides of a lovely countenance and beautiful appearance. And Jehovah said. Arise, anoint him; for this is he". It is as if God was resting in David, the word meaning *beloved*. So it runs on, "And Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his brethren".
It seems to me the brethren would do well to start with this thought of his being anointed in the midst of his brethren. It says further, "And the Spirit of Jehovah came upon David from that day forward. And Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah". It suggests that the matter is now in good hands.
R.W.S. In chapter 13:14 Samuel says to Saul, "But now thy kingdom shall not continue: Jehovah has sought him a man after his own heart, and Jehovah has appointed him ruler over his people; for thou hast not kept what Jehovah commanded thee". Would what we have in chapter 16 be the fulfilment of this word as to David?
{365}
J.T. Quite so. That was a prophetic announcement as to David although his name is not mentioned. We should all notice that, because it is an important matter. His name is not mentioned, but clearly *he* is mentioned; and it seems as if Saul must come in as a warning to us. All of us, as the Lord's people, are engaged in some way in this great matter of administration, and we have the warning in the preceding scripture as to Saul. He seemed to do well at one time according to the narrative. It says in chapter 14:47,48, "And Saul took the kingdom over Israel, and fought against all his enemies round about, against Moab, and against the children of Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines; and whithersoever he turned himself, he discomfited them. And he did valiantly, and smote the Amalekites, and delivered Israel out of the hands of their spoilers". Now it is remarkable that this could be said of him, and the natural eye would say that Saul did well. He appeared to be a successful king, whereas in truth he was not. He proved unfaithful, and it seems to me to be necessary that we should all pay attention to what is set out here, by the Spirit, before we actually reach David by name, and we should be warned in relation to our ministry, so that it can be said of us as it is said of David, that he did the will of God.
A.N.W. Why should a man like Samuel mourn after Saul, seeing God had rejected him?
J.T. Does it not suggest to us that though in the main we are serving well, we may be influenced adversely at times? He mourned for Saul and Jehovah had to mildly rebuke him. Then he fails in discernment as to the eldest son of Jesse. It is said, "And it came to pass when they were come, that he looked on Eliab, and said, Surely Jehovah's anointed is before him. But Jehovah said to Samuel, Look not on his countenance". That shows that he was diverted in his mind. The best of us
{366}
may be affected unless we are watchful, as the Lord said in the great servant gospel, "But what I say to you, I say to all. Watch", (@Mark 13:37). We are to be observant. And so in this book we have it said of Abigail, "Blessed be thy discernment". Sisters are sometimes more discerning than brothers as to certain difficulties that may arise. Samuel recovered himself, and Jehovah helped him to do it, which He is always ready to do. Samuel, being fully recovered, says, "Are these all the young men?" verse 11. He soon fell in with the position when David came in. Jehovah says, "Arise, anoint him; for this is he. And Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his brethren". In a way we have to learn to anoint one another as we see from the scripture in @Mark 14. The woman, who is doubtless Mary of Bethany, anointed the Lord's head. It was not God anointing Him now, but *she* did it. So here, Samuel anoints David, though, of course, representing God in doing so.
A.P.T. Was Barnabas mistaken in regard to John Mark? Is there a danger sometimes of being mistaken as to whom the Lord may be using?
J.T. Quite so; and one good address is not sufficient to determine the fitness of one serving. "The Spirit of Jehovah came upon David from that day forward" gives the idea. The Lord sets us before each other; we are to be before God, of course. David was anointed in the midst of his brethren, and doubtless they all fell in with it in regard to David for the moment, so that if God is using a brother, we should discern it and fall in with it.
A.N.W. It is remarkable how much is conveyed to Saul of Tarsus by Ananias at his conversion. He put his hands upon him and said, "Saul, brother, the Lord has sent me, Jesus that appeared to thee in the way in which thou earnest, that thou mightest see, and be filled with the Holy Spirit", (@Acts 9:17).
{367}
J.T. The Lord needed to put Ananias right, also. He is always ready to put us right, and will do it in the presence of the brethren, too.
D.P. Why was David kept out of this important meeting? Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel, but David was not there.
J.T. I would say that Jesse was remiss spiritually. Where was David? Why did he not bring him with the others? Your own father, or your own wife, or your own son may be remiss, and this is often true in matters that come up. The very best of us may be remiss in these matters, and hence the warning we have here so lengthily set before us as to the history of Saul, after the apparently successful showing he made at the beginning.
J.T.Jr. Saul influenced the people generally, no doubt, and Jesse, as ignoring David, would be an evidence of this influence.
J.T. No doubt Saul would be an ideal in Israel. He was head and shoulders above his brethren -- a distinguished young man -- the people's choice. But he was not discerning, nor was he discerned in his true character by the people, and this showed itself so often.
T.N.W. Were you going to say something more about anointing one another?
J.T. Well, just in the sense in which the woman at Bethany anointed the Lord. She evidently anointed His feet, too. She had right thoughts. She had His head and His feet in mind. Anointing His head would refer to His ministry and His administration, and so we have in the @Song of Songs 3:11, "Go forth, daughters of Zion, and behold king Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him". It is the feminine subjective idea of anointing.
C.A.M. I suppose the Corinthians were anointing one another in some sense. They were reigning as kings, but they did not appreciate the right Man.
J.T. Well that is apt to happen. We might be found
{368}
flattering each other as ministers. I remember well enough many years ago when there was a set of brethren known as evangelists, and they knew each other, and had a sort of fraternity in themselves, but it all came to nothing. Of course, we are always liable to that sort of thing making special friends or placing special interest on special things in the sense of flattery.
A.R. Do you think that Barnabas anointed Paul in @Acts 9? He brought him to Jerusalem.
J.T. Well, he committed himself to him. Paul needed him at the moment. He had no status in Jerusalem and Barnabas was a good brother. He took him and brought him to the apostles. On the other hand, Paul himself went to Jerusalem to make the acquaintance of Peter, because he recognised the leadership of Peter. God had given Peter a place, and he recognised it.
J.A.P. To Timothy, he says, "Lay hands quickly on no man", (@1 Timothy 5:22). Would that support what you are saying?
J.T. Just so, I think that is good. It is right that we should recognise a man according to the gift and ability that he has. We read of leading men among the brethren, but we should not commit ourselves quickly. There should be the evidence in the brother of reliability, and when that is present, we should not be slow in being fully in line with what the Lord is doing in such a one.
T.E.H. The apostle refers to having put his hands on Timothy, which would show how he committed himself to him.
J.T. He refers also to the imposition of the hands of the elderhood which refers to a plural committal. All these things enter into what we are saying. We see how Paul and the elderhood committed themselves to Timothy and it shows how we may commit ourselves to the brethren who are ministering faithfully.
C.A.M. Do you think that one important thing to bear in mind is that gift is a universal matter? We might
{369}
find in a certain part, that a certain one is anointed, perhaps without regard to the qualifications necessary and to the Lord's thoughts in a universal way.
J.T. Just so; there might be personal selection or preference. There is no doubt that that entered into the feeling that arose between Barnabas and Paul when Barnabas selected John Mark. A heated feeling arose between those two well-known brothers; but then God singled out Paul, and He was with him. Barnabas, although he is recognised later, was out of the way for the moment; you might say that he was shelved for the moment. Well, we do not want that; hence we ought to be careful as to those who should be supported, and if there be anything to be corrected in any servant, it should be corrected.
S.M. Is a proper state found in chapter 13 of the Acts? When they were ministering to the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul".
J.T. Quite so; they were in accord with what the Spirit of God was doing, because that is the point there. It was the Spirit -- not God nor the Lord. "The Holy Spirit said. Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". And the brethren laid their hands upon them and let them go. But they were sent forth by the Spirit. The elders did not send them. That is another point of importance. While we would expect and look for a brother to have the approbation of the local company, he is to be directly under the command of the Spirit.
G.P. How do you understand David's lamentation relative to Saul in chapter 1 of this book?
J.T. It is what might be called spiritual generosity. David was a great man morally as well as a great king. He made the most of Saul and Jonathan. Saul was God's anointed. David respected the anointing and therefore he did not slay Saul. We need to watch what God has
{370}
recognised at any time, such as in Saul or even Joab and be careful as to personal feelings arising. They had dedicated things to the house of God and they are recognised so that we cannot condemn them wholly. We cannot condemn Saul entirely. There was something good in him at first at least.
W.W.M. Would you say it is important to think of David with the sheep? He was not exactly recognised at this meeting, but God had seen him caring for the sheep and saving them from the lion and the bear. These were the qualities that brought him out and qualified him to be an administrator later on.
J.T. That is good. "I have found David". God did not wait until he was called in by Jesse to find him. God had found him long before. So it is that God finds every minister in secret before he is in that place; so it is with every brother that is taken up in service.
A.E.W. In the book of Ruth it says, "And they called his name Obed. He is the father of Jesse, the father of David", chapter 4:17.
J.T. Just so. That is the first mention we have of David, and it is to show the line from whence he came. The first historical mention we have of David is in chapter 16, but he was found by Jehovah long before, which is a very important point. It says, "I have found David". He did not wait for the meeting in chapter 16 to find him. He knew he was there. Indeed, from his birth he was found; and so with Paul; from his birth he was set apart by God.
J.T.Jr. I suppose it is instructive that David is immediately put in touch with Saul. He has to be near a man like Saul who has an evil spirit.
J.T. He is used of God to relieve Saul. It is a very remarkable testimony to grace. The evil spirit was driven away by the ministry of David; showing what a man can be before he is recognised in full.
F.H.L. Immediately after the anointing among his
{371}
brethren it says that the Spirit of Jehovah came upon David from that day forward. You would expect great spiritual acquisition after a brother is anointed among his brethren?
J.T. Yes; there was a little appreciation in the man who spoke of him, @1 Samuel 16. It would show that he, too, as well as God, had found David. We might read the scripture that alludes to it. It says, "And the Spirit of Jehovah departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from Jehovah troubled him. And Saul's servants said to him, Behold now, an evil spirit from God troubles thee. Let our lord now speak; thy servants are before thee: they shall seek out a man, a skilful player on a harp; and it shall come to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall play with his hand, and thou shalt be well. And Saul said to his servants. Provide me now a man that can play well, and bring him to me. And one of the young men answered and said. Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, who is skilled in playing, and he is a valiant man and a man of war, and skilled in speech, and of good presence, and Jehovah is with him", verses 14 - 18. Recognition amongst the brethren comes gradually, and apparently it was not known by many that David had such qualifications, but this man who spoke so well of him did know. Jehovah found him before Jesse called him; and now this man has found him. It takes time for gift to come into full evidence and acceptance among the brethren, and we have to be patient. David had patience. So it is for all of us to heed the word in chapter 13 of Mark, which is the servants¬ gospel: "But what I say to you, I say to all, Watch".
A.R. When David comes in, the Spirit's comment relates to what he is personally. Does that have a bearing on service?
J.T. Personality is a very great thing in service. We all cannot take part in the service on the platform. We
{372}
are to be such as the brethren love; persons that are wanted in the houses of the saints, and persons who can help the saints spiritually.
A.P.T. Is there an administrative feature in feeding the sheep?
J.T. There is; it came out there, just as we have been noticing with Moses. He fed the flock of Jethro and led them to the right point, to mount Horeb, the mount of God, where they could get food and help. So that David is showing what he is. He is qualifying for the service of God; so that he left the sheep with a keeper when he had to go to the army. He said, 'Is there not a cause?' His brethren reproved him for going to the army, and leaving the sheep. What about those few sheep? they said. David had left them with a keeper. That is to say, he was an elder as well as a warrior. That is a thing that often comes before us; not simply what we are on the platform, but what we can do to help the brethren and save them personally.
A.P.T. We need to get around and see the brethren in their homes.
J.T. Quite so. We should now pass on to the second book of Samuel and then to Chronicles. The second book is to bring out how David served; how he administered; how he fought; how he carried on his wars; and how successful he was in bringing about subjugation. It is a matter of great importance that the spirit of subjection should be brought about in the saints by those who are leading amongst us. That is what was in mind in reading chapter 8 of the second book. It is said, "And after this it came to pass that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them", verse 1. We have often noticed that in Joshua's day it was not a matter of subjugation of enemies, but destruction; whereas under David there is grace to bring about subjugation. So the enemies became subject to David, and he set garrisons amongst them so as to subdue rebellion. It is a great
{373}
matter in administrative service to bring about a state of subjection among the brethren.
C.A.M. I suppose it needs great skill to counteract the expressions of will that are sometimes made. Will is, I suppose, one of the greatest difficulties we have to contend with.
J.T. If, instead of being subject to his brethren, a brother leaves, and says, he will not come back again, it is just that he is taking things into his own hands in self-will. Such people say, they are going out of fellowship, but that is more than simply leaving a few brethren; it is rebellion against God.
C.F.E. It says in verse 2, "And he smote the Moabites, and measured them with a line".
J.T. That is another thought. There was one full line to keep alive, and two lines to put to death. These are dispensational thoughts, I would say, but at the same time the spirit of grace is seen in the one full line by which David kept some alive. It is the power to keep alive spiritually. The bearing of the thought of putting to death now, in our case, would be simply that some must be withdrawn from, They are not fit for fellowship: but *keeping alive* is one full line. It is one idea of keeping the brethren alive.
R.W.S. Would the way this chapter starts, "And after this it came to pass", allude to the wonderful impression that David had of Jehovah as he sat before Him in the house. Does he come out in that spirit of grace?
J.T. Nathan's chapter, which is chapter 7, precedes this. I was thinking of Nathan's chapter, that we should read it, but there is hardly time. Nathan comes in to help the minister. There is a peculiar element in the service of God in Nathan the prophet. He represents the spirit of prophecy, which is for the good of David and his reign. The servant can count on the spirit of prophecy coming in to help him, and so in chapter 7,
{374}
verses 1 - 3, it is said, "And it came to pass when the king dwelt in his house, and Jehovah had given him rest round about from all his enemies, that the king said to Nathan the prophet. See now, I dwell in a house of cedars, and the ark of God dwells under curtains. And Nathan said to the king. Go, do all that is in thy heart; for Jehovah is with thee". That is Nathan's service, and undoubtedly the spirit of Nathan affected David's heart. Nathan's name means gift, and while he had to be adjusted, and David, too, as to who should build the house, yet he is in full sympathy with the desire of David's heart. It is an element that helps the servant and imparts the right spirit to him. David is on a right line and Nathan supports him. This wonderful chapter precedes the one we have read, and I believe that it is morally before it as affecting the servant and making him fit for subjugation. And then he sets up a system of rule for the government of the nation. It was not simply that he was king or ruler, but he had officers; we may call it his cabinet, and its members are named in the latter part of the chapter. It is the system of David, as we might call it.
C.N. Verse 1 reads, "David took the power of the capital out of the hand of the Philistines".
J.T. That is the idea of Rome. It is the idea of a central power by which the people are held in subjection. David took it out of their hands. In regard to our own position now, it would be to deliver the saints from metropolitanism. The full expression of metropolitanism is seen in Rome. The contrast to that and what is over against it, is Jerusalem which is above, which is our mother. Metheg-ha-ammah means the *metropolis*. It was the city, the capital, or mother city.
G.P. Would you say more is gained by subjugation than by destruction?
J.T. Surely; that is the contrast between Joshua and David: David preserved the people in subjection,
{375}
although there are two lines for death. All that would be dispensational, but the thought that enters into the moment is the one full line for life.
A.N.W. The end of verse 2 says, "And the Moabites became David's servants, and brought gifts". It must be excellent administration, to subdue in such a way that they bring gifts.
J.T. That is the idea, I am sure. Chapter 7 is really magnificent. I would say that it is the most magnificent in 2 Samuel and, as remarked, it forms a background for David's success in chapter 8.
A.R. In chapter 8 the kingdom is extended. The kingdoms of Moab, Ammon and Edom are all subdued.
J.T. It is universal testimony, because David was operating in relation to the Euphrates, the utmost point of the land that God gave to His people. David is going to take it all.
A.R. Will Christ claim all these territories when He comes to reign publicly?
J.T. Just so; when He comes. His reign will be universal, over against what has been in Rome, the modern Metheg-ha-ammah, the capital or mother city. The end of the chapter says, "And David reigned over all Israel; and David executed judgment and justice to all his people. And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was chronicler;" (meaning he kept account of things) "and Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Seraiah was scribe; and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David's sons were chief rulers", verses 15 - 18. He made an excellent selection to support him in the kingdom. It is now not simply the reign of David, but the kingdom, which is an administrative system.
J.A.P. Would these men be like Timothy, Titus and Luke who were with Paul?
J.T. Paul and his company would be the idea.
{376}
A.R. Does the kingdom of God involve a system?
J.T. It does. The kingdom is very prominent in Matthew and Luke, so that it can be seen that Christianity involves a system. Therefore, in Matthew it is not simply *who* was there, but *what* was there: "Behold, more than Jonas is here", (@Matthew 12:41). It is the kingdom, and it is energised by the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God is down here in the assembly.
J.S. David executed justice and judgment.
J.T. That is the point. He executed judgment and justice to all his people. He was a real governor. He tells us at the end of his reign what a king ought to be, he must be just, ruling in the fear of God.
D.P. In reference to the garrisons, would you say the apostle Paul in sending Titus to Crete would be setting up a garrison there?
J.T. I think so; I think they are like local assemblies as in contrast to the metropolitan idea. The Spirit of God has local spheres through which to maintain the order and rights of God so that the gospel might go forth. That is the idea in the garrisons.
R.W.S. Does extending the kingdom to the Euphrates bear on our day?
J.T. I think so. I think the Lord is helping us. We have been speaking now and again about the young men. They are called conscientious objectors, but that is a poor description, although true. It is not enough for these young brothers, for they have done far more than objecting to taking life. They have borne testimony to the truth of the gospel and have gone all over the world. That is not for nothing. It is remarkable how the brethren have been made universal in their outlook and how the young men have spoken about the Lord and have been a witness to Him universally. That is remarkable to me and we are hopeful for all these young brothers, that the Lord will bless their service in all these places where they have been. We are to come out to rule,
{377}
and morally we are ruling now with our influence. When we come home, what influence have we in our houses and local meetings? Hundreds of young men in the British Isles and in Europe and Australasia and America have been carrying the testimony with them and we ought to know how much we owe them. It is glorious to be able to recount it, especially in regard to England where there are far more of the brethren in the military forces than there are here. I believe God is using the influence they have had in regard to the general position among the nations.
A.Macd. Will that influence be carried on in sonship?
J.T. That is the idea; the grandest thought for us is sonship. God is bringing many sons to glory, and He is bringing them to glory now, so that they will be able to witness for Christ. The glory shines.
C.A.M. The fact that there are in existence varied types of enemies does not mean that the saints have not the victory. The saints really have gained the victory.
J.T. It is remarkable how they have escaped morally and have come home undamaged to take their part in divine things. One has felt, as moving among the brethren, that God has preserved His people so that they have not lost, but have gained through recent years of pressure. The question now is for the younger men to work it out.
J.T.Jr. So that things have to be done, and the idea of a cabinet is to get the things done in the various departments. The younger men as now returning should be fitted by what they have been through to take on responsibilities.
J.T. That is very good. Let us notice the various departments that are suggested in the men that are mentioned by name. In verse 13 it says, "And David made him a name when he returned". That would allude to the glory of God in the saints. And then we are told,
{378}
"And David reigned over all Israel; and David executed judgment and justice to all his people", meaning that it was universal. "And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was chronicler". Now, notice, there is a chronicler and a scribe as well, meaning an accurate account was taken of matters. Things are known and we can revert to them at any time. It is an important thing that we should be able to recall what is being done in the kingdom of God. Things come up constantly that may be taken up as models, or as establishing principles that stand, and this chronicler would be able to tell you what happened at a certain time which would correspond to what is happening now, which is always important. And then a scribe is an accurate man. There was a scribe and a chronicler. But then we are told that Zadok, who has great distinction and is carried forward into the book of Ezekiel, is the son of Ahitub. He and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Seraiah was scribe; and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada (a good brother) was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites. Things are well looked after in the kingdom of heaven.
G.V.D. Do you feel that the proceedings of assembly meetings should be recorded?
J.T. I would not like to make much of that, but it is well that we should carry them in our minds. As to this, I can recall a good deal that has been told me by persons who were eye-witnesses of what happened during the last one hundred years, and I have seen a good deal too. It is important that we recall things when certain conditions arise in administrative matters, so that illustrations can be given of how God came in at a certain time. We can count upon Him that He will do the same thing again, or maybe better.
W.W.M. The Spirit brings things to our remembrance. "But the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, *he* shall teach you all
{379}
things, and will bring to your remembrance all the things which I have said to you", (@John 14:26).
J.T. That is good. We should look now at the end of David's kingdom and the divine side of things in his administration. We have referred to his wars, but the music and the ordering of the Levites, and above all the twenty-four courses of the priesthood, all came out under his administration. We have the twenty-four elders in the book of Revelation, which allude to the twenty-four courses, and the book of Chronicles leads up to establishment of these courses. We have a recapitulation in chapter 23: "And David was old and full of days; and he made Solomon his son king over Israel. And he gathered together all the princes of Israel, with the priests and the Levites. And the Levites were numbered from thirty years old and upward; and their number, by their polls, man by man, was thirty-eight thousand. Of these, twenty-four thousand were to preside over the work of the house of Jehovah; and six thousand were officers and judges; and four thousand were doorkeepers; and four thousand praised Jehovah with the instruments which I made, said David, to praise therewith", verses 1 - 5. This is the beginning of the twenty-four courses of administration in service that are so famous throughout the history of Scripture, running into the book of Revelation, as remarked. It says, "And David divided them into courses according to the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari", verse 6. Going back to Numbers, he carries out the administration under the number twenty-four.
C.A.M. The book of Revelation seems to take us right on into heaven.
J.T. Quite so; the thing to see is what goes into heaven, because heaven is much larger than earth. We were speaking of it in prayer last night. It struck me very much that the earth can be measured. We have been speaking of the young men traversing it; but who can
{380}
measure heaven? What a realm it is. The Lord Jesus has gone beyond all the heavens. Heaven is infinite, and therefore what is of God must go into that; what comes from God goes to God.
C.A.M. Moses says, "From eternity to eternity thou art God", (@Psalm 90:2).
J.T. Quite so.
R.W.S. What do the twenty-four courses represent?
J.T. Well, our brother reminded us that the book of Revelation takes us into heaven. The twenty-four elders are seen in heaven as well as the four living creatures, and they refer to eternity. It is a question of love, and how love operates, so that things are always right.
J.T.Jr. Would the key of David in Philadelphia be a link, too? The key must be a great thought.
J.T. I have often thought of the place David has in the book of Revelation. We have the key of David in the early part of the address to Philadelphia, and then, at the end, the Lord says, "I am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star". The thought of David runs into eternity. The Lord sprang out of David, we are told; I mean, the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ is linked in that wonderful way with David in the book of Revelation. It is a question of the refinement that comes out in the administration of David.
A.R. What is the significance in changing from twelve to twenty-four?
J.T. Well, twelve is an administrative number but twenty-four is a double dispensational number. It is a number covering two dispensations. The idea of dispensation is God's way of dispensing what He is Administration is the dispensing of what God is.
A.N.W. Is the Lord greater as seen in David than is Solomon?
J.T. I would think so. I think, morally, David is the greatest thought.
{381}
A.N.W. I thought your reference to this feature of his passing through into eternity would confirm that. Solomon would be more connected with the millennium.
J.T. It is remarkable that Christ is said to be the root of David. David sprang from Him, in that sense, but this link is remarkable.
F.N.W. Does Paul, in effect, write David's epitaph, bringing out the moral excellence of this dispensation? "For David indeed, having in his own generation ministered to the will of God, fell asleep", (@Acts 13:36).
J.T. What a great triumph that was! What a moral triumph! Jehovah said, beforehand, that he would do all His will.
J.T.Jr. Linked up with that is the thought of the psalmist, which comes in here, too. He is the sweet psalmist. He is not only administrative, but he is a man that can keep you occupied with good music.
J.T. Notice that the doorkeepers are the same number as the musicians, showing that if we are to have good singing, we must have good door keeping. The singing will not be maintained on the right level unless we see that the right material comes in.
A.P.T. Would there be a suggestion in @John 20 that the singing would be good? The doors were shut.
J.T. Just so -- "for fear of the Jews". We must keep the legal element out.
{382}
ADMINISTRATION (7)
@2 Chronicles 1:13 - 17; @2 Chronicles 2:1,2; @1 Kings 4:1 - 20; @1 Kings 8:1 - 21; @1 Kings 10:1 - 13
J.T. We have read from the first chapter of 2 Chronicles and it is proposed that we should proceed further in our consideration of the history of Solomon, particularly as it is recorded in 1 Kings.
I am sure the reading of the Scriptures has been heard with pleasure, and I hope, instruction, too, but it seemed impossible to avoid the reading of this number of passages, considering the nature and extent of Solomon's reign. It was thought that the last scripture read, which records the visit of the queen of Sheba, was needful so that we might have in our minds the effect of Solomon's administration on the gentiles, the queen being representative of them. We have Solomon's request for wisdom at the beginning of 2 Chronicles, and there is also the recording of his multiplication of horses, silver and wives, all of which were forbidden in @Deuteronomy 17:16,17. These forbidden things were the seeds of Solomon's downfall, and therefore they are intended to affect us now, that in the service of God we should see to it that we avoid what would become seeds of trouble and damage. The book of Kings especially mentions that there were forty thousand stalls of horses. Then there was a great quantity of silver, and besides this he multiplied wives, as remarked, all of which were forbidden, and proved peculiarly damaging to the king and his rule. On the other hand, the account in Chronicles is peculiarly attractive, because it has a certain touch that may be regarded as derived from the fact that Ezra had to do with writing the books of Chronicles. He was a man of peculiar interest in the testimony of God. We have the allusion to the house immediately, in chapter 2, where Solomon purposed to build a house for the name of Jehovah. "And Solomon purposed to build a house
{383}
for the name of Jehovah, and a house for his kingdom". And then is given the great number of workers which were needed for this great undertaking. "And Solomon numbered seventy thousand men to bear burdens, and eighty thousand stone-masons in the mountain, and three thousand six hundred to superintend them",
C.A.M. Ezra would be a link with the glorious reign of Solomon and the day of small things, as is suggested in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah.
J.T. Well, I think he was a servant whom God used to link up the testimony from the outset. Chronicles begins with the name *Adam*; and then at the end, there is a link between 2 Chronicles and the book of Ezra.
A.N.W. The last two verses of 2 Chronicles are the same as the first three verses of Ezra.
J.T. That is what I was thinking and it is important to take note of this. It is intended that we should be intelligent as to these things, and the links that bind Scripture together as one whole. Chronicles, Luke's gospel and the book of Acts form a great continuance of thought throughout the Scriptures in a historical way ending in Paul's position in Rome. You feel that it is fitting that there should be a link between Ezra and Paul; and accordingly, between the books of Chronicles and the book of Acts. Luke, who is the author of the Acts and the gospel that bears his name, was a man who carried the thought of thorough sympathy with the testimony in what he wrote.
A.R. Does Paul in his own hired house in Rome link on with Ezra? He "received all who came to him". Ezra, also in captivity, had similar liberty, did he not?
J.T. Yes; it is a very fine thought that Paul "received all who came to him". It must have entailed great labour to see people as they came to him, he having so much to do, because he must have written a large proportion of the epistles in the prison at Rome. We
{384}
get the greatest results from him, in that sense, in those epistles. But you can see how Solomon's regime gave way to the greater, as the Lord says, "Behold, more than Solomon is here", (@Matthew 12:42). The idea is that "*more* than Solomon" was there. It contemplates the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.
I thought that before we entered on the positive side, which is presented in Kings, we would do well to note the failure; the king's transgression of @Deuteronomy 17.
J.T.Jr. Would it help us, in reviewing this subject, to see that in order to administer properly, we need to know what we must *not* do?
J.T. There are special things mentioned through Moses, by the Spirit of God, that are prohibited to the king, and he should pay attention to them, whereas, they are the very things that Solomon ignored.
A.R. Is the idea of multiplying horses like forcing a matter in the care meeting?
J.T. Well, we must make allowance for the war horse, because he is a useful horse. You need to take up the battles of the testimony even in a care meeting. He smells the battle afar off, we are told -- "the thunder of the captains, and the shouting". I mean to say, he represents that side in a person who does not shirk the responsibility of war if needed.
R.W.S. According to Deuteronomy the king was to write for himself a copy of this law in a book. Did Solomon fail in that?
J.T. Apparently. It would be disregard of what the Scripture prohibits in a servant's way and relations. Surely it is taken notice of in heaven, for it is so manifest that these things were forbidden. But then we are immediately ushered into the glory that marked Solomon's reign and the great results, in the sense of building; because building is the great feature of his reign.
J.T.Jr. Are you alluding to chapter 2, "a house for
{385}
the name of Jehovah, and a house for his kingdom"?
J.T. Yes. They are introduced immediately.
A.N.W. He had already prayed a model prayer and now desires and purposes to build a house. And in between, Solomon made these errors of which we have been speaking. All this shows the variableness that may mark us.
J.T. But if we go to @1 Kings 4 we see the public side of Solomon's reign in the sense of benefit for the people, and what order marked his reign. He was king over all Israel; and then his princes and their names are given, verses 2 - 6. And Solomon "had twelve superintendents over all Israel; and they provided food for the king and his household: each man his month in the year had to make provision", verse 7.
And then, "Judah and Israel were many, as the sand which is by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking and making merry. And Solomon ruled over all kingdoms from the river to the land of the Philistines, and as far as the border of Egypt: they brought presents, and served Solomon all the days of his life. And Solomon's provision for one day was thirty measures of fine flour, and sixty measures of meal, ten fatted oxen, and twenty oxen out of the pastures, and a hundred sheep, besides harts, and gazelles, and fallow deer, and fatted fowl. For he had dominion over all on this side the river, from Tiphsah as far as Gazah, over all the kings on this side the river; and he had peace on all sides round about. And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine and under his fig tree, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, all the days of Solomon", verses 20 - 25. There seems to be a remarkable link between him and his people and he has favour with God, so that he affords a foreshadowing of Christ in a very peculiar and special way. At the same time he prefigures what should be seen in our own services. Those who serve should be moving in happy relations with each other and
{386}
with the brethren. The saints are to prosper through the servants, especially in regard of food. In @Matthew 24:46 we are told, "Blessed is that bondman whom his lord on coming shall find doing thus", referring to the matter of ministering a portion of meat to the household. That is real food for our souls. These meetings are to provide food for the brethren, not simply to enjoy each other's company and then leave, but to have spiritual food.
A.B.P. Is there any link between the monthly food supply here and the tree of life in @Revelation 22?
J.T. One has often thought of "the tree of life, producing twelve fruits, in each month yielding its fruit". The leaves are for the healing of the nations, but the fruit of the tree of life is for the heavenly saints, showing how we rise in the New Testament to the celestial side of things. I think Solomon, in Chronicles, is a figure of the earthly side of assembly conditions; but 1 Kings would treat of his administration more in relation to heaven, typically. He built the house of God and his own house, and the other houses that are so great and varied, including the house of the forest of Lebanon. These would all point to the magnificence of the present time as seen in the assembly in its heavenly relations, but Chronicles would, I believe, point to the service of God maintained on earth, because we have the veil instead of folding doors. Solomon as a type also refers to the millennial glory of Christ in the future.
C.A.M. Would the fruit yielded in each of the months allude to what the heavenly saints will be enjoying in relation to what is happening on earth?
J.T. The months are referred to in the blessings of Joseph, showing that the heavens and the heavenly bodies -- the sun and the moon -- are involved in the *months* here. The idea would be, I suppose, Solomon's ability to arrange all these things and co-ordinate them so that they bear on each other. It is a great matter that
{387}
each other, that we are not isolated as having particular lines independently. There may be particular lines, of course, but they should bear on each other, and I think the numerals twelve and twenty-four in David's regime, but particularly in Solomon's, would be the administrative side, but each bearing on the others. Those of us who are engaged in the administration of things should not be isolated in our thoughts toward one another. Neither should we promote special lines but should promote the truth in general, according to what the Lord says of the Spirit, "he shall guide you into all the truth", (@John 16:13).
J.H.E. David provided for the house of God, but he told Solomon to add to it. Would that be the thought?
J.T. It would; Solomon was to add to what was there.
A.R. What you say about 1 Kings suggesting the heavenly side of the administration is very interesting.
J.T. Well, it is; of course there is hardly time to touch on it because the subject is so large. The intent today is that we each may take it on ourselves, and look into it as we have time for it. We can only touch on things in the merest way, now.
J.T.Jr. Would you say that we should see the difference between the presentation of things in Kings and in Chronicles, so that we might understand what is going on now, and what will be in the millennium?
J.T. I think there is important guidance in that.
E.A.L. Would you say verse 27 is very important in this connection? "And those officers provided food for king Solomon, and for all who came to king Solomon's table, every man in his month: they let nothing be wanting". Some do not come to king Solomon's table and do not get the good food.
J.T. Well, if we do not appropriate what Solomon is typical of we will come short of the great thoughts
{388}
of God as to the magnitude and glory that Christianity is capable of, and what there will be in the millennial reign, too. These scriptures record the glory and magnificence of Israel under Solomon, and are typical of Christianity. "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God", (@1 Corinthians 2:9,10). The depths of God would bring out the depths there are in the present dispensation.
R.W.S. Will you say more about the difference between the administration in Chronicles and Kings?
J.T. I think Kings is the heavenly side, because the study of it directs your mind to the heavenly side of things, and the inside conditions of the house are more characterised by family relations. There are folding-doors instead of a veil, and also half-open flowers. These things suggest that there is no distance. All that tends to touch the affections family-wise. The house of God is implied in it, in that sense. It is that one is to know how to behave oneself in the house of God, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth. But the character of the house of God is heavenly although it is on earth. It comes out of heaven, like the sheet that Peter saw that came down knit at the four corners, pointing to Christianity instead of Judaism. It came down to be noticed and observed and thought over, but it was taken up to heaven again. The idea is to show that Christianity is a heavenly thing. It is down here for the moment, provisionally, that everything might be set out in the best way, as in @Luke 15. The best things are there; the best robe, the ring and the shoes, and the house with the music and the dancing. All this is to indicate the wealth of heaven, and how it is to be appropriated down here, and then caught up again.
{389}
A.N.W. That would be confirmed in the reference to the ascent in chapter 10. The queen of Sheba observed the ascent by which Solomon went up to the house of Jehovah.
R.W.S. What about Chronicles?
J.T. Chronicles has the veil and the altar, which refers more to the earth and the order of the service of God down here. Distance is implied in the veil.
R.W.S. Do we fit more into the side set out in 1 Kings?
J.T. I think so; it affords a type of Christianity; whereas the books of Chronicles bear on the earthly side in so far as the house of God is made available to us at the present time.
F.H.L. It is only in Chronicles that Solomon is said to kneel on his knees on the platform of bronze.
F.N.W. Would the princes mentioned at the beginning of chapter 4 emphasise that it is the heavenly side? It is not a prince from each tribe, for example; also a priest is mentioned first; then later, two priests are mentioned together.
J.T. Just so; the word *prince* has a great place in the future in Ezekiel, showing that the future will have an official under that head, and David is usually in mind in Ezekiel. I think all that bears on the heavenly side.
J.T.Jr. We do not get this personal side in Chronicles as we have it in chapter 4 of 1 Kings. Do you not think it emphasises that the heavenly side is seen in persons now; and that will come out in display, as linked up with the house, later on?
J.T. The reference to the queen of Sheba helps as showing the effect it had on her. She tells of it herself in chapter 10: "And when the queen of Sheba saw all Solomon's wisdom, and the house that he had built, and the food of his table, and the deportment of his servants, and the order of service of his attendants, and their
{390}
apparel, and his cupbearers, and his ascent by which he went up to the house of Jehovah, there was no more spirit in her. And she said to the king. It was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thine affairs, and of thy wisdom, but I gave no credit to the words, until I came and mine eyes had seen, and behold, the half was not told me: in wisdom and prosperity thou exceedest the report that I heard. Happy are thy men! happy are these thy servants, who stand continually before thee, who hear thy wisdom! Blessed be Jehovah thy God, who delighted in thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel! Because Jehovah loves Israel for ever, therefore did he make thee king, to do judgment and justice", verses 4 - 9. I thought her testimony would show the effect of the heavenly reign of Christ. It is what is current even now. Preceding this, in chapter 8, it says, "Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the princes of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto king Solomon in Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah out of the city of David, which is Zion. And all the men of Israel assembled themselves to king Solomon at the feast in the month Ethanim, that is, the seventh month", verses 1, 2. The seventh month points to the richness of the agricultural year, as we call it. It is the richness that flows out. The allusion to the corn of wheat falling into the ground and dying points to the richness belonging to the agricultural year.
W.W.M. Do you think that the months referred to in chapter 4 would have any relation to @Exodus 12:2? "This month shall be unto you the beginning of months". Would this be a further thought in the service?
J.T. Just so. And then, the agricultural thought involves the number seven. The beginning of months is in the passover and the seventh month is the feast of tabernacles.
W.W.M. So that a servant that would minister food
{391}
to the saints, as is suggested here, would not forget the passover in his ministry.
J.T. Quite so. You must carry the young people, and there can be no doubt that the passover and the Lord's supper developing out of it, would mean that the young are taken account of. And so, as to the agricultural year, you are enabled to tell where you are in it on account of the various cereals as they come up out of the ground. It is not simply the guidance of the sun in the heavens, but guidance implied in vegetable growth. Therefore we are to take account of the growth of the saints. It would be what can be seen in them, things that are apparent, denoting that there is advance spiritually.
C.A.M. So the twelve months are stressed. Would the twelve months or solar year fit in with Matthew's gospel, and the seven months, or the agricultural year, with John's gospel?
J.T. Matthew shows how the public side goes on to the end both as to the assembly and Israel and the nations; so that the solar year would be Matthew, for it is a question of actual time. John would be the spiritual side which is suggested in the agricultural year so that we get the feast of tabernacles in John. The beginning of the agricultural year would be in @Exodus 12, as remarked, running on to the seventh month, that is the development of the crop.
J.H.E. The Lord corrects the disciples in @John 4. "Do not ye say, that there are yet four months and the harvest comes? Behold, I say to you. Lift up your eyes and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest", verse 35. They had miscalculated.
J.T. Yes; they were governed in what they said by the literal side, but the Lord says, "Lift up your eyes and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest". So that you are guided by the state of the saints; as you may say, the state of the crops. It indicates
{392}
to the understanding person where we are in our souls.
A.B.P. It says as to Ruth that she came in barley harvest and continued through to the end of wheat harvest. These two harvests would have a spiritual meaning?
J.T. Just so. The wheat harvest, I think, would be the saints. The barley refers to the Lord Himself personally. We get a reference to the state of the crops in Egypt also after the plague of hail. "For the barley was in the ear, and the flax was boiled", (@Exodus 9:31). They ripened earlier than the others mentioned. We have, therefore, a double way of reckoning: by the sun, and by the state of the crops, which would be the state of the saints, as we have already said. God would say, Unless there is something to take to heaven -- unless the crops are ready, so to speak -- the time of the ascension or the coming of the Lord has to be deferred.
R.W.S. Would it be right for each one to soberly consider what month he is in before God as to his own spiritual history?
J.T. I think so, so that in a certain sense we look into ourselves. Each one of us affords history which can be taken account of; and if that history is not existent there is something wrong; there is some stunting influence. In that case the state of the crop is poor and there is not the yield for God that there should be.
A.R. Colossians speaks of bearing fruit and growing. Is that the same idea?
J.T. Quite so.
R.W.S. And again Paul says to Timothy, "Occupy thyself with these things; be wholly in them, that thy progress may be manifest to all", (@1 Timothy 4:15).
J.T. This assembling of Israel leads up to the great result in the ark. It says, "And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of Jehovah to its place, into the oracle of the house, into the most holy place, under the wings of the cherubim; for the cherubim stretched
{393}
forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and its staves above. And the staves were long, so that the ends of the staves were seen from the holy place before the oracle, but they were not seen without. And there they are to this day. There was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone which Moses placed there at Horeb, when Jehovah made a covenant with the children of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt. And it came to pass when the priests were come out of the holy place, that the cloud filled the house of Jehovah, and the priests could not stand to do their service because of the cloud; for the glory of Jehovah had filled the house of Jehovah", (@1 Kings 8:6 - 11). So that the installation of the ark points to the Person of Christ. Certain wilderness circumstances are not noted, for it is more the heavenly side that is in mind; Christ in heaven.
J.T.Jr. The staves would be the evidence of what had gone before, I suppose; the carrying service. They are there to be seen, but everything that is connected with their journey is not brought up. Is that what you mean?
J.T. Quite. Why should certain things be omitted? The manna, for instance, is omitted. Why should not the pot of manna be there? We are not thinking of the wilderness. In Solomon's regime we have reached the heavenly side of things.
A.R. Is it Christ dwelling in the heart by faith?
J.T. Quite so.
A.N.W. The staves drawn out would indicate that the carrying time is over.
J.T. That is the idea. We have the beautiful expression: "The ark was in rest", (@1 Chronicles 6:31). Therefore, the importance of Solomon is most evident. It is the culmination of all that there was in Israel before God had recourse to the nations. There is not time to go into Solomon's failure, but he broke down
{394}
seriously, and hence, in time, the kingdom was given up, and God had to revert to the gentile nations to carry on His government. But the four monarchies are very poor as compared with the glory of Solomon. God would call our attention to Solomon. He is not calling our attention to the glory of Nebuchadnezzar's kingdom, or that of the Persian kingdom, or of Alexander, or of the Romans. God would say that these are only provisional things and will all disappear. Whereas, the kingdom that He is going to set up will be for ever and ever.
C.N. What place does the ark have in assembly administration?
J.T. Well, it is a question of whether we are dealing with Colossians or Corinthians. Generally, we have to revert to the two epistles to the Corinthians incur difficulties, because they refer to the earthly side of our position. It is the wilderness side, whereas what we are dealing with now is the heavenly side. It is what is possible in the reign of Solomon.
A.B.P. What is the import of the oracle?
J.T. I suppose it is that God speaks. The place of it was inside a cube. It was twenty cubits every way. It was a cube, pointing to the assembly, which is also a cube. (@Revelation 21:16). The assembly will come out thus according to Revelation. It is said to grow into a holy temple in the Lord. The oracle therefore will be in the millennium and all inquiries will have to be made there. All inquiries will come to the assembly, finally, in the millennial day. The light will radiate from the heavenly city.
A.B.P. What is the difference between the oracle and the expression of the mind of God in the covenant, in writing?
J.T. Well, the covenant is on a lower level. It has come up many times and we have had some light as to it. Whilst the mind of God is in it, I would say in general it is for the young Christian. It is what is available to the
{395}
young Christian, in the sense of God committing Himself to us, that we can rely on what God promises. But you get very little of that in Ephesians, Philippians and Colossians. I think therefore that the covenant is intended for the young Christian. Take for instance, @Hebrews 6:18, where it is said that God intervened with an oath, that by two unchangeable things in which it was impossible that God should lie, we might have a strong encouragement, who have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us. I think young people especially need that. There is something they can rely on in the sense of *promise*, and they can cling to that to carry them through; whereas the epistles to the Ephesians, Philippians and Colossians, I would say, are on higher levels. Under these circumstances, we do not need a covenant from God. We do not need a committal from God. We know God and love Him because we know Him.
J.T.Jr. That would link on with the thoughts we had at our last reading in regard to the two altars. The altar of earth was compulsory, but the other altar was, "if thou make me an altar of stone". The heavenly side would link on with the altar of stone.
J.T. Yes; the elder brethren ought to be able to supply what the 'if' calls for. There is an 'if' about it; whereas the altar of earth must be available. It is imperative.
A.P.T. Solomon seems to be restful himself here. He is free and happy.
J.T. Just so. His name would signify that he was a man *of peace*, and the conditions described point to that.
A.P.T. Does the administrative service change in this chapter, in that it is more Godward? "I have indeed built a house of habitation for thee, a settled place for thee to abide in for ever", verse 13. And then the next verse seems to indicate the full height of administrative service: "And the king turned his face, and blessed the whole congregation of Israel; and the whole congregation
{396}
of Israel stood. And he said: Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel", verses 14, 15.
J.T. It is the very acme of things in the Old Testament, involving Christianity. Solomon is the full thought and really a counterpart of David.
J.A.P. There would be a link here with "accepted in the beloved" in @Ephesians 1. Solomon was named "Beloved of Jehovah", (@2 Samuel 12:24).
R.W.S. Is the point that while this position of glory does not last long, it was actually reached?
J.T. That is the idea; it shows what God can do, and how everything is brought through according to God's mind. And, on the other hand, how things left to man's responsibility so rapidly degenerate. It is very humbling that it should be so, but in Solomon's reign God is showing what He can do. And so it was at the beginning, in Paul's ministry, after the twelve. God showed what He could do, and hence the wonderful epistles that we have -- Colossians, Ephesians and Philippians. It is what can be reached and Paul is particular that the Ephesians should understand *his* knowledge of the thing. There was at least one man that knew, and could effect the mind of God.
E.E.H. Is the king a priest here?
J.T. He is; he is acting as priest.
F.H.L. He stays in; when the glory comes in and the priests go out, Solomon is seen inside still (see @1 Kings 8:10,11). Is it a higher thought than the end of Exodus when Moses had to go out?
J.T. You mean that Solomon and David combined exceed the ministry of Moses, which we have already touched on earlier. "When Israel went out of Egypt ... Judah was his sanctuary". We are dealing now with Judah, not Aaron, or Levi. It is the glory of Christ, because it is said expressly, "Our Lord has sprung out of Judah", (@Hebrews 7:14). Therefore all the glories are to be looked for in Him.
{397}
S.F. The king stands to pray, here. Would that be in the consciousness of sonship?
J.T. The kneeling position is also seen in (@1 Kings 8:54). Both postures are priestly. "Behold, bless Jehovah, all ye servants of Jehovah, who by night stand in the house of Jehovah", (@Psalm 134:1) Standing is an attitude in which Eli failed, for he *at*in the house. In the instructions to Moses there was no provision made for sitting in the tabernacle. The priests were to stand in the house of the Lord to keep the charge of the Lord, and I think Solomon is on that line here. He is a priest in that sense, keeping the charge. Things are being looked after. Kneeling is more urgent and supplicatory. Sitting, in a priestly sense, is also noted in Scripture, as in @2 Samuel 7:18 and @Zechariah 6:13 although no provision is formally made.
C.A.M. The question may be raised, Where is the evidence of His glory at the present time? Would it be right to say that we could not have the ministry and the food that is afforded to the saints, were this not a reality in the faith of our souls?
J.T. Well, the revival in which we have part is the answer to that. The leaders in Christendom do not know anything about the revival, but we do, for the revival has brought back all these things. The heavenly side as in Ephesians has especially been recovered to us.
A.B.P. Was this in the soul of Moses by faith when he uttered his song in @Exodus 15? "Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, the place that thou, Jehovah, hast made thy dwelling, the Sanctuary, Lord, that thy hands have prepared", verse 17.
J.T. Just so, and then the allusion in the Psalms, "When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange language, Judah was his sanctuary, Israel his dominion", (@Psalm 114:1, 2). That would mean that David and Solomon were the full
{398}
thought. What we are dealing with now is the full thought in Israel, and typically, the full thought is in Judah which is Christ. Judah means 'praise'. It is the service of God, and this has been recovered to us.
 
{399}
UNDER ORDERS
@Genesis 28:1 - 5; @Genesis 29:1 - 12
I would like to say a few words especially to call attention to Jacob as under orders in regard to his marriage. He was under orders -- we might say from above. One of the expressions of love and fellowship that our young brother and sister, who have just been married, received today, quoted the last verse of Matthew's gospel in which the Lord says, "... teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have enjoined you. And behold, *I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age". How applicable is this verse -- at all times, of course -- but particularly at such a time as the present, when will is apt to be active in these natural things.
The marital relation tends, at times, to bring out the working of the will, sorrowfully. The gospel by Matthew treats the marital relation with a certain liberality which is not found in the other gospels; but of all the gospels, it specifically enforces the will of God. It is, therefore, significant and in keeping with the teaching of the book, I that Matthew should close with these words from the Lord Jesus: "Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have enjoined you. And behold, *I* am with you all the days". The presence of the Lord with His people -- a most precious fact -- is known to those who are regulated by His will. The promise of His presence is given. It is a most comforting and most necessary, thing whilst we are in this wicked world.
The disciples received their commission from the, Lord according to this chapter. They were under His orders, and their converts are to be under His orders, I also. Matthew, above all other parts of Scripture; abominates man's will in the things of God. Modern history reveals the most sorrowful outcomes of marriages arising out of the action of the will. Thus it seemed that
{400}
the message referred to is very appropriate and no doubt our dear brother and sister will remember it. If the Lord is with them, as He promises, they must not forget "whatsoever I have enjoined you".
And so these thoughts link up peculiarly with the passage in Genesis, for Jacob is seen as directly under orders from above; that is, from his father, who is representative of God. He is under orders to procure a wife. That is the principle. In this case he is to go to find her. The servant of Abraham was to go and find a wife for Isaac. He, too, was under orders -- explicit orders from Abraham as to the wife he was to procure. But here Jacob is to go himself. It is said, in Hosea: "Jacob fled into the country of Syria, and Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep". The names used there are: *Jacob fled*, and *Israel served*. Jacob fled! That is a state of things that is not to be overlooked, for he was in danger of his life from his brother. Jacob is the responsible man. But the name is changed. Israel is the man who has become spiritual, "for thou hast wrestled with God, and with men, and hast prevailed". So it says, "Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep". So that there is nothing unseemly or unmanly in keeping sheep for a wife. It was Israel; he who had triumphed, acquiring power with God and men. He could well afford to humble himself in order to find a wife. In truth he hired himself to obtain her; but he was under orders. And that is just the point. We are not to exercise our own wills. If we do there will be trouble. Thus we have in the New Testament the word governing marriage, that it is only in the Lord (@1 Corinthians 7:39). That means that all is under His orders and that the exercise of our wills is shut out.
We have in Jacob the example of the husband making little of himself in order to have a wife: "For a wife he kept sheep". Most of us will be well aware that @Genesis 28 brings in the fact that God met Jacob as he
{401}
was on his way for a wife. That is a very remarkable thing. As he was going out to Padan-Aram for a wife God met him. In his dream Jacob beheld a ladder which was set up on the earth and the top of it reached to the heavens. And angels of God ascended and descended upon it. And Jehovah stood above it. And as he was coming back from Padan-Aram, still afraid of his brother Esau, God met him again: "The angels of God met him". He said, "This is the camp of God". But I have in mind particularly the first occasion Jehovah stood above the ladder and the angels of God ascended and descended upon it; a most remarkable thing that a man in this employ -- in the path of obedience in relation to a wife -- is so regarded by heaven. Is it too much to say that the marriage relation requires this? It requires that the brother entering into the relation should be in direct touch with heaven. Heaven here shows itself to be in direct touch with Jacob.
And then the house of God is mentioned. The truth of the house of God comes into Jacob's mind. Indeed, it is in this relation that it first appears in Scripture. Surely it is not too much, dear brethren, to say that the marriage relation requires recognition of the house of God. We are apt to be disregardful of the house of God. Let everyone know that we are not speaking of a building made with hands. The house of God is a spiritual matter. Since the temple at Jerusalem was destroyed no such building of stone and mortar can have the place of the house of God. The people of God are His house: "Whose house are *we*", (@Hebrews 3:6). And again, "In whom *ye* also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit", (@Ephesians 2:22). And so the house of God comes into Jacob's mind and he says, "This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven", (@Genesis 28:17). Here God met him. Here he is conscious of the interest of heaven. It is none other than the house of God; far transcending any natural joy.
{402}
The house of God affords far more for us than any natural relationship here below. In the house of God we are to be made superior to all that. We enter from the natural into the spiritual. That is the point of the house of God. We are lifted up to heaven, as it were, and only then can we rightly take up marital relations. "This is none other but the house of God". Jacob is on his way for a wife; the thought is that one is made superior to the natural in the house of God. That is the principle governing us today and it bears particularly on our brother and sister.
We read in the next chapter: "And Jacob continued his journey". It is a definite matter; he is under orders to procure a wife, but see the great things that come in on the way -- heaven; the angels; the house of God. The marriage tie is only for a time but our chapter conveys that we are brought into the great things of God so that we may come out in the natural relationships as superior to them. We can be in them according to God. We are above the sorrows as well as the joys. One is superior as in the new heavenly relation. That is the principle; as obedient, we are lifted into the divine realm in order to come out and shine for God in what is natural -- ordained of God, but in itself transient. I believe that the whole married life is to be carried out as adorned with the heavenly, with the sense of the greatness and blessedness of the heavenly; that we are the house of God.
And then, finally, the wife comes into view. How practical she is! What is a wife worth unless she is practical? Rachel is occupied in a practical way; with useful things. Already a title is attached to her. The proper rendering of the passage is "for she was a shepherdess". She had acquired a title through her practical application. She was not dependent upon the marriage relation for her occupation; she was already occupied profitably; she had acquired a title which dates
{403}
back to the beginning, for we are told that Abel was a keeper of sheep.
It is most important that a wife be able to look after things and to function in her own house when her husband is not present. Rachel was a keeper of sheep -- a shepherdess. Indeed, all the community was similarly engaged. And they know one another. They know Laban; they know that he is well. It is a profitable conversation -- not mere society gossip. And as soon as Rachel comes into view Jacob rolls away the stone and waters the flock. But she is the shepherdess; she is profitably engaged.
And so I thought these scriptures would help at this time. We love our dear brother and his wife, our sister. We want to see that the new start which has begun for them today contributes to the house of God. They know something of it and of heaven's interest in them personally, and as with Jacob, so with them; they may contribute to the house of God.
{404}
ADMINISTRATION (8)
@Daniel 2:17 - 49
J.T. It is well to mention that this will be our last reading in the Old Testament on administration. It is thought that there is need for four readings in the New Testament on the same subject. We should look at Daniel in order to consider the truth of administration under the government of God by the gentiles, as taken out of the position it had in Israel.
This chapter contains the basic facts relative to the times of the gentiles. What is before us now is that we might understand and learn the facts relative to the transfer of government from Israel to the gentiles. It is obvious that the great kingdom of Israel had degenerated, and that its rulers had failed. Hence God was obliged to hide His face from the house of Israel, so to speak, and to transfer the authority of rule in the world to the gentile nations. The Spirit of God would impress us with the sorrow that necessarily entered into these circumstances, especially as felt by Daniel and his companions. And so Jerusalem ceased to be the centre of government. It was transferred to Babylon, and later to the Persians, and later still to the Greeks, and then finally to the Romans where it is now. There could be nothing in a way more important than that we should understand these facts and see what part we have in them. Daniel and his companions afford the idea of a remnant of those who would adhere to the mind of God and carry the testimony through in a humble and almost secret way, such as exists at the present time and in which we have part.
J.T.Jr. Would you say that the direct government of God, therefore, would be in relation to Daniel? There was a direct communication to Daniel. Does Nebuchadnezzar stand indirectly in relation to the matter?
J.T. Yes; I think that is the truth. Therefore, God's
{405}
government in the world at that time was indirect; and it is still indirect. It is not as it was under David and Solomon, where He ruled directly. In fact, before there were kings in Israel there was what is called a theocracy. That is to say. God's rule was direct, but it continued mediatorially in the kings, in the house of David and others. If there be any direct government today it would be in the assembly.
A.N.W. Are Daniel and his companions representative of the saints today?
J.T. Yes. They really represent the remnant, and it was transferred to others after they died. While they lived they and others with them were the remnant. They have gone, but still the idea remains of a remnant among the nations, a remnant of the assembly at the present time as there was a remnant of Israel earlier. What is contemplated here was before the assembly historically; and the assembly coming in did not alter the position because the government of God is contemplated as indirect through Nebuchadnezzar and those that followed him. Christ coming in, and later, the assembly being formed, did not alter this position. The position remains what it was according to Daniel and will remain so until there is the heading up of evil. The beast and the false prophet will appear and will be supported by the devil. @Revelation 13. When that takes place God will intervene and set up His government on earth again. It will be in a remnant for a while, but in due time the Lord will appear among them.
C.N. Is it important that Daniel refers to God as the God of the heavens?
J.T. It is important, because it means He is not outwardly the God of the earth. He is not seen in that character, but He has not given up the reins of government. He is over all and through all and in us all. The real thing lies in the fact that He is in us all; that is, in the assembly. That is where He is directly, but He has
{406}
never given up His rights in the universe; even the physical universe is held and carried on by God. He is over all and through all.
A.R. Did the Lord recognise this in Pilate when He said, "Thou hadst no authority whatever against me if it were not given to thee from above", (@John 19:11)?
J.T. Quite so. It is important to note that God is seen here as the God of the heavens. We might say, that is His proper official position now because He has hidden His face from Israel. Christ has come in and a remnant from Israel has been gathered up in the assembly, but the great future now is direct administration in the assembly.
T.E.H. We are exhorted to pray for "all men; for kings and all that are in dignity", (@1 Timothy 2:2). God would have us to pray for those in government.
J.T. Just so. It is not that God takes the place of being directly their God, or the God of the nations. He is, in a certain sense, the God of the nations also; especially in the gospel. But He is not that govern-mentally; His rule is indirect. And that is what we have to consider tonight and I hope we will get instruction too, because it directly affects everyone.
D.P. Is the Roman Empire the last of the world powers that will have to do with the assembly until the end?
J.T. Just so; the last one is alluded to here and is described as part iron and part clay. That is the present public means of divine rule, but in great deterioration. It is not the head of gold. What we have to consider and weigh is the difference between the first part of the image, the head of gold, and the last part, the feet of iron and clay. The image is of a man -- a monstrosity -- and yet God is pleased to recognise it, especially because of Nebuchadnezzar. He was already the head of gold when he had his dream: "Thou, O king, art a king of kings unto whom the God of the heavens hath given
{407}
kingdom, the power, and the strength, and the glory; and wheresoever the children of men, the beasts of the field, and the fowl of the heavens dwell, he hath given them into thy hand, and hath made thee ruler over them all: thou art this head of gold", verses 37, 38. It is not that he is going to be made that: he is already that; that is, Nebuchadnezzar is in the position of head of the system before he is converted, so that the thing was already inaugurated before Nebuchadnezzar was converted.
J.T.Jr. Do we have to understand how God uses these kingdoms in governing and dealing with evil? He deals with evil through them, does he not?
J.T. Yes: and what is to be observed in that connection is that although there is great deterioration from the head down, for the head is of gold and the next feature is silver, and the next brass, and the next iron, yet there is no diminution of the power. There is as much power, perhaps more, in Rome than there was in Babylon.
J.T.Jr. And the Lord recognised that when He said to Pilate that his authority was from above.
F.H.L. Nebuchadnezzar had to recognise that the heavens do rule. Is that public position ever taken by the powers?
J.T. Well, possibly the nations that recognise the truth of Christianity in some sense recognise that God is in heaven, and rules as in heaven. Even the public assembly became corrupted and lost the sense of God's rule from heaven -- the heavenly side of the kingdom. That is the side that is presented here, that He is the God of the heavens, not the God of the earth.
R.W.S. Would the fact that he who was the head of gold was converted, give God an advantage that possibly does not exist now?
J.T. I would say that very definitely, and hence the great change that has come about, because in principle the idea of democracy is not that the heavens do rule
{408}
but the people rule. That is the idea, and of course it is a great departure from the head of gold. It is the mixture of iron and clay.
A.N.W. The legs were of iron. Would the gold suggest majesty and would the iron in the lower section of the monster suggest strength?
J.T. That is important in a practical way because it has been demonstrated before our eyes that there has not been such military and other power as has been shown lately. There has been no diminution of the power, although there is deterioration in the quality from the very beginning, so that Nebuchadnezzar represents the more exalted side, and I suppose God thought it wise to come in and convert him so that he might give increased advantage to this order of government. The full thought, of course, awaited Christ, and the introduction of better conditions, but God is God, and He is merciful. He never forgets that men are men, and that He created them, and He would have to say to them, too.
E.A.L. In chapter 2: 16, it says: "Daniel went in, and requested of the king that he would give him time, that he might show the king the interpretation". Daniel recognised the king's authority and then spoke to his companions and to the God of the heavens. He did not first speak to his companions and the God of the heavens. He evidently realised that the king should be recognised as the power and authority under God's hand.
J.T. I think that is right, and he was concerned as to the whole position; that there might be a revocation of the decree to destroy all these men. I would think Daniel, in a sense, was with God in all this, because God is God of the nations, and He is God of humanity and in that sense He is Creator and His own distinctive character is to be seen. Therefore all these things come up. God is ready to act for men at every opportunity, and so this opportunity offers itself. Daniel is the intercessor,
{409}
because he would save the lives of his companions as well as his own life. I think we have to just bear in mind that God is compassionate at all times, and He would save the lives of these men. We have to begin with Daniel and his companions in this part of our subject and see what kind of persons they were. They were with God and were concerned about His holiness, and what was suitable in their own case, and what food they should eat. They would not be defiled by the king's meat. All these things are basic. If we are to follow up the truth, we must take account of these basic thoughts. Daniel was a godly Jew, he does not belong to the assembly. We should first get from these facts that we are dealing with the Jewish remnant, and that God is taking them up. Isaiah says, "For Jehovah spoke thus to me with a strong hand, and he instructed me not to walk in the way of this people, saying. Ye shall not say, Conspiracy, of everything of which this people saith, Conspiracy; and fear ye not their fear, and be not in dread. Jehovah of hosts, him shall ye sanctify; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. And he will be for a sanctuary; and for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and snared, and taken. Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples. And I will wait for Jehovah, who hideth his face from the house of Jacob; and I will look for him", chapter 8:11 - 17. Now these circumstances are before us in our consideration of this subject. God has hidden His face from the house of Jacob. This is what Christ became. He was hiding His face from the house of Jacob but He would bind up the law and the testimony among His disciples. That was the prophecy of what would happen when the Lord came to earth. But now it is Daniel, and he is taken up mediatorially and entrusted with light, but he is with God
{410}
and God is with him. That is the position in this chapter. He has taken up Daniel and his companions, so that it is not yet the time for the assembly. It may be applied, of course, as the remnant now, but we wish to follow the line of the truth in this book and it begins with these four men. It is what four men of this kind can be at any time and how God can take them up. But to follow the facts, it is Daniel and his three companions; and they get understanding of what the decree of the king was. He had dreams and visions and could not understand them, and he ordained terrible judgment on all the wise men of Babylon, and, of course, Daniel and his companions were numbered amongst them although he was one of the remnant of Israel and one who feared God. Therefore he was concerned that he and his companions should be saved, and indirectly that all the others should be saved too.
A.R. Christianity does not come into the book of Daniel at all.
J.T. Quite so. It is a book that deals with the transfer of the government of the world from Israel to the gentiles. That is the position in this chapter of the book.
C.N. Would you say that the testimony of God was bound up with these men in Babylon?
J.T. I would. There were others like them, but they are taken up in this peculiar way.
J.A.P. In the second monarchy Cyrus orders the Israelites back to Jerusalem. How is he to be viewed?
J.T. It is the line of the four monarchies. He is the Persian, and God took him up as He took up Nebuchadnezzar. You might say that He converted him and therefore he was used of God to bring a remnant back to Jerusalem. Nebuchadnezzar did not do that.
J.T.Jr. What is made known to Daniel as to the seventy weeks alludes only to what concerns the earth. Messiah is cut off, but there is nothing said about the church.
{411}
J.T. That is right. We ought to pursue the thing as it is here to get right thoughts about it; so that the seventy weeks are timed. They belong to the time sphere on earth which is running on now. The last week -- at least half of it -- is still to be fulfilled. Messiah was cut off after sixty-nine weeks, and He has nothing; that is. He has nothing of the inheritance that is His, but He has the assembly. The seventy weeks have run on in that sense for all these centuries; but before the last week is fulfilled, the assembly is formed, yet it forms no part of the seventy weeks. When the final part of the seventy weeks begins to be fulfilled the assembly will be in heaven. She is to shine out from heaven in the millennium. The period of the assembly's formation is the most wonderful dispensation. It is a sort of nondescript dispensation. It is not like any of the others. It does not refer to the earth properly. It is a dispensation from heaven enacted here on earth, the gospel and the assembly being the great thoughts in mind.
A.Pf. What is the effect of the direct government of God in the assembly and on the universal lords of this darkness?
J.T. The direct government on the earth in the assembly is the testimony for all the nations if they have eyes to see and ears to hear. There is such a thing as direct government from God on earth. Our care meetings are a testimony to it. He is helping the brethren to do what is right. "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them", (@Matthew 18:20). So that we get the real government of God among the saints who form the assembly.
A.Pf. Does it also restrain the power of the universal lords of this darkness?
J.T. It certainly is against them although they are still free. Satan is not yet bound. He is still in heaven and that is very sorrowful. He is going to be cast out presently. While the assembly is going on down here,
{412}
Satan is regarded as in heaven but the assembly is to take its place in heaven and he is to be cast out.
R.W.S. Has not God used the war to have the testimony brought before the government through young men in order to show that God's direct government is in the assembly?
J.T. Just so. These young men, some of whom we have here among us tonight, have been in our prayers for these last six years. They have shone like Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego for God has helped them. They have shown that our prayers have been effectual. The more we take on the character of these four men, the more we shall understand our position, and how God will help us in these present circumstances.
F.S.C. Is there anything on the earth today that represents the righteous nations of which the Lord speaks in @Matthew 25?
J.T. The time for that has not yet come. The sheep on the Lord's right are the saved nations. There are the saved on the right hand and the lost on the left. The lost are called the goats, and the saved, the sheep. That is a time yet future. The test will be, I think, the treatment of the Jewish remnant: "Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren ..." (@Matthew 25:40). I believe the Jewish remnant will be the 'brethren'.
A.N.W. Administration is committed to the four young men in Babylon. Would they not maintain the rights of God in performing their duties?
J.T. You can see that, by what it says. Daniel interceded for them, and they were given a place with him in the administration of the kingdom. It says, "And Daniel requested of the king, and he appointed Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego over the administration of the province of Babylon", (@Daniel 2:49). That was, I suppose, the leading province in the kingdom. The administration is in their hands.
{413}
A.N.W. When the rights of God are in question, they may have to go into the fire, but their administration would certainly maintain the rights of God.
J.T. And so it is that any of us in our businesses may fulfil righteous administration, and God is pleased with it. It is a testimony to our employers.
J.T.Jr. Do you think that the features of David and Solomon are carried forward in measure through these men into the place they had in Babylon? In a way, it would reflect the glory of what had passed.
J.T. It is remarkable that they should be so distinguished and honoured and yet be submitted to such cruelty as we see with the three in chapter 3 and later with Daniel himself who was cast into the den of lions. It shows how little you can rely upon politicians or statesmen.
A.R. In chapter 3, the first difficulty arises over a question of God's rights over them.
J.T. Quite so; the favour of this second chapter is tested in chapter 3. But we have another great matter in the conversion of Nebuchadnezzar himself. But before that was achieved he was subjected to seven years as a beast of the field, showing how we are to fear God and how God would produce this fear and testimony among kings and rulers.
D.P. This system built up, in Babylon, is on the brink of disaster, and not one of the wise men is able to find a solution. Would it not remind us of how easily the world's system can be dissolved?
J.T. Just so; presently we will see the fulfilment of Nebuchadnezzar's dream. The image will be ground to powder and blown away with the wind. One of the most solemn things you get in this whole book is what eventuates in the history of the kingdoms of this world.
A.B.P. Is there a mixture of religion with rule in chapter 3, and is that what usually brings the test to the saints?
{414}
J.T. Just so; that is a good way to put it. The devil has these three men in his mind, and this is a religious matter. The king made an image of gold that was to be worshipped. How suggestive the allusion to Babylon is in the book of Revelation. It is the name given to a so-called system of Christendom. It should just be mentioned to bring out the truth. It is not at all insignificant that Babylon is the name given to this great system, now numbering, I understand, about 300,000,000 people. They are making a great show at this very time in Rome, and it represents this kind of thing in @Daniel 3, where these three men are sacrificed and thrown into the fiery furnace. This system is capable of that if the political powers make a way for it.
A.P.T. What is the truth as to the end of chapter 2 where the king worships Daniel, and he is able to secure appointments?
J.T. It is really a question why Daniel did not refuse the worship. I suppose we will have to leave that, because I am sure he would refuse it ordinarily. It says, in verse 46, "Then king Nebuchadnezzar fell on his face and worshipped Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet odours unto him. The king answered Daniel and said. Of a truth it is that your God is the God of gods, and the Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, because thou wast able to reveal this secret". It is a question as to whether or not he is just a viceroy as a representative of God for the moment. It was said to Moses that he was to be God to Pharaoh. We should perhaps leave the matter as it is stated and just accept the position and the facts given. The king was saying the truth in a general way, and Daniel was for the moment representative of God.
C.A.M. Perhaps the king's attitude in reverence was a step towards his conversion.
J.T. It may have been leading up to that. I think the idea of representation is perhaps the most feasible.
{415}
Apparently Daniel accepted it without saying anything.
C.A.M. I think that brings in a lot of light as to the matter.
J.T. I think it does. I have often wondered myself as to Daniel's acceptance of what the king did, but what throws light on the matter is that the king asserts the truth as to God. "Of a truth it is that your God is the God of gods, and the Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, because thou wast able to reveal this secret". He was attributing it all to God and I suppose Daniel accepted that.
C.A.M. I suppose things are deteriorating so much that you would not expect this kind of thing now. The heads of the political world have not that intelligence now.
J.T. That is true. We have already remarked, and I think rightly, that whilst there has been deterioration in government, there has been the greatest evidence of combined military power in recent times that ever has been seen on the earth. So that there is no diminution of power to govern, but there is diminution of quality and there is very little respect for divine principles. There was this respect with Nebuchadnezzar when he came to submit to God after the seven years of terrible experience through which God passed him as recorded in chapter 4.
A.P.T. When you refer to power are you speaking of the enormous military power that was recently in evidence to put down what was unquestionably of the devil?
J.T. Yes. In the meantime government is, in the main, of God. God is using it, I would say. The present government that has been set up by the nations over Japan is of God. Certain right principles are enacted and enforced by the military government now in charge there. I would say that God is in that, so far. Why should we not attribute to God everything that is in any
{416}
way favourable to the truth? As we have been saying, the present combination of military power is greater than we have ever seen before and for the moment we are thankful for it and pray God to support it, because it is in favour of the right.
A.N.W. In what is transpiring now in this and other countries in disputes between management and labour you can see the iron and clay showing itself.
J.T. Just so. The clay is showing itself in unionism, but that is the situation and we have to leave it.
B.T. Would you link the attitude of Nebuchadnezzar toward Daniel in the end of chapter 2 with the respect that certain nations have today for the conscience of Christians?
J.T. Quite so, and as far as I know the brethren in this city and generally have thanked God for six years for the late President of this country and the Prime Minister of England and others like them who have worked together against the evil that came up in other lands. We have connected them with God's governmental dealings.
J.A.P. They are God's officers and ministers.
J.T. Just so; the powers that be are called that. Therefore, we are to respect them and pray for them and submit to them. God is honouring the prayers of His people. And the brethren are getting free from trade unions, which is another great matter. Many are not free from them and, of course, that is a stain on the testimony.
A.Pf. Is the Russian government included in the Roman Empire?
J.T. No. It never was in the Roman Empire. The Roman Empire was more limited than the Babylonian, although it had more power in the West. But I would say that Russia has a peculiar place under the government of God. The devil has great power in her too, but God has used her recently against the formidable evil
{417}
power that arose in Europe. When Jerusalem is attacked Russia will have to do with that. In @Ezekiel 39 Russia is seen as the attacking power which is caused to come up from the uttermost north. It never was part of the Roman Empire. We cannot ignore the fact that the Roman Empire is a dread one, nevertheless; but it is only a detail that Russia was never a part of the Roman Empire. She is seen at the end of the dispensation in chapter 20 of Revelation where it is recorded that fire comes down from heaven and destroys Gog and Magog.
S.M. You referred earlier to Satan being in heaven. The Lord says, "I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven", (@Luke 10:18).
J.T. The Lord Jesus told His disciples that He saw that Himself, showing how things were happening in view of His final position of governing the world. He saw that anticipatively for the power was there for his overthrow. But the hope is that the brethren will get the general idea that is in this chapter, of this monster as we may call it, which Nebuchadnezzar saw in the dream that Daniel explained. The explanation is given briefly in verse 31, "Thou, O king, sawest, and behold, a great image. This image was mighty and its brightness excellent; it stood before thee, and its appearance was terrible. This image's head was of fine gold, its breast and its arms of silver, its belly and its thighs of brass, its legs of iron, its feet part of iron and part of clay. Thou sawest till a stone was cut out without hands; and it smote the image upon its feet". No human combination or skill -- no scientific ability -- was involved in the destruction of the image. It was divine power. "It smote the image upon its feet of iron and clay, and broke them to pieces. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold broken in pieces together, and they became like the chaff of the summer threshing-floors; and the wind carried them away, and no place was found for them. And the stone that smote the image
{418}
became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth. This is the dream; and we will tell the interpretation of it before the king". This fourth feature -- the iron and the clay -- is running on just now and it will run on to the end. The destruction of it will be sudden as noted in the passage read.
C.N. Verse 35 includes the gold and silver and brass as well as the iron and clay, as broken.
J.T. It is one mass broken together; yet the gold is respected in Nebuchadnezzar.
C.F.E. How do you look at the stone here? It becomes a great mountain filling the whole earth.
J.T. The stone would be a symbol, I think, of what is of God. It suggests what is permanent.
J.H.E. You were saying that it is hoped that we would get the full thought of this. If we do, would we not break out in an exclamation like verses 20 to 24? It is poetic and could only be said by those that are in the good of what God is revealing.
J.T. It is very affecting to see how those three men had a prayer meeting, as you might say, in view of this awful thing. It says in verse 17: "Then Daniel went to his house" (it is remarkable that he had a house) "and made the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions ..." 'Companions' is a beautiful word there. The Lord uses it Himself. Then it goes on to say, "... that they would desire mercies of the God of the heavens concerning this secret". We see how complications can be faced at the present time and how we can get together in prayer, because this is nothing more nor less than a few brethren getting together in prayer, to ask mercies from the God of heaven. They did not have the link that we have. They were not taught to pray by the Lord Jesus, but they prayed.
F.H.L. Does it suggest the prayer meeting in @Acts 4? "Why are the nations in tumultuous agitation ... ?" (@Psalm 2:1).
{419}
J.T. Just so; only there the answer is instantaneous. The Lord taught them to pray, and we are taught to pray. It comes to one now what a beautiful thing it is that the remnant is seen here in these words. Praise was rendered to God Himself, first. "Then Daniel blessed the God of the heavens. Daniel answered and said. Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever; for wisdom and might are his. And it is he that changeth times and seasons; he deposeth kings, and setteth up kings; he giveth wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding. It is he that revealeth the deep and secret things; he knoweth what is in the darkness, and the light dwelleth with him. I thank thee, and I praise thee, O God of my fathers, who hast given me wisdom and might, and hast made known unto me already what we desired of thee", verses 19 - 23. This should be a great encouragement to the brethren to get together, and that our prayers should embrace all these matters that refer to the government of the world because of their bearing on the assembly and assembly service. It lifts the brethren to a different plane altogether in that we have part with God in what He is doing as Daniel and these three men have here.
C.N. Would you say then that this section we have read is God acting directly with His people and for His people?
Yes; and they are acting for Him, because they serving Him. They are praising Him; they are carrying on His worship. In the end of chapter 4 Nebuchadnezzar came into the service of God. He is not in it in chapter 2; "And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto the heavens, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the Most High" (now he is linked, as a priest, with Daniel and the other three) "and I praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation.
{420}
to generation. And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing; and he doeth according to his will in the army of the heavens, and among the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou? At the same time mine understanding returned unto me, and for the glory of my kingdom, my majesty and brightness returned unto me; and my counsellors and my nobles sought me; and I was established in my kingdom, and excellent greatness was added unto me. Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour the King of the heavens, all whose works are truth, and his paths judgment: and those that walk in pride he is able to abase", verses 34 - 37. It seems to me chapter 4 shows how the truth is spreading, so that even the king is brought into it. It might be said that in our times God has brought this kind of thing about, even though it be in a very faint way.
W.W.M. What the apostle says to Timothy as to prayer should be in our hearts: "I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings be made for all men; for kings and all that are in dignity, that we may lead a quiet and tranquil life in all piety and gravity", (@1 Timothy 2:1,2).
J.T. Quite so; and it works out, I am sure, in favour being shown us when we may not expect it. These men were cast into the furnace, but see the victory they had. The Son of God was with them. That comes into our times. The Lord is with us.
A.N.W. When we pray for kings and rulers, we would not consider what denomination they belong to.
J.T. We do not pray for the King of England as head of the Church of England, although that is one of his official functions. We pray for him as being one of God's ministers and so also the President of the United States and other rulers. We link up those in authority with God. They may not do it themselves, but we do it for them because we know the rights of God in government.
{421}
A.R. Paul, in speaking to the Athenians said that God "has made of one blood every nation of men to dwell upon the whole face of the earth, having determined ordained times and the boundaries of their dwelling, that they may seek God", (@Acts 17:26,27). Does that mean that the territory which each nation is allotted of God is designed to make it favourable for them to hear the testimony and be converted?
J.T. I think that is good, because Paul's own word is "that the blessing of Abraham might come to the nations in Christ Jesus, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith", (@Galatians 3:14). God divided the languages at Babel, where Babylon began, and they remained where He put them. It was as if God impounded them and kept them by boundaries for the gospel to reach them. That is really the truth and it is a remarkable testimony to God's grace.
S.M. Is that why it is said that the house of God is a house of prayer for all nations?
J.T. Just so.
S.W. There are qualifications which any ruler of a I land must acquire before he can fill such a position. Does it not work the same with us, that we must have qualifications before we can administer in the assembly?
J.T. We get a good example in these four men in Daniel. They really contain the roots of the whole matter subjectively, and there must be that with us. What God is doing governmentally, or dispensationally, must hinge on what the Holy Spirit is doing in the saints. That is where the testimony lies.
A.R. You have spoken of the prayer meetings of the saints as being the very centre of things.
J.T. I think that is so. It is illustrated in these men. Although they did not have the Holy Spirit yet they were remarkable men and point to godliness among the brethren.
E.A.L. In verse 17 the Hebrew names are given,
{422}
whereas in the last verse of the chapter they are called by the names that the prince of the eunuchs gave them. What does the change of names mean?
J.T. It may indicate that God is coming now to respect the position of the gentile monarchies. They are acquiring more place with Him; especially in Nebuchadnezzar there is the idea of the transfer of government. God enlarged and elevated government in him, and gave it a great start, but the degeneration is very rapid until we get down to the iron and the clay. It is the idea of degeneration that one dreads, because we have to do with it now, and there is little or nothing of God in it.
R.W.S. At times there seems to be a complete breakdown of administration.
J.T. It is remarkable how weak administration has become in the last year or so. The administrators are helpless in dealing with certain conditions. And, of course, that is something for us to think of, because things might get worse unless we keep going to God about them, because the degeneration is rapid and steady.
P.C. In praying for rulers and those in authority would it be right to include the leaders of trade unions?
J.T. I do not know that it would be right to recognise any such thing as that. That is not of God. While they may have part in politics we can hardly consider them as God's ministers, but should they become statesmen they become representative of God in government for they have part in the State.
J.H.H. In @Romans 13 it says, "Practise what is good, and thou shalt have praise from it", verse 3. Even though the government may deteriorate you practise what is good.
J.T. I think Paul treats of the subject abstractly. He rules out other things, and looks at persons in authority abstractly as representative of God insofar as they may be. The abstract idea is very often seen in Scripture and
{423}
it helps us to eliminate other things from our consideration. God can do that.
D.P. The powers that be are making an effort to form a governing body. From what we have had before us, it would seem that their efforts will fail because the iron and the miry clay do not mix.
J.T. It would seem so. They are intimating that themselves. There is little hope for peace if they do not succeed. We should count on God that they may succeed, in measure, and give a little respite for the gospel to continue.
E.A.L. Daniel told Nebuchadnezzar, "Thou art this head of gold". Then it says that Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold. It was *all* gold.
J.T. Yes; I suppose the thing was really suggested to him in the great image of which he had dreamed, but he became religious and applied it to himself.
J.T.Jr. The power he had received inflated him.
J.T. Just so. We have already alluded to the great results finally reached in Nebuchadnezzar, and the pains to which God went to convert him. Doubtless the prayers of those four men had something to do with it.
J.T.Jr. He judged his pride at the end: "And those that walk in pride he is able to abase". In Job it speaks about the king over all the proud beasts. I suppose Nebuchadnezzar was like one of the proud beasts before he was converted.
J.T. He was under the domination of Satan, you might say. Leviathan is a type of that sort of thing -- king of all the proud beasts. Satan was lifted up in pride because of his beauty.
C.A.M. I suppose the reason that many in authority are not converted, is because they are not willing to admit that they are beasts, as Nebuchadnezzar did. God has designated the Roman Empire, in the Revelation, as a very terrible beast, but pride would prevent admitting it, would you say?
{424}
J.T. Just so; the psalmist says, "I was as a beast with thee", (@Psalm 73:22). He judged himself.
D.P. Is an absolute monarchy God's thought for rule?
J.T. It is, a limited monarchy is not of God but He is going on with such governments in His ways with men. The throne of grace is absolute, so that every person who is convicted of sin need have no difficulty in turning to God. The throne is absolute.
J.A.P. We have been considering the God of the heavens, but when Nebuchadnezzar speaks about his conversion, he speaks of God as the Most High God. It is the same term Melchisedec uses in speaking to Abraham.
J.T. It is a term that refers to the millennium. God is Most High. He is Supreme. The term does not belong to our day, therefore in @Acts 16, when the woman with the spirit of Python said, "These men are bondmen of the Most High God" she was simply the devil's mouthpiece to divert attention to another day instead of the present, which is the greatest. We do not want to miss the greatest. The greatest day is the day of grace -- grace reigns "through righteousness to eternal life". Think of the magnitude of that.
R.W.S. Do you think that conditions will get worse publicly before the Lord comes, or do you feel that as a result of prayer God might hold things in check?
J.T. I think that things are getting worse, and prophetic suggestions all point that way. This very prophecy gives a degenerating picture, and we are in the period of the worst part of it. We can see that government, represented in the head of gold, is not holding. It is not asserting itself. The degenerating spirit is there, and we need not be surprised if conditions get worse and worse.
R.W.S. It is possible that the tide of evil may bring suffering to the saints.
{425}
J.T. The word to Philadelphia will help: "*I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth", (@Revelation 3:10). The Lord says He is making a difference as to the saints, to keep us out of the hour of trial, so we are praying to the Lord to come.
D.P. The rise of communism and socialism are furthest away from God's idea of administration.
J.T. Exactly, and these features are making headway. They are restrained somewhat. It is a comforting thing that "there is he who restrains now until he be gone". The Spirit of God Himself is hindering, and then there is also *that* which restrains, which would no doubt include governments which are outwardly supporting Christian principles.
A.P.T. It says of Daniel, in chapter 6, that he had an excellent spirit. Would that link up with your remark as to what has a deterring effect on conditions in the world?
J.T. I would say he had a great influence. He had become known. In chapter 5, the queen-mother said, "There is a man in thy kingdom ..." She extolled him; and what a thought Darius had of him in chapter 6! Belshazzar made him the third ruler in his kingdom, but he was not enthusiastic about that. You can see how different his attitude was toward Belshazzar from what it had been toward Nebuchadnezzar, showing how servants make a difference in their judgment of people. If we were more with God about matters we should have a clearer judgment about people.
A.B.P. The interpretation of Belshazzar's dream is different from the interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's dream. Would that be an indication of the deterioration of the kingdom -- that communications concerning it were not as free?
J.T. Very likely.
A.N.W. "And thou, Belshazzar, his son, hast not
{426}
humbled thy heart, although thou knewest all this", chapter 5: 22. That made the difference.
J.T. "That night was Belshazzar ... slain". But the decree went through and Daniel was made third ruler in the kingdom.
A.P.T. What is said of Belshazzar ought to help young people in a meeting like this. His end is a solemn warning to those who have had godly parents and who are indifferent to what has been presented to them in testimony by their parents and others.
{427}
ADMINISTRATION (9)
@Acts 19:1 - 7; @Ephesians 1:1 - 23
J.T. The subject of administration has been pursued in the Old Testament for several months and it is thought that we should consider it now in the New Testament. It is thought that Paul's epistle to the Ephesians should be considered. It may be thought that the level of Ephesians is somewhat high for the first reading in the New Testament, but the principle governing it requires that we should begin at the top, for administration refers to what is at the top. It is therefore a question of Christ in heaven, being "head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all", chapter 1:22,23. Earlier in the chapter we have the exact word which has entered into all these meetings: "... having made known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he purposed in himself for the *administration* of the fulness of times, to head up all, things in the Christ, the things in the heavens and the I things upon the earth", verses 9, 10. The word is also used twice in chapter 3. The subject, therefore, has a prominent place in this epistle. It should be noted that Paul, to whom was committed the great subject of the mystery of the gospel, as well as other leading subjects of the truth, resided and ministered three years in Ephesus and unfolded the truth in its fulness. He said he had not "shrunk from announcing to them all the counsel of God", (@Acts 20:27). He spent three years at Ephesus and eighteen months at Corinth, which is the fundamental side of the position, but added to these he spent a good many years in prison. He was about two years in prison in Caesarea and probably more in Rome. It is thought that these years of imprisonment were ordered of the Lord to give the apostle an opportunity to be in quietness and in freedom from his ordinary active
{428}
labours which entailed great sufferings as he tells us, especially in @2 Corinthians 11. So that he would thus have opportunity to ponder the truth in all its bearings, which doubtless he did. In fact, his greatest epistles were written from prison. There can be no doubt that the Lord intended that this great epistle to the Ephesians should be in writing in the inspired page, as well as the epistles to the Philippians and the Colossians, and others. This would show that he had great opportunity with the Lord to ponder the truth, and the great subject of administration necessarily came before him in those years.
It is morally right that we should bear all these things in mind in considering the subject of administration. We read of the Lord having gone beyond all the heavens, but in the subject before us He is at the right hand of God, as we are told in verse 20: "... and he set him down at his right hand in the heavenlies, above every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named". He is actually administering now in the whole realm of the testimony. So that we have the Lord before us functioning as the great Administrator of the whole realm of the truth. It was thought, therefore, that we should direct our view to this epistle as well as to the verses we have read from @Acts 19, which give the historical facts of the apostle's ministry in Ephesus. Chapter 20 is engaged with other features, but particularly calls attention to the apostle's work and how he summoned the elders of Ephesus to him to review the whole matter of his service amongst them and to exhort them to shepherd the assembly of God. We now get the benefit of all that. Administration extended all through the past centuries and will go on through Christianity, but it will also extend through the millennium and beyond it, for the assembly will be engaged in the service of administration throughout the eternal day. The assembly is made to grow into a holy temple
{429}
in the Lord; meaning that it is where things are told out and explained.
A.R. Would the reference in chapter 3 of this epistle to the administration of the grace of God and the administration of the mystery help in what is before us?
J.T. Yes. It is a parenthetical chapter and it is devoted to Paul's knowledge of the mystery, which he wishes the Ephesians to know. We too should know it, but there was one man whom God especially raised up to know the mystery. But we want to get the truth of administration as in the hands of the Lord at this time. The Lord is functioning in that very way tonight; but He is functioning in heaven and the Holy Spirit is carrying it out here. We want to get the full thought of administration from the spiritual side which Ephesians affords.
A.MacN. Does Joseph, who is a type of Christ exalted among the gentiles, serve to illustrate the present administration of the Lord Jesus in the assembly?
J.T. Quite so; only that the subject before us is not simply Christ among the gentiles. Ephesians contemplates Jew and gentile in the assembly so that it is the widest thought we can get and embraces all that compose the assembly.
F.H.L. Would the counsels of God involve administration?
J.T. It is a question of His counsels, so that we have, in the book before us, the counsel of His will, the mystery of His will, and the good pleasure of His will. The will of God is going through in every respect, which involves His counsels. And so Paul told the elders of Ephesus that he had not shunned to declare unto them the *whole* counsel of God. We get the widest thoughts in this epistle.
C.N. So that it says in chapter 4:9, "But that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended into the lower parts of the earth? He that descended is the same
{430}
who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things; and *he* has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints; with a view to the work of the ministry". Would that involve the Lord's administration?
J.T. Quite so. It is therefore open to us to help each other according to the measure of ability that there may be among us. It is a question of the gifts that have been given, as it says: "Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men". This is the Lord's position, and He is functioning in it now, and it is for us, as having any knowledge of the truth of Christ's administration, to unfold it to one another, and the Spirit of God is here to help us.
A.N.W. Would the "administration of the fulness of times" denote finality in regard to administration? The passage goes on to speak of heading up all things in Christ.
J.T. Just so; we are in the times of the gentiles now, but the fulness includes all times. All that has come out in all dispensations will be seen fully in the millennium, so that it is a very full and comprehensive thought. The Lord would help us to apprehend it.
R.W.S. Would the Lord's present administration bear on the assembly, or is it wider than the assembly?
J.T. Well, His administration is wider because it involves the heading up of all things. The idea of heading up is to be noted. It is not simply that He is now administering through the assembly, which He is, but He administered even before the assembly was formed. He arose, and went up to heaven, and was in heaven for ten days before the Spirit came; but as the Spirit came. He began to unfold through the gifts. There were twelve men -- the apostles. They are all said to be present, and Peter stood up and spoke. As he finished speaking, the Spirit of God began to work in
{431}
souls, so that they spoke to Peter and the other apostles. That is, all the gifts were there, and they were recognised. And in any little measure in which that is seen now, the Spirit of God is present to unfold things to us. And so it was that those who were convicted said to Peter and the others, "What shall we do?" Well, that is the way the matter worked out but we need not proceed further on that line, because we are now concerned as to the unfolding of the mystery of the whole counsel of God. And according to the measure in which the Spirit has His way in any of us He will help us into that.
A.MacD. I think what you say about the fulness of the times is important. The passage in @Galatians 4:4, which says, "But when the fulness of the time was come ..." would mean the present moment in which we live -- Christ's day of administration.
J.T. That passage refers to the fulness of time that led up to the incoming of the Lord Jesus. "God sent forth his Son, come of woman, come under law". But we are dealing with Ephesians, not Galatians, and I believe if we keep to that we shall get something as to the great general thought entering into administration, for it governs the whole position of the truth. It is not simply the universe in a physical sense, but in a moral sense -- the whole of mankind is in mind. The Lord is unfolding the truth in that sense.
J.T.Jr. The centre of operations is heaven -- that is the top, so to speak. We should get a view of everything from that position.
J.T. It is the grand view that is afforded to us in Christ above, the Holy Spirit down here giving us the power, subjectively, to understand and to speak of it. They spoke "as the Spirit gave to them to speak forth". He gave the apostles, and particularly Paul, utterance of the whole scope of the truth; but now we are engaged with the matter of administration.
{432}
A.R. Is the extent of the administration conveyed in "the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth"? Would that reference go beyond the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. The administration runs on into the millennium and into the eternal state of things. But at the present time it enters into Christianity. The Lord is in charge of it; it is His matter, only the gifts are employed by Him, and the assembly itself will be employed presently even in regard to the universe, so that she grows now into a holy temple in the Lord. She will be that in the millennium and in the eternal state of things, too.
A.P.T. Are the gifts subsidiary administrators?
J.T. I think that is right. Paul was such. He speaks of himself in that sense in chapter 3, "If indeed ye have heard of the administration of the grace of God which has been given to me towards you, that by revelation the mystery has been made known to me (according as I have written before briefly, by which, in reading it, ye can understand my intelligence in the mystery of the Christ), which in other generations has not been made known to the sons of men, as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets in the power of the Spirit, that they who are of the nations should be joint heirs" (this is the fact of the mystery) "and a joint body, and joint partakers of his promise in Christ Jesus by the glad tidings; of which I am become minister according to the gift of the grace of God given to me, according to the working of his power", verses 2 - 7. So that what you say is borne out here, that the apostles and other gifts are immediately in the Lord's hand to help in the unfolding of the truth.
C.A.M. Would you say the expression, "The fulness of times" refers to the millennium, and would be the closing up of time, whereas the thought of "the fulness of him who fills all in all" will go into eternity?
J.T. Just so. The fulness of times is the millennium.
{433}
The present time is a sort of parenthesis, as we have often remarked, to bring out the assembly. The great burden of truth comes down from the Old Testament and enters into the millennium. But in the meantime everything is disclosed in the assembly and Paul is the minister of it, so that we should all be informed and instructed and built up in the truth. What has been said as to subsidiary administrators is important. The Lord has all of us, in whatever measure we are able to link on with the system, because, as soon as one is converted and has the Holy Spirit, he forms part of the system. If he is a gifted man, he will be more in evidence in the system. That is the advantage we have in these meetings, because the Lord is over us all and the Spirit is here and ready to use us according to our measure.
D.P. Would the administration of the food in @Acts 6 come within the scope of the administration of which you are speaking?
J.T. It belongs to the administration, and it was of the Lord that deacons should be appointed to look after it. The apostles said it was not right that they should leave the word of God to serve tables. Serving tables was part of the administration, but on a lower level than this of which we are speaking. It was a matter of administering literal food to the saints. Therefore, seven men of good report among them were appointed to attend to that 'business'.
R.W.S. John says, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand", (@John 3:35). Is Ephesians the working out of that in a detailed way?
J.T. Just so. We are now engaged with the whole matter, and we are part of it. The next chapter brings in the woman of Samaria, and she recognises, as the facts show, that she was part of the system. She says, "Is not he the Christ?" The Christ is the Head of the system. He is the One who does things. So it is that she
{434}
immediately left her waterpot. She had come out to draw water and she left the waterpot because the Lord had brought in spiritual water -- the Holy Spirit. She becomes a vessel for the Spirit. Each one of us here, who has the Spirit, is a vessel of the Spirit, and we are in the administrative system according to what we may be able to do, and especially if there is gift, as remarked.
A.N.W. Would you make it a little plainer where the historical reference of @Acts 19 fits in with what we are considering? Is it the Lord administering there or the apostle acting in a subsidiary way?
J.T. We read that passage, having in mind to look into it because it gives us the historical facts of this part of the ministry. There were twelve men involved, as we have often observed. They were probably converts, having light as to John's ministry, but that is not Christianity. Apollos had come to light in chapter 18 and he was a preacher -- an able man. These twelve men would be of a similar class, only they had not as yet received the Spirit. Paul asked them, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed? And they said to him. We did not even hear if the Holy Spirit was come. And he said. To what then were ye baptised? And they said. To the baptism of John. And Paul said, John indeed baptised with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe on him that was coming after him, that is, on Jesus. And when they heard that, they were baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus. And Paul having laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them, and they spoke with tongues and prophesied. And all the men were about twelve", verses 2 - 7. These verses show this particular part of the work of the apostles; especially Paul, and how the Ephesian assembly was formed, which is a most important matter. There were twelve men, all converted, and they received the Spirit at the same time through Paul laying his hands upon them, showing that
{435}
this part which we are considering now is characteristic of Paul's work. That is why we are dealing with the epistle to the Ephesians. It is thought that we should seek to grasp the truth unfolded by Paul because it is the final administration of the truth. He completed the word of God. It is thought that we should begin with his ministry if we are to get a proper view of our subject.
A.A.T. Would the fact that there were twelve men connect with the thought of administration?
J.T. That is just the point. That is particularly in mind because the number twelve suggests administration. We shall see also that this number is stressed in regard to the city in @Revelation 21.
C.N. Is there any special import to be attached to the upper districts?
J.T. I think there is. Apollos was at Corinth, which would be the lower district, so to speak, and therefore suggests fundamental Christianity; whereas Paul is moving in the upper districts, which would allude to the heavenly side of the truth, from which position administration is carried on. The administration of the universe, whether physical or spiritual, is in the hands of Christ. He is using all the gifts in the unfolding of the truth.
A.MacD. Would Priscilla and Aquila take on the position? They were apparently local at Corinth and at Ephesus, for some time.
J.T. Just so; I think they represent this. They joined in with Paul in a very sympathetic way. @Acts 18 is the Corinthian chapter -- the fundamental side of the truth -- whereas chapter 19 is the Ephesian or heavenly side of the truth, and that is what we are dealing with now.
A.MacD. Aquila and Priscilla instructed Apollos more exactly in regard to the truth. Having been with Paul, they would know his ways and thus be qualified to adjust Apollos.
{436}
J.T. He needed to be instructed more exactly and that is what we are seeking to get at now, in principle. We are told that they "took him to them and unfolded to him the way of God more exactly". The way of God would be wider than what we are dealing with now. It is Christianity, really, and it involves the way in which the gospel is promulgated, but we are dealing now with the heavenly side of the administrative services of Christ. As this dispensation finishes these services will especially affect the millennial day.
A.T.D. Would the orderly way in which Boaz went about his matters in relation to Ruth fit in here? Boaz asked ten men and the near of kin to sit down with him, the number being twelve altogether.
J.T. Boaz therefore may be regarded as a type of Christ, and as you say, he went about things in an orderly way. He says, "Thou, such a one, turn aside, sit down here", (@Ruth 4:1). It was a deliberative matter. And that is the point now. We want to get on to the deliberative side, and to keep to the particular phase of the truth that is seen in Ephesians. These meetings should be deliberative.
J.T.Jr. When Peter said that the Lord Jesus was made both Lord and Christ by God he did not open up what those titles mean, but Paul opens up the thought of Christ, especially in this chapter.
J.T. Just so. When the article is used -- 'the Christ' -- it is the Man who does things for God. He is anointed to do that. If it is the preaching of the gospel. He is anointed to do that; if it is opening up the truth of the mystery. He is anointed to do that. Then the brethren who are anointed, as having the Spirit of God, are called into the work of the anointed One. So it is a question of being able to deliberate and weigh things patiently as to how they fit in with what is before us.
J.T.Jr. What is the force of "... head up all things"?
{437}
J.T. The word 'head' is a verb and is used to show how God works out the principle of headship. Christendom is not governed by headship at all. There are perhaps a hundred religious groups in Christendom. Recently it was reported that representatives from a number of these were closeted together here and in Geneva, but headship is not being recognised in such meetings at all. Headship will be headed up in those who recognise the lordship of Christ and the presence of the Spirit and the authority of the Scriptures, and I trust it is coming about in us now. We only want to get the truth of Scripture and the way it applies. The Bereans would lead in this. It was said of them "... daily searching the scriptures if these things were so". (@Acts 17:11). It is a question of determining if what is ministered is so -- not merely what any one may think, but whether it is so according to Scripture.
A.R. Christ is made Head over all things *to* the assembly.
J.T. The assembly has part in headship. He is Head over all things *to* the assembly; that is, the assembly has part in headship.
F.N.W. Do the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth go beyond the millennium into the eternal day?
J.T. I think the heading up of all things has in mind the millennium. Then, when time shall be no more, we have entered into eternity.
A.B.P. The thought of fulness appears twice in this chapter -- "the fulness of times", and in relation to the assembly, "the fulness of him who fills all in all".
J.T. The word is applied to Christ; the fulness of the Godhead dwells in Him. The Godhead operates in Him, in the sense of fulness, and then the assembly is the fulness of Him who fills all in all. So the assembly comes very near to Christ's place in the word fulness. Its use in Colossians is almost as a title of God; "In
{438}
him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily". That is Deity, but it is in Christ as the great Operator, and the assembly is very near to His place, because she is the fulness of Christ. "The fulness of him who fills all in all" is the assembly, showing how great her place is. No other part of the redeemed throng has that place. She has part in the fulness. She is to Christ what Eve was to Adam.
C.H.H. To whom does the 'him' refer?
J.T. "The fulness of him" is Christ, I think, because it says, "... the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all".
A.N.W. Is it the fulness of the Man? It says, "... which is his body".
J.T. I think so, and yet Deity is implied in His filling "all in all". Only God could be so regarded -- "who fills all in all".
A.B.P. Does it connect with chapter 4:10, "He that descended is the same who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things"?
J.T. That helps, that is the Lord. But it is really Deity. But I was thinking of the assembly's place. How great a place that is! No other family of the redeemed has this place. The assembly alone has it. She is the fulness of Him who fills all in all. It comes very near to Deity. Of course it cannot be Deity because the assembly does not have part in Deity, but she is brought very near.
J.A.P. Will the assembly be in heaven in the millennium or will it stand in relation to earth?
J.T. We cannot limit things in that way. She will go into heaven and she will come down from God out of heaven having the glory of God. That is how the matter stands. She has her place in relation to the millennium, but to say that she must be in any particular place is another matter. The saints will be in the liberty of the glory. So that she may go up to heaven or she
{439}
may come down. She does not come down to the earth literally, as far as we can tell, but she comes very near to it.
J.A.P. The Lord Jesus will be here?
J.T. I think He will be here in the assembly, properly, only every eye shall see *Him* and we cannot say that must be in the assembly.
R.W.S. Verse 21 refers to Christ as being set down "above every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named". Is that moral or spiritual? Would you just enlarge on what the principalities and powers and dominions are? They are mentioned in chapter 3 as seeing now the all various wisdom of God in the assembly.
J.T. We have to keep in mind that the assembly is viewed by itself in all this, but the Lord, according to verse 20, was raised from among the dead. The footnote says, "'Set him down' is an added statement not connected *grammatically* with what precedes". We should notice that. "Set him down at his right hand in the heavenlies, above every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come". Well now, the Person of Christ is in mind there, and how universal the outlook is! This gathers up everything under Christ. These things may not all be existent at the moment but they will be in time. What is existent at the moment and functions under Christ's headship is the assembly. I think that is the way we should keep it in mind, for "every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come", not only has Christianity in mind but the millennium is also in view. And not one is excluded, *all* will be under Him.
R.W.S. Are the principalities and authorities evil powers?
J.T. Whatever they are, Christ is above them. Some
{440}
of them may be destroyed; "whom the Lord Jesus shall consume with the breath of his mouth", (@2 Thessalonians 2:8). It is to bring out how universal the Lord's dominion is; how everything is under Him. And then it is brought down to the assembly. "And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly", verse 22. Paul's thought is to bring in Christianity in its present function, and to show that the saints are in the matter. The assembly is a present thing.
A.B.P. Will the fulness of times involve setting out in display the results of what God has wrought in time?
J.T. The fulness of times will be a setting forth of all that had come out from God in all the dispensations beginning with Adam. The subject of administration was considered in these meetings beginning with Adam, and following that the flood, Abraham, Israel, then the transfer to the gentiles, and then finally in relation to Christianity. All these things are the working out of what was in the mind of God, and the fulness of times means that the whole product is to be gathered up. But verse 22 says, "... and has put all things under his feet". All is under Christ. This would set aside Christendom as it is, and the nations as they are, because all these are provisional. What we are dealing with now is not provisional. It is what is in the mind of God. It is a question of God's counsels being brought to pass and everything set up under Christ. "He has set a day in which he is going to judge the habitable earth in righteousness by the man whom he has appointed", (@Acts 17:31). That is one idea.
C.A.M. The assembly will occupy its place in heaven but Satan will be cast out of heaven. It is right that he should be confined and finally consigned to the lake of fire.
J.T. Quite so. Things are being worked out now provisionally. Nothing is finished yet; Christ is at the
{441}
right hand of God, but that is provisional, also. He is on His Father's throne. He is going to occupy His own throne later. And it says, "The Son also himself shall be placed in subjection". (@1 Corinthians 15:28). All these things are in mind, and we have to see how they are developing and how we are in them.
S.W. The Lord saw Satan fall as lightning from heaven. Would that be the evidence that all things are to be put under Christ's feet? He saw that, so we can see, anticipatively, all things put under Him.
J.T. The Lord says, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven". But that has not taken place literally as yet. The war in heaven must first take place, and then he will be cast out.
S.W. The principalities and powers against which we struggle are wicked.
J.T. Quite so; but the Lord has power over them.
R.W.S. Would not the converts at Ephesus have a good start in their conflict against Satan's power over them in that they brought their books and burned them? "Those that practised curious arts brought their books of charms and burnt them before all", (@Acts 19:19). I wondered if, in great measure, Satan was enthroned in Ephesus, and we have an example of how the Lord defeated him through Paul's ministry.
J.T. That was in mind in reading the passage, because it shows how the Lord is operating. It is the Lord in Ephesus. It is rather the word of God at Corinth; but in Ephesus, it is the word of the Lord that prevails. It is the military side and shows how things are controlled now; how the Lord can take things in hand to make way for us. He does not interfere with politics. The governmental ways of God indirectly regulate things publicly. The powers that be are ordained of God, and we are to submit to them. God uses them, too, but the Lord is operating Himself in certain matters to make way for His people; and what we have referred to
{442}
as burning the books at Ephesus helps in that way. The books that were destroyed cost fifty thousand pieces of silver. It reminds us of Kirjath-sepher, which is the "city of the Book". Books are greatly used by Satan to defile and corrupt humanity. But we see how the Lord is acting against that here in a militant way. It is the same way in which Michael will cast out the devil from heaven. The Spirit of God is operating in this way now to overcome the books in the minds and hearts of the saints.
D.MacD. You referred a moment ago to the place of subjection of the Son, @1 Corinthians 15. Is that the eternal thought?
J.T. It is important to have that before us, because it is a question of time. Verses 20 to 28 of that chapter are in a parenthesis, referring to a special point, and the verse that you are calling attention to reads, "But when all things shall have been brought into subjection to him, *then* the Son also himself shall be placed in subjection to him who put all things in subjection to him, that God may be all in all", verse 28. Notice the use of the word "then", relating to time. This parenthesis is put in to fill out the whole subject, and it is helpful now to bring that up because the end of the whole matter is that God is all in all -- not 'all and all', but "all *in* all". He is in the saints in the assembly.
A.B.P. Subjugation is typified particularly in David.
J.T. Yes; it stands in contrast to the idea of destruction as under Joshua; the Canaanites were not only to be subdued; the point was to destroy them; they were to get no quarter. But David carries the thought of grace. He subdued them, and they became his subjects. He set up garrisons to maintain his authority; not to destroy the people, but subdue them.
A.B.P. Does Paul's ministry seem to carry this feature of David right though the millennium?
J.T. I think so; it is a question of subduing. There
{443}
will be destruction of course; the beast and the false prophet and Satan will be cast alive into the lake of fire, which is an awesome thing, and others will be destroyed. I suppose Christendom will be. I do not think any peace will be made with Christendom. It has had its opportunity and is revolting now. The man of sin will presently arise, but the eastern nations will be taken in hand in mercy and the everlasting gospel will be preached to them. I believe that is how matters will stand.
A.P.T. These verses in @1 Corinthians 15 can only be understood by those who are very near to the heavenly Administrator.
J.T. That is just what I was thinking. It is a privilege to get near to things, and I believe the Lord is bringing us near. The Lord, in revealing the truth, intends that it should be understood, and the assembly is the body of Christ. It is not simply an institution. It is the body of Christ and therefore near to Christ. We are nearer than the word ordinarily signifies. He is in the assembly.
J.T.Jr. Is there a converging of the truth in Corinthians and Ephesians where the expression "all in all" occurs in both epistles? @1 Corinthians 15:28 refers to God being "all in all". In @Ephesians 1:23 it says, "... the fulness of him who fills all in all". Is that where the two epistles meet?
J.T. Very good. It is a great thing to see, in these things on which we are touching, the nearness into which we are brought. We are already venturing to speak of nearness to Deity, and I believe it is a proper term, if it is guarded so as not to imply that we have part in Deity; but there are families that are nearer than others and the assembly has the nearest place because it is the body of Christ, "the fulness of him who fills all in all".
C.A.M. When Satan occupied the exalted place he
{444}
was given he had a thought to be God. It is such a marvellous thing that the assembly is so near to Deity and yet there could never be a thought that would outrage the throne.
J.T. It is in holiness that we are entitled to speak of such exalted things, and God graciously gives us the liberty of sonship: "For ye have not received a spirit of bondage again for fear, but ye have received a spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father", (@Romans 8:15). That shows the nearness of the position that is ours. It is the assembly's position and it is greatly enlarged on in Paul's ministry.
F.N.W. "That ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God", (@Ephesians 3:19).
J.T. Just so. We are made capable of that; and then, "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages", verse 21. The assembly is the only family of whom that is said. That is the present time and it is eternal, too, showing one family has a nearer place than the others. God is entitled to the liberty and latitude that He takes in grading things.
T.E.H. Is it not remarkable that a man who had such wonderful light in these matters should be bowed in prayer that we should be able to understand it a little?
J.T. Yes, "For this reason I bow my knees". Perhaps if we bowed ours more we should know more of the mystery.
A.Pf. "For of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace", (@John 1:16).
J.T. That is the fulness of Christ. It is important to see that there are different families, but there is one family which has a peculiar place of nearness for ever, and that family is the assembly.
A.N.W. That family is the fulness: "... which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". I
{445}
suppose that of no other family can it be said that they have part in the body.
J.T. No; the assembly is the body. Colossians tells us that He is the Head of *the* body, the assembly. The article means there is no other.
F.S.C. Is the Holy Spirit the power in us for this?
J.T. It is the Spirit in His present relation: "... a spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father". We have that peculiar place of relationship.
F.H.L. Is that place of relationship in mind in the address to Ephesus in @Revelation 2? The word is: "Remember ... whence thou art fallen".
J.T. That is good. We should remember that: "Remember therefore whence thou art fallen". The church was never reinstated to that position. In Philadelphia we get a touch of the real thing that she lost. It is through Philadelphia, where brotherly love prevails, that this can be reached now. Where brotherly love is, there is recovery to what the assembly enjoyed at the beginning.
F.N.W. Is the assembly included in the 'all things' under His feet or does it have a place of distinction in relation to Him as Head?
J.T. The assembly has part with Christ in headship and therefore should not be regarded as being part of the 'all things' over which He is Head. The passage reads: "Head over all things *to* the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". It is a question of understanding that God is entitled to grade things. "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named", (@Ephesians 3:14,15). The assembly is the first family. It is the only family with which God is working at the present time. Of course. God recognises the angels, but in relation to what we are speaking of now, *the* assembly is the only family in which the work of God is being perfected.
{446}
A.B.P. The holy city -- the bride, the Lamb's wife is exclusively the assembly?
J.T. I think so. I do not see how we can make it anything else.
A.B.P. The reference to the twelve sons of Israel would be moral?
J.T. I think it would be to show the greatness of the position. She is great enough to include all that. There is nothing the assembly is not in the secret of. She knows all that the other families know, and much more. It is in the sense of what she knows. She comes down from God out of heaven having the glory of God. The glory of God would refer to what God is in His nature.
{447}
ADMINISTRATION (10)
@Revelation 21:9 - 27; @Revelation 22:1 - 5
J.T. At our last reading, which was our first in the New Testament on administration, it was remarked that we should consider the subject from the top, so to speak. We read from Ephesians which denotes the highest level of the truth. A like thought enters into our present meeting, the passage in @Revelation 21 having been suggested because it is a continuation of the idea on the highest level of the truth. The epistles to the Corinthians and the gospels give us the lower levels of the truth we are considering. This scripture fits in as a continuation of the last meeting. The epistle of James speaks of what comes down from above: "Every good gift and every perfect gift comes down from above, from the Father of lights, with whom is no variation nor shadow of turning", chapter 1: 17. John the baptist in John's gospel says, "He who comes from above is above all", chapter 3:31. And so, too, in @Acts 10, the sheet is seen coming down to furnish light as to the mind of God in view of the incoming of the gentiles. There is, therefore, in such passages the suggestion of how foundational truth comes in from the top. The final arrangement comes into evidence as the truth settles down in the sense of foundational truth, and certain features that may seem irregular are regulated.
A.N.W. Has it been rightly said that Paul's ministry sees the assembly placed in heaven, and John's ministry brings it out?
J.T. Paul places it in heaven, so to speak, and John brings it out here where it is to be displayed. John, however, speaks of the ascension prominently in chapter 20 of his gospel in view of the assembly as a vessel for the service of God here and the government of God. The ascension is not brought forward in Matthew; in fact, it is said by the Lord, "And behold,
{448}
*I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age", chapter 28: 20, as if He is here all the time. There is need for His vigilance and care in view of the treasure in the vessel and the government of God here below.
C.A.M. Would you say that the reference to one of the seven angels which had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues would show that the moral questions were all settled before John is shown the bride, the Lamb's wife?
J.T. There is an intimate connection between the judgment in the last plagues and what is presented here in the holy city in relation to the most positive and blessed features of administration. Therefore, what is said about Babylon, which is the earthly system, would suggest itself to the mind. It shows how that system is dealt with in unmitigated judgment. It seems as if the settlement of things requires that we should see how judgment is meted out to what is spurious. The assembly in this chapter points to the most blessed features of administration as coming down from God out of heaven. The link in that way with judgment is remarkable, and in view of the great stress laid on administrative principles in chapter 21, it is that our minds should be settled as to all that is evil. In this chapter there is that which is capable of settling every moral issue, and in the most positive way. This chapter affords principles more than any as to the subject of administration in the number twelve.
A.A.T. The holy city comes down in contrast to Satan who falls down.
J.T. Quite so; the devil is cast out of heaven, @Revelation 12:9. The Lord says, "I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven", (@Luke 10:18); whereas, what is before us now is the liberty wherewith Christ has set us free, involving sonship, because Jerusalem above is our mother. This implies sonship. She is seen coming down
{449}
out of heaven from God having all these blessed features of administration.
A.R. Do you think it requires elevation to see this? John was carried to a high mountain.
J.T. Just so.
A.P.T. Have you something more in mind about the numeral twelve?
J.T. That is why the chapter was read. If we look at verse 12, we shall see -- "having a great and high wall; having twelve gates and at the gates twelve angels, and names inscribed, which are those of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel. On the east three gates; and on the north three gates; and on the south three gates; and on the west three gates. And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them twelve names of tile twelve apostles of the Lamb", verses 12 - 14. There are other allusions to be made, but these are only to show how the idea of twelve enters into this chapter in a most prominent way.
A.P.T. There seem to be nine references to the thought of twelve in this section. Reference is made to twelve gates; twelve angels; twelve tribes of the sons of Israel; twelve foundations; twelve names; twelve apostles of the Lamb, and twelve pearls.
J.T. So that the numeral twelve stands out prominently, as remarked. And then there is the administrative personnel which we have already alluded to. There are the twelve *angels*, twelve tribes of the *sons* of Israel, and the twelve *apostles* of the Lamb; so that the personnel in the administration is very striking, covering men as well as angels. It is not the *children* of Israel, but individual personnel, denoting their dignity. I think we have to bear in mind, in thinking of these things, what is current among the nations at the present time, and has been for many years past; that is, the great uncertainty which marks government, and the tendency to disintegration and degeneration. There is constant
{450}
reduction in quality as seen in the great image in Daniel. The general trend is deterioration from the top to the bottom until we come down to the lowest elements.
J.T.Jr. Do you regard this chapter as an extension of @Ephesians 1, where the assembly is spoken of as being the fulness? Does the fulness appear here in the city?
J.T. I think so, because we are dealing with the assembly, which is said to be "the fulness of him who fills all in all", (@Ephesians 1:23).
A.N.W. In that connection would the holy city in verse 2 be on a higher level than in verse 10?
J.T. The idea of newness is there. "And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea exists no more. And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem". We are looking on toward the eternal condition; whereas, in verse 9, we come back again to millennial conditions in which this thought of administration is carried out with a view to showing what God can do with men in flesh and blood. It shows what He can do, and then the thought of flesh and blood will disappear, but in spite of what Satan has done and will do. God will show that He can carry on with flesh and blood. He is not obliged to resort to actual resurrection conditions. He can carry out His thoughts in connection with men and women in flesh and blood.
A.N.W. There is no deterioration in the bride. At the end of the thousand years she is as a bride adorned for her husband.
J.T. Yes; quite so. There is no change, but the outlook is toward eternity; whereas the other side is of very great moral importance. It is the same personnel and qualities, only what is to be dealt with in government is imperfect.
R.W.S. It says, "And they shall bring the glory and the honour of the nations to it", verse 26. Does that mean that there will be a change in the nations?
{451}
J.T. There will be, but the millennium does not present a perfect condition. I think the intent is that God will show that He can carry on with men and nations in flesh and blood. He can carry out His administrative thoughts in spite of what Satan has done and may do. At the beginning of the chapter the outlook is to eternity. It is what God intends to bring about eternally; whereas in time He has recourse to means which will show what He can do in the one thousand years. There is not a complete breakdown; the instrumentality through which He operates is the assembly in glory, and therefore there is no complete breakdown, although on earth there may be deterioration, as we see typified in @Numbers 29, where the bullocks are reduced from thirteen to seven. The perfect idea, in the sense of administration, is retained, only there is a breaking up of certain elements. In spite of this the thoughts of God go through. When the devil makes his final attack, heaven intervenes and that is the end of the matter.
C.N. In the end of verse 10, it speaks of the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God. Is there anything greater than that?
J.T. If you compare glory in regard to what is created, there would be nothing greater. God is the God of glory; and He is the Father of glory. So when Scripture speaks of the glory of God, you have perfection in glory.
Question Would love have a great part in this matter, the number twelve being mentioned so frequently?
J.T. Yes, and this section of the chapter contemplates perfection in the heavenly side, because this is what comes down from above. It is from the Father of lights. All is on the coming-down line, but then it is in relation to earth in the millennium, and the earth would imply that there is some defect. A sinner of one hundred
{452}
years shall be cut *off* in the millennium, but from the heavenly side there is no change at all. It passes on into eternity, but the earthly side is adjusted when flesh and blood conditions disappear.
J.A.P. Should this elevated side of things keep us in our care meetings so that there should not be any breakdown in present administration?
J.T. Well, it is an encouragement that, in one sense, there is not a breakdown. Properly speaking, from Paul's point of view, there may be, and will be, but still, what is set out in Paul is intact in principle. I am using that phrase *in principle* because it is important. *In principle* it goes through. Details do not affect it. They are just details, and God can deal with the details, as He will do in a very peremptory way, for fire will come down from God out of heaven and consume the attackers of the holy city even though they are great enough in number to go up on the breadth of the earth.
R.W.S. That will occur after the millennium, will it not?
J.T. Quite so; but I mention it to bring out how God deals with such a matter so that there is no continuation of evil. God is not going to permit of that. Fire comes down and consumes them. That is the most severe way of dealing with wickedness. Peter tells us that the new heavens and the new earth will be the outcome of destruction of the present ones by fire. "By reason of which the heavens, being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements, burning with heat, shall melt", (@2 Peter 3:12). It is immediately, finally and positively done.
J.T.Jr. The fire comes down from heaven. But it is not fire in our scripture. It is the assembly that is seen coming down. Christ came down from heaven, and now the assembly comes down.
J.T. Just so, and the Spirit, too, came down, sent down, indeed, and has an important place dispensationally. It is a long dispensation. Whilst the millennium
{453}
will continue for a thousand years, yet the actual judgment will take place very quickly and with finality, too.
D.P. You were remarking about the reduction in quality of administration amongst the nations, but the bride, the Lamb's wife, is to retain her freshness throughout the ages.
J.T. Just so; that is seen, as we have noted already: "And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband", verse 2; and then in verse 10; "And he carried me away in the Spirit, and set me on a great and high mountain, and shewed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God. Her shining was like a most precious stone, as a crystal-like jasper stone; having a great and high wall". So there is the same freshness in both verses; the assembly is untouchable in that sense. The first is in relation to eternity, and the second is the provisional government of God here in the millennium. The assembly is seen as intact in both cases. But notice the repeated reference to the number twelve, which is to show, I think, that love is active in administration.
A.R. There is not much said of what is inside the city, but considerable detail is given about the wall. Its bearing is outward.
J.T. The prominence given to the wall is a thing to be noted, and it shows that what we are saying is right. The second part of the chapter deals with divine protection, so that there is no possibility of breaking in on what God has in mind. The extent of the walls is a guarantee for that.
R.W.S. The way great nations have broken solemn covenants would stand in sharp contrast to the standards which are being maintained in the assembly.
J.T. The height of the wall and the breadth of it, and the greatness of it are a guarantee that it is the same
{454}
thing that goes into eternity; only here it is in the character of the wall to affect our minds as to the security that is connected with the assembly in these circumstances.
C.N. The foundation is as great as the gates in that respect, would you say? The gates would be the *administration*, the foundations would be the *support*.
J.T. That word 'foundations' is noteworthy. There are twelve foundations of the *wall*. The wall is more in mind than the city because that is where the strength and the defence are needed. There will be nothing like that necessary in eternal conditions.
T.N.W. What would hades¬ gates suggest?
J.T. The power of Satan in what he has organised in power and wisdom. It is what you might call his wisdom, and the gates would denote that it is the best he can do, but his best is not equal to what God has done. That is a present view of the matter. He cannot break through.
W.C.R. Was this seen, in principle, in Ananias and Sapphira being dealt with quickly?
J.T. Quite so; there was power there and the evil was immediately overcome. Later on, it was not so, but it was so there, and it was Peter who acted. It is the administrative side, I would say.
J.T.Jr. It is the masculine side in Peter, but it is feminine here. The bride is feminine, but in the twelve apostles it is what is masculine.
J.T. Just so; your mind is directed to the book of Proverbs, where there is demand for the woman of worth. This book shows that there is a woman of worth, and that she takes care of her husband's affairs, and He is known in the gates through her.
T.E.H. In the book of Nehemiah when the wall was being built and finished, Nehemiah brought the princes of Judah down to the wall, as if it needed masculine strength to retain the glory.
{455}
J.T. Just so; and another thing that helps in Nehemiah is that the queen was sitting by. Nehemiah's position is the active masculine side, but the queen is passive and sitting by the king. Here she is active; the feminine side is seen in all those features of administrative power and wisdom.
S.W. Is the wall in Nehemiah the same as the wall here?
J.T. The idea would be the same, but there is no other wall like this, because the reference to it in verse 17 shows that it is one hundred and forty-four cubits. "And he measured its wall, a hundred and forty-four cubits, a man's measure, that is, the angel's".
A.N.W. We are to be reminded of its height; it is great and high.
J.T. Everything is not stated at once in regard of the wall. The Spirit of God comes back to it. We are told that the extent of the wall is one hundred and forty-four cubits, which is twelve times twelve.
V.C.L. The names of the twelve apostles are in the foundations of the wall. Where does Paul's ministry come in?
J.T. It would be in the pearl, I suppose, but the twelve apostles of the Lamb are referred to here, as if God would say to us now that what He began with was perfect in itself. He had supplied all that was needed for the administration of the assembly in @Acts 2. If He added more, as in the gospels, in adding the seventy to the twelve who were sent out, it was just to show how liberal and how careful He was. But the twelve were enough; there was the idea of perfection in the twelve.
V.C.L. The Lord said to the twelve, in @John 6, "Will ye also go away?" Is Peter's answer suggestive of the foundations?
J.T. Just so. Peter answers, "to whom shall we go?" That is the secret of the preservation of the strength of the wall. Peter was a symbol of the wall.
{456}
Although it is said that one of the twelve was a devil yet the power was with the twelve.
A.A.T. Why does it speak of a *man's* measure?
J.T. I think it is to bring out that man has a place; He has the leading place in instrumentality -- even above angels. But it is a man's measure; showing that it is not infinite measure or power. It is limited, as you get in Ephesians: "... that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge", (@Ephesians 3:18,19). The breadth and length and depth and height do not surpass knowledge. They are creature limitations.
A.R. To what extent will the assembly have influence in the millennium?
J.T. Well, it will be paramount, and universal. A subdivision of rule and influence is seen in what the Lord says to the disciples, that they shall sit on twelve thrones. We shall judge angels, but the apostles are seen as judging the twelve tribes of Israel; but they belong to the assembly. It is the subdivisional idea.
A.B.P. In @Isaiah 60 it says, "Arise, shine! for *thy* light is come", verse 1. Is there any connection with the thought here of "*her* shining"?
J.T. I think so. It shows how the earthly Jerusalem will correspond with the heavenly, and I think an examination of Ezekiel would show that. We have the heavenly here, but it is evident that John was conversant with the prophecy of Ezekiel. The facts given here are similar, and appear to allude to what had been said before, only with additional thoughts, which are very interesting. God has reserved the best for the last. The heavenly has the first place. Therefore, Jerusalem above is our mother, whereas Jerusalem below is dealt with in @Galatians 2.
R.W.S. In @Malachi 4:2 it says, "And unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with
{457}
healing in his wings". Does that allude to the Lord personally in the millennium or is it what He does through the assembly?
J.T. Both things might be true; it might be through the assembly. The Lord said the disciples would do greater things than He because He went to the Father. Some think that the Lord will not appear at all except through the assembly but it would seem from the prophetic word that He will. At the same time, it ought to be kept in mind that the assembly is the vessel in which He is expressed.
A.A.T. The precious stones are mentioned as adorning the foundations. Is that an additional thought?
J.T. "The foundations of the wall of the city were adorned with every precious stone", showing the extraordinary grandeur involved, because a foundation ordinarily would not be adorned. What is needed, primarily, is strength. Then we have a list of twelve precious stones which appear in the foundations. This stresses the wonderful wealth and beauty of the system, because the foundations are made so much of. Therefore, they are evidently displayed, not buried, as is customary. They are evidently visible because of their beautification and adornment. The whole system, therefore, is marked off as apostolic. It is the best that God has produced, and if He adds something more it is Paul, but the twelve imply the best that God has produced. Therefore when one was missing, Matthias was selected; there must be the number twelve.
T.E.H. Peter said that he would go into death for the Lord, and while he denied Him, yet he did go to martyrdom. Do these precious stones for the foundations suggest suffering love coming to light under tremendous pressure so that the apostles would shine in the foundations?
J.T. I suppose so; it is a question of the use of the precious stones; and then there is the idea of the pearls,
{458}
too. The very best that God has produced is implied in the heavenly city.
R.T.M. In what way does the number twelve show the idea of love?
J.T. Because it is so divisible, and flexible in its computation. What a wonderful interchange there is in the number! You cannot compute seven in the same sense. That number stands by itself. You must work things out from some other viewpoint to get the value of seven, but twelve is a number that is divisible. It would suggest that the brethren have no difficulty in taking each other's places or in standing aside for each other. It is a question of love and it is like that chapter in 1 Corinthians of which it is said, "Yet shew I unto you a way of more surpassing excellence", chapter 12:31. That is the number twelve, I would say.
J.T.Jr. Peter stood up with the eleven; that is, the idea of twelve is made up there, and then later the twelve sent Peter and John down to Samaria.
J.T. Just so; they sent two of them; that is good.
A.N.W. That must be why the names of the twelve tribes of Israel are rearranged in so many different ways throughout the Bible.
J.T. Yes; that serves to bring out what the number means. Our selection of this subject of administration works out in the matter of love. It is a question of how much love we have, because the number will disappear if the love is not there. We must keep the thought of the twelve intact.
C.N. Would it be right to say that this administration is not so much the suppression of evil as it is the unfolding of the love of God and the manifestation of His love in glory?
J.T. Quite so; therefore a comparison may be made of the lake of fire and heaven. Heaven is viewed in Scripture as the most blessed place in the creation, and all that connects with blessedness and glory and love
{459}
are found there. On the other hand, there is the lake of fire. How terrible that is! The necessity of love requires the lake of fire. It would be intolerable beyond words that there should be a continuation of wickedness without complete restriction or hindrance. The idea of the lake is one of limitation -- to limit or hinder wickedness. This is the necessity of love, and the more we see that, the more we shall understand why so much is made of it in the gospel.
J.A.P. Is this the city that Abraham waited for?
J.T. That is what I would say. It is the city "whose builder and maker is God". There is no imperfection in it.
A.R. What nations shall be saved as indicated in verse 24?
J.T. Well, they are the saved nations after the present position of Christendom. I would say that the area called Christendom will become apostate and will be judged unmitigatingly at the end, but there will be saved nations, and I should think that they would be more the eastern ones. The east is where the angel with the everlasting gospel will fly in mid-heaven. I do not think there will be any hope at all or any provision made for the salvation of Christendom again. Its time will be over.
C.A.M. Would you say that @Matthew 12:20, 21: "... until he bring forth judgment unto victory; and on his name shall the nations hope" would look forward to the millennial day?
J.T. Quite so; but it would apply to the gospel day, too, as in @Romans 15:12. The prophetic allusion to the saved nations would, I think, have in mind those in the east, especially those sections of the earth that have not been evangelised.
A.B.P. Would the nations in @Matthew 25 which are referred to as the sheep which enter into everlasting life, be the nations referred to here as the saved nations?
{460}
J.T. Quite so; they would be the saved nations and the others go into everlasting judgment. The nations bring their glory into the city, showing how all contributes to the fulfilment of God's promises to Israel, and the great place the assembly is to have.
V.C.L. Should those who preach seek to have power in their service in the gospel so that Christendom will have a true presentation in the closing days of the dispensation?
J.T. I think that is good. The truth is being opened up, and has been since the time of the revival. First it was in relation to the prophetic map, and then the assembly, and then the house of God and the gospel, and then eternal life, and then later the service of God in the assembly and local administration. I believe all these features have been opened up, and are being opened up, in view of those who have part in the assembly going to heaven intelligently. The apostle could say, "I speak as to intelligent persons". That has been greatly stressed in relation to the Lord's supper.
C.N. Will you say a word on verses 22 and 23?
J.T. "And I saw no temple in it; for the Lord God Almighty is its temple, and the Lamb. And the city has no need of the sun nor of the moon, that they should shine for it; for the glory of God has enlightened it, and the lamp thereof is the Lamb". This shows that there is no need of natural light. The greatest natural ability in the human race has no place in it at all. The epistle to the Colossians is the secret to all this, there is no natural light needed at all. We do not need philosophy nor vain deceit, nor do we need Judaism.
A.P.T. The presence of divine Persons in the city is what gives it light and glory. "The *glory of God* has enlightened it, and the lamp thereof is *the Lamb*". And in verse 9 it says, "Come here, I will shew thee the bride, *the Lamb's* wife". And the last verse says, "... the book of life of *the Lamb*"
{461}
J.T. It is to bring out the greatness of the system, I think, that divine Persons are known in it. They are known, and distinguishable in it too, which is another important matter as to *whom* we are hearing and from *whom* we are getting light. The title Father is not used here; it is God. You can distinguish between God Himself and the mediatorial Person, the Son, and also the Holy Spirit.
G.H. Would the title Lord God Almighty emphasise the immense greatness of the whole system?
J.T. Yes; and it would show also that the Lord is operating as from the beginning. The assembly is a thought by itself, yet it was in the mind of God from the beginning. The Lord God Almighty is the light that Abraham had. Jehovah is the light that Israel had, and the Father is the light that we have. We do not get the Father in this book, in the sense of our relation with Him, as we do in John's gospel.
S.W. We have been saying that this is a millennial setting. But do we not get the gain by writing ourselves into it? The Lord said to His disciples, "Yet in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you, but rejoice that your names are written in the heavens", (@Luke 10:20).
J.T. We belong to the heavenly. We are not millennial saints. They will learn from us, and they will look up on us. We shall look down on them. Saints of this dispensation shall be ruling over cities in the millennium.
W.W.M. Would the measure of the golden reed be the standard by which we take things up in the care meetings? If we are thinking of the city, and of the gates, and of the wall, and if we are measuring matters from the divine standpoint, we should always arrive at the right judgment in any matters that are before us.
J.T. These scriptures in Revelation help us even though they refer to what is future. They are apostolic
{462}
writings, showing that they serve as Scripture to us. They have authority with us. It comes up constantly that brethren acknowledge that they have been linked up with unconverted people in business and in other ways such as mixed marriages, for example. That means they are disregarding the height of the wall. And so in many other instances we can see how these scriptures in Revelation, although largely in different expressions and terms than the epistles, have a voice to us. They regulate us, especially in regard of the wall. It is all a question of having regard for the commandments of God.
R.W.S. Is this like the city of truth in Zechariah in which the boys and girls will play in the streets? The walls would be there.
J.T. You are not free to let your children engage in what is in the streets now. There is that to cause us to fear. One often has said that Satan rules in the street but God rules in the house. But in the millennium the boys and girls will play in the streets, and there is no danger or fear in them. Even old people can sit there and commune together.
C.N. The street of the city is of pure gold as transparent glass.
J.T.Jr. Many of these things that you have been speaking of which are allowed amongst us would becloud the shining. If there are any evil mixtures in our localities the shining would be hindered. God would see it and the angels would see it.
J.T. How constantly we hear of trade unionism, mixed marriages, alliances in business; all beclouding us and beclouding others. Whereas in this scripture the use made of the wall is so plain. We are in a divine enclosure and God would protect us in it. We are to remain there and not go out into the place of defilement. We have the allusion to what is defiling in verse 15 of the last chapter, "Without are the dogs, and the
{463}
sorcerers, and the fornicators, and the murderers, and the idolaters, and every one that loves and makes a lie". That is over against verse 14, which is: "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city".
A.P.T. Chapter 21:27 says, "Nothing common, nor that maketh an abomination and a lie, shall at all enter into it; but those only who are written in the book of life of the Lamb".
J.T. Just so; all these things are most solemn and directly apply to us now as the word of God. "Every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be complete, fully fitted to every good work", (@2 Timothy 3:16,17).
G.V.D. What do you understand by the statement, "its length is as much as the breadth"?
J.T. That is, the city lies foursquare, according to verse 16 -- "And its length is as much as the breadth. And he measured the city with the reed -- twelve thousand stadia: the length and the breadth and height of it are equal". The height is given, too. The one statement supposes a square and the other a cube; that is to say, the solidity of the city in its substance is in mind in the latter. How solid it is! Whereas the other is the measure of a square. I think the idea of the cube is carried through here, and is very important.
A.MacD. You spoke about the personnel in the city. At each gate is an angel. How do the angels fit in here?
J.T. I suppose that they come in according to what is said in @Hebrews 1:14, "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?" They are sent out for service, and I suppose it is in God's mind that He would bring in all that is in creation; He approves them although they are not men. He uses them. I suppose that is what is
{464}
meant. And they are subservient to those that are heirs of salvation, showing that mean are the greatest persons.
R.W.S. The throne of God is mentioned in chapter 22:1, "And he shewed me a river of water of life, bright as crystal, going out of the throne of God and of the Lamb". Is that operation a millennial thought through the assembly, too?
J.T. Quite so, I would say it is millennial in this section of chapter 22; in fact what we have been speaking of is all millennial. "And he shewed me a river of water of life, bright as crystal, going out of the throne of God and of the Lamb. In the midst of its street, and of the river, on this side and on that side, the tree of life, producing twelve fruits, in each month yielding its fruit; and the leaves of the tree for healing of the nations". That is millennial. But then it says, "And no curse shall be any more", which points on again to eternal conditions. "And the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him, and they shall see his face; and his name is on their foreheads. And night shall not be any more". We have come to eternal conditions, again. And then it says, "And no need of a lamp, and light of the sun; for the Lord God shall shine upon them, and they shall reign to the ages of ages". The Lamb is not mentioned in this part. It is more looking toward the eternal state of things.
R.W.S. This magnifies what we have been having as to the greatness of the assembly. The throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it.
J.T. This shows, I think, the whole position in mind in the opening of chapter 22 is to bring out the transparency there is in the assembly, and of course that should mark us now. We should be together in transparency with each other, without evil thoughts or motives or pride or ambition. All that is to be dissipated by this remarkable passage in chapter 22. While in
{465}
truth what we get from verse 9 on in chapter 21 is millennial, and so is this chapter, Yet the external state is there, too. There is a sort of mixed allusion to millennial conditions, and at the same time, eternal conditions, because in truth they go along together.
A.B.P. Is there a present application in John's epistle: "But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another", (@1 John 1:7)?
J.T. Just so; a very good word, too -- "with one another" -- without any discrimination.
S.W. Would the throne of God and of the Lamb be one throne or two separate thrones?
J.T. In this book, separate thrones are referred to. The Lord speaks of His own throne, which He does not occupy now. He speaks of His Father's throne, on which He is now seated. But He is going to leave His Father's throne to take up His own throne in view of ruling the millennial world. This verse refers to "the throne of God and of the Lamb".
A.R. There is only one street in this city. I suppose that suggests that our fellowship should be the same.
J.T. Quite so -- one street is quite intelligible. It says of Peter that he went down one street when he came out of prison in @Acts 12 and then he went to Mary's house, and he found Rhoda, who is a victorious damsel. I am referring to these things in a general way, but they are most important things. There is no idea of an aristocratic section in the heavenly city.
A.N.W. There is no 'second quarter' in that city either.
Rem. In chapter 22: 4, it says, "And they shall see his face".
J.T. That is the idea of service. It is a question if that is God, personally, except as seen in Christ. It is oft-times difficult to distinguish in John's writings.
