{1}
Pages 1 to 140 -- "Vessels for Service". South Africa, 1947 (Volume 173)
VESSELS FOR SERVICE
@Exodus 25: 23 - 30; @Isaiah 22: 23, 24
J.T. The thought in mind is that of pouring out, as seen in @Exodus 25: 29. In this chapter, verses 23 to 30, we have the table of shewbread and the vessels of service attached to it for the service of pouring out. In @Isaiah 22: 23, 24 we have a detailed reference to vessels of service; "small vessels, as well the vessels of cups as all the vessels of flagons". The verses in Isaiah help to show how all are to be in the service of God. Each vessel represents a person who should function in his place. The table in the sanctuary in @Exodus 25 affords a basis to speak of administration in relation to these vessels, however it may be in the Lord's mind to use us. The idea of pouring out is the general thought in regard of the vessels, as it is said in @Exodus 25, "And thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and cups thereof, and goblets thereof, and bowls thereof, with which to pour out". In Titus Paul says, "The Holy Spirit, which he poured out on us richly". So the thought of pouring out is linked with the Holy Spirit given by Christ from heaven and then administered by Him in the assembly. The result intended is that each person, being dependent on Christ, should function according to the Lord's pleasure and so be available for divine service in the assembly whether in relation to Himself, or the Father. The service of God is not an empty form, not mere ritual, but is worked out livingly through persons viewed as vessels, whatever they may have, or whatever use the Lord may make of them.
{2}
C.M.M. What does the shewbread imply?
J.T. Again it refers to persons. It typifies the saints viewed administratively. In Exodus it is viewed as 'the bread of the presence'; it is bread or food, always there before God. That is the general thought in the type.
P.L. In @Matthew 26, Mary, having broken the box of very precious ointment, poured it out on His head, as He lay at table. There was the pouring out.
J.T. Yes. The Lord said, "In pouring out this ointment on my body, she has done it for my burying". Mary of Bethany was a very distinctive vessel. We have another vessel in the woman of Samaria in @John 4, who came out of the city with her water-pot, and left it after the Lord had met and instructed her as to living water. As a result she arrived at the idea of belonging to that system and functioning, being useful in it. In @1 Kings 17 we have another, the woman of Sarepta, who had things in her house *in vessels*; the meal was in a barrel and the oil in a cruse. That was where they should be and they were therefore usable, and so she was serviceable to Elijah as a type of Christ. Jehovah says He had commanded her to maintain Elijah and she did. He had been served by ravens before, but now this woman was to care for him.
W.O.S. Paul speaks of himself as being poured out as a libation in a sacrificial service (@Philippians 2: 17).
J.T. Yes. He was something that could be added to the sacrifice and ministration of the Philippians. We should be ready thus to add to whatever is going on that is of God.
C.deK.F. There was pure gold in Mary of Bethany.
J.T. Yes, the Lord said, "Wheresoever these glad tidings may be preached in the whole world, that also which this woman has done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her". She, like many others,
{3}
thus comes down the line to us as illustrating the material usable for service and for preaching.
P.L. The "sons of oil" in @Zechariah 4 have two golden tubes that empty the gold out of themselves.
J.T. Yes. The gold is not in us naturally. All begins with Christ and every vessel hangs on Him. It begins with Him, but does not end with Him.
H.W.R. There were different sizes of cups and vessels, so we would each have our own measure.
J.T. It is not a one-man ministry; each believer is a vessel. Paul, speaking of his measure, says to the Corinthians that it was "to reach to you". He did not serve beyond his measure, but effectively through the power of his ministry. It was not going a journey to preach. Divine measures are exact, whatever they are in view of; this is specially seen in Exodus.
H.W. The Lord as Minister of the sanctuary has all the vessels under His hand and knows the measure of each.
J.T. Yes. Exodus is typical of what we have in mind, the true tabernacle which the Lord has pitched and not man, and all the vessels are His. In Genesis all service to God is without direction from God, but in Exodus all is measured.
H.W. So that there is to be full recognition of God right through.
J.T. We serve in parts and by direction and the service goes on under Christ.
S.P.S. Is this indicated in Isaiah in the word, "They shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's house"?
J.T. The prophet was directed to make known what Jehovah would do. There was one to be removed so that way might be made for Christ; Eliakim typifies Him.
S.S. What is meant by saying that the measures are exact?
{4}
J.T. It is a question of God's thoughts. In creation itself He must have wrought on the principle of *weight* and *measure*, and so likewise in Exodus God does not leave things indefinite in His service. Things are not left open for anyone to do as he pleases. All is to be according to God's mind.
H.W.R. God is a God of measure, as seen in @Job 28: 25; @Job 38: 5.
J.T. Yes. Nothing is left open to be decided by man's mind. Christendom is simply a monstrosity from the divine standpoint, as things are carried on according to human standards.
A.M. The vessels are of pure gold. We are to accustom ourselves to regard the saints as God sees us, "holy and blameless before him in love", @Ephesians 1:4. There is no admixture.
J.T. There is no admixture, but there is to be no isolation because of variation of measure. It is not dependent on man's mind, but on God's mind. The Lord Jesus is in God's mind in @Isaiah 22 and all is to hang on Him. The Christ is the One who does things. The Lord in @Mark 8 asks His disciples, "Who do men say that I am?" Peter answers for the disciples and says that they would say "*Thou* art the Christ". Previously it had been said that "He does all things well". When there is something out of order with us such as failure in speech, as the man in @Mark 7 "who could not speak right", we are to think of the Lord's feelings. "He groaned".
D.S. What does pouring out imply?
J.T. It refers to the action of Christ in using the saints. He is the great Superintendent of all in the service of God, so that all is done perfectly and right. When the service proceeds, we all have pleasure in it as under the hand of the Lord.
H.W.R. Do the sisters have part in this, or does it refer only to what is audible and therefore the service of the brothers?
{5}
J.T. In singing the sisters¬ voices afford them an outlet, and possibly they use their voices better than brothers. They are instruments of music, "which I made", said David -- none should be silent.
H.W. The Lord provides what is poured out, through the sisters as well as the brothers.
J.T. Yet the *person* is being used; there is great need of usability as in the divine system. We are not to be silent.
A.G. The cup at the Lord's supper has a stimulating effect in connection with the pouring out. In Corinthians we are all made to drink into one Spirit. In @John 4 the Lord directed the woman of Samaria; He gives the water, but it has to be drunk. We often sing 'One spirit, glorious Lord' as we are stimulated by His love. The cup is an allusion to the Spirit.
C.M.M. What would be the meaning of the four different kinds of vessels referred to in @Exodus 25, the cups, dishes, goblets, bowls?
J.T. It is a question of variety, such as should be seen in the assembly. There is resemblance with us all, as being according to the grace given by Him, like Christ, but there is variety; all are made of gold. The use of gold alludes to the state of righteousness before God.
W.O.S. All are made serviceable for pouring out. David's mighty men brought the water to David and he poured it out before the Lord. No vessels are mentioned there (@1 Chronicles 11: 17 - 19).
J.T. Yes. The water poured out represented those three men, what they were before God. They sacrificed their lives for David. His action showed how he viewed it and hence their place among the mighty.
J.H.H. Is there significance in the table being portable?
{6}
J.T. The whole tabernacle was portable. We have to do with the true tabernacle which the Lord has pitched and not man, but things are portable now. The wilderness position is always movable, and we are to be ready to move, we are not to be stationary. Solomon's system involved what was stationary and suggested millennial conditions. It was a fixed matter, but not so under Moses; everything then was movable. It was a question of vessels for pouring out, the kind that had to be made, and were made in perfect order. The waggons in @Numbers 7 teach us that all these things had to be moved. If they were heavy, the Levites who carried them had waggons. Certain Levites carried the boards and the coverings, which were heavy things, so they had waggons, but the Kohathites had no waggons. The precious things, the golden things, which point to Christ or the things that are like Christ or of Christ, were carried by the Kohathites on their shoulders, and that is why they were provided with staves; they were for them, that their burdens might be carried on their shoulders. I think it suggests for us what is most valuable, hence what needs to be most protected.
J.H.H. Is it in any way linked with @Revelation 21, "the tabernacle of God is with men"?
J.T. I think that shows that it is not the Solomonic character of things in Revelation, but the Davidic. David is in the mind of the Spirit in Revelation. He is alluded to in what we read in @Isaiah 22. It appears that Revelation is in mind, therefore in the address to Philadelphia mention is made of the key of David. Then again in @Revelation 22 Christ is said to be the Root and Offspring of David. So that Revelation has in mind the tabernacle idea, I would say that it is the movable thought, and I suppose our position in heaven eternally will be a movable one. We shall not be fixed.
{7}
P.L. Our environment will be marked by the flexibility of love. Love cannot be static; it is marked by agility too.
J.T. Quite so. The gospel of John contemplates 'the hind of the morning', corresponding with the title of @Psalm 22. All that you speak of is involved in the service of God as we are now speaking of it. The feminine thought is seen in the beginning of @Psalm 22. Mary of Magdalene would be a suggestion of the hind of the morning, and what the feminine thought as taken on by the saints, is for Christ. There is agility as we were saying; flexibility and agility, both the result of our being affected by Christ Himself. Things are done in an orderly sense, but done quickly with agility, so that the most possible is procured for God.
H.W.R. There is more intimacy in the idea of the tabernacle than of the temple.
J.T. I would say that, because of its movability, whereas in Solomon's system all was fixed.
H.W.R. The eternal state will be marked by intimacy between God and men.
J.T. Just so, God and men, not Jews, or gentiles, but men. The greatness of that order of being is in mind.
J.R. After the loaves were set in order on the table, frankincense was poured upon them. Would these vessels be used to hold the frankincense in view of that?
J.T. No doubt, although that is not recorded in Exodus, but in Leviticus. Exodus deals with the making of the vessels and their usable qualities. In the record given in Exodus we have the number of the kind of vessels. The vessels were formed, and there were four kinds. The loaves in Leviticus were divided into two rows, six in each, as if to suggest administration, and a working together in it, two
{8}
sets of six each, side by side. In Exodus too, God's thoughts come out as to intelligence and measure.
C.M.M. Is it right to say that if there is to be a pouring out, there must first be a pouring in of the supply that God gives, according to our spiritual measure? I was thinking of that expression, "the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ".
J.T. I think it would be more *drinking in* than *pouring in*. Would it not be like the woman of Samaria to whom the Lord spoke of drinking of the water that He should give?
C.M.M. It comes from the well of water.
J.T. That is what I was thinking. It is a question of drinking.
A.M. Is that involved in the expression in @Ephesians 3, "that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God"? At the end of the chapter Paul says, "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus". The filling comes first.
J.T. That is filling to all the fulness of God. Ephesians contemplates infinitude, but we are in it in the sense of being filled, not *in* ourselves, but filled to all the fulness of God. We do not belong to the Deity, we are not part of the Deity, but yet very near it. Of the Lord Himself it is said, "in him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell". But that cannot be said about any one of us. It is a wonderful thought to apprehend, but we have to begin with the thought of measure, the breadth and length, and depth and height, and then know the love of Christ which passes knowledge. The fulness of God is not measurable. It is, I believe, an allusion to the eternal condition. We are in that which is fulness but when we come on to the fulness of God, we come to infinitude.
H.W. What you speak of is expressed in Christ in whom God has come into expression.
{9}
J.T. Quite so. It is a question too of breadth and length and depth and height, without saying of what. Even the love of Christ is spoken of as that which passes knowledge. Creature measure is to be known but the love of Christ passes knowledge. You cannot limit the fulness of God either, for it passes knowledge.
H.W. Would you connect it in any way with what the Lord Jesus said, "My Father and your Father ... my God and your God"?
J.T. It is very near to that. The Lord brings us into the same kind of love that He has as Man according to @John 17: 26, the same sort of relation that He has. And so in @John 20 it is first "my Father and your Father", and then "my God and your God".
J.H.H. Does what you are saying mean that our full ability to understand is reached now?
J.T. It certainly is. The present is the educational time. We are soon coming to the fixed time in the sense of formation, but we are not in it yet. We are all in the educational time, and we are to know the love of Christ that passes knowledge, and at the same time we are to know the breadth and length and depth and height, the full measure of what has come out in Christ in the christian economy.
Ques. Is He getting glory in the assembly now from our present knowledge?
J.T. I think He is. The first day of the week introduces the final glory. In that sense there is what is going on now, what is current in the saints throughout the whole world. Christ being the divine Operator, and the saints being the vessels of the operations, what is going on in us and among us at the present time, especially on the first day of the week, the supreme day of the week, brings out the glory. The Lord Jesus is referred to in @Psalm 19
{10}
as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoicing as a strong man to run a race. That is what is going on every Lord's day in a universal way. So the question is whether we are in this thing and learning in it. It is the educational time, too, as well as the time of joy. It is the Bridegroom's time; He is coming out of His chamber and rejoicing as a strong man.
P.L. "From the rising of the sun even unto its setting my name shall be great among the nations", @Malachi 1: 11.
H.W.R. Should we have a sense of the Bridegroom on Lord's day morning?
J.T. I think so. We shall not go home in any right or satisfied way unless we do. We have to do with the Bridegroom. John spoke of the Bridegroom, as having joy in hearing His voice. It is the time of hearing His voice.
H.W. That would involve the peculiar joy that enters into the occasion for the Lord Himself.
J.T. That is what, I have thought, is the joy that was set before Him. That is the time we are in. It was anticipated in the days of His flesh here, but for the joy that was set before Him in the days of His flesh. He endured the cross and despised the shame, and is now set down at the right hand of God. What was the joy that was set before Him? He endured the cross in view of that; He has come into it now and we will come into it too.
H.W.R. If there is a Bridegroom there must be a bride.
J.T. John the baptist did not say anything about her, but Scripture says much about her; the bride is the assembly.
H.W.R. If we are conscious of the Bridegroom on the Lord's day morning we are conscious of having part in the bride.
J.T. Just so.
{11}
GOD KNOWN AS GREATER THAN ALL
@1 John 3: 19 - 24; @1 John 4: 1 - 10
J.T. It is not in mind to confine ourselves to these scriptures, but to call attention to John's ministry and its peculiar character. The Lord spoke of John and his service in an indefinite and mysterious way in view of the dispensation, leaving the understanding of it open. Answering the inquiry of Peter as to John, the Lord said to him, "If I will that he abide until I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me", @John 21: 22. If John should remain it would be at His pleasure and this was not a matter for Peter specially to concern himself about. We may conclude from what the Lord said, that we are not to concern ourselves specially about any brother who is ministering; it is right, of course, to pray for all and carry the ministers in our hearts, yet they are the Lord's ministers and they stand or fall at His pleasure; so the Lord says of John, that it was not specially a matter for Peter. The Lord had thoughts about John, and the Lord's words would leave the truth open, and suggest that John at least in spirit and character as a servant, was to continue until the Lord comes. With this in mind the thought now is to see that he affords, as indicated in these verses read, the means of victory to the brethren. Even although one may fail, or be wanting in any way the word is, "Hereby we shall know that we are of the truth, and shall persuade our hearts before him -- that if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart". It is thought that each of us should have this in mind that whatever happens, God is greater than the believer's heart and knows all things. If the believer's heart does not condemn him he can be assured that God will answer his prayers, "Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, we have boldness
{12}
towards God, and whatsoever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments". There is a certain assurance to us in these passages, that whatever may happen, not that anything wrong should happen, for God has given us the means of avoiding sin and keeping from it, but if we do sin, "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from all unrighteousness", @1 John 1: 9. Then if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart and knows all things. This is a great matter to keep before us, because we are so apt to give way and to give up, as we say, if something untoward does happen, especially if it is a serious matter.
H.W.R. Is it by keeping His commandments that our heart does not condemn us?
J.T. That is what he says: "Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, we have boldness towards God, and whatsoever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments, and practise the things which are pleasing in his sight".
H.W.R. Almost the same words are used by the Lord Himself in @John 14 and 15 as to keeping His commandments, and He says, "Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name he may give you".
J.T. It is a very great matter that we have assurance in that sense, but at the same time, even if our hearts do condemn us, we are to know that God is greater. You are thus maintaining your soul in the good of the knowledge you have of Him, in the good of the knowledge of God that is available, and however much condemnation there may be, we know that God is greater than our heart. Thus we should not become weary, however serious the matters that may happen, because God is God, and He intends to give *us* victory. He intends to bring us home. If we look at chapter 4 we see how frequently the word 'God' is used throughout; about
{13}
thirty times. John and Peter had been diverted from the course of righteousness according to @John 21, and they might easily have gone right astray. The Lord did not reprove them at all at first. He called them 'children'.
H.W.R. What is the difference between our hearts condemning us and our conscience condemning us?
J.T. The difference is a matter to be looked into. Conscience came in with sin. We cannot say that the heart came in with sin. God made man with a heart.
C.M.M. How do we persuade our hearts before Him?
J.T. I would say that it is through the knowledge we have of Him. God is pleased to make John available to us for the purpose of showing us the means of knowing God. In his gospel and epistles and in the book of Revelation, John shows us much so that we may avail ourselves of every means of knowing God. So the means of being assured is available to us.
H.W. There is something very comforting in the thought that God knows all things; He is greater than our hearts and knows all things. Each one should delight in that.
J.T. If he has the assurance and he is conversant with Scripture, then he knows how God does things. Even a sparrow does not fall without God, much less anything happen to one of His children. God knows about it.
B.H.T. Is it important to know "that we are of the truth"?
J.T. It is, most important, because it shows the distinctiveness of John's teaching. It shows the distinctiveness of christianity. John shows in his communications, especially in the epistles, that the truth is available to us, and we are to be lovers of the
{14}
truth. We are hardly christians at all, unless we love the truth; we might say it is next to loving God.
S.P.S. Would the knowledge of God thus ensure continuity of the truth, despite the weakness?
J.T. Yes, and as having the system also set up in heaven, in Christ as High Priest we have the means of continuing. The book of Hebrews is written to show us that we have the means of continuing in the truth. The system that God has set up in heaven in Christ furnishes us with all that is needed, not only as to instruction, but with the sympathy of Christ, the sympathy of the brethren too. It is not a small matter that the brethren are sympathetic with each other and so if one is taken in sin, or in some fault, it is said, "Ye who are spiritual restore such a one". It is not said, 'If you can'. It is a direct command, it is an obligation put upon us to restore such a one. To restore here means that he is to be set *up as he was before*. If he was a good brother, a useful brother, then he is to be set up in that usefulness whatever it was. The word 'restore' there means or implies that.
H.W. In that word in @Galatians 6, "if even a man be taken in some fault", the apostle seems to call attention to a matter that might arise, that might be considered very serious indeed; but there is forgiveness possible.
J.T. We have often noticed that it is not overtaken, but taken in it. The woman in @John 8 was taken in a fault. Even if it be so, then restoration is possible, and we might say imperative. It is the business of the brethren to see to it that he is restored.
W.S. While we know that we are of the truth and persuade our hearts before Him, yet if our hearts condemn us and communion has been marred, is the outlet that God is greater and knows all things?
{15}
J.T. God is surely not any less than any ordinary christian, and such a one would normally do what he could for another christian, and God has shown us that He is not behind in that sense. He is greater than our hearts. He knows our hearts, but He is not condemning them with the rod. He is saying that He is greater, which is a very comforting thought. If there is any condemnation, our hearts condemning us, He knows about it.
P.L. Would John's reference to finality in the tabernacle of God with men show how God has risen above all evil to assure His thoughts of love in finality? Would that encourage every heart?
J.T. He has confidence in man in an abstract way. We cannot say that the tabernacle of God is with men as they are now, many of them wicked. It is a final thought and brings out what God is in Himself. The tabernacle of God is with men, not with angels or with any other being; but with men.
C.deK.F. Would the ordinary christian you spoke of just now be marked by spiritual judgment? John also says, "Ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things".
J.T. That is a parallel thought, amplifying what we have been saying. The word 'unction' there is not the word generally used for the Holy Spirit, but refers to the effect of the possession of the Spirit, the peculiar effect of the Holy Spirit indwelling us, and it affords knowledge of everything. The man in @Mark 8 who had the second touch from the Lord saw all things clearly, but this in John's epistle goes beyond that, for it says that we know all things. Seeing all things clearly would mean that he would, so to speak, have a clear view of the landscape, so that he would not call a man a tree or a tree a man. He would see things clearly and call them by right names, but then the epistle of John implies that we *know* all things by the power of the unction, so that
{16}
we have to seek to find out what the word 'unction' means and the force of it in the christian. No others have it but christians, not necessarily those who say they believe, but those who are really christians in the true sense of the word, those who are sealed with the Holy Spirit.
W.S.S. Is the thought here to establish the hearts of the saints, notwithstanding the weakness which may be with us, in the knowledge that God is greater than our heart and knows all things?
J.T. The weakness around us is appalling, but then the heart of the real christian may be condemning him. There must be some cause for it in his own conscience or his own heart, but then the comforting thought is that God knows, that God is greater than our heart. It is a very remarkable thing, that that should be said of God at this point, that God is greater than our *heart*; the word is in the singular.
P.L. Is this illustrated in David in @2 Samuel 7? He goes in and sits before God and speaks of Him as "that God" and in various ways does he resort to God as greater than his heart?
J.T. Quite so, and if we think of Nathan there, while he was a great prophet and a sympathetic prophet too, yet Nathan was not up to the mark at that time. He says to David, "Go, do all that is in thy heart; for Jehovah is with thee". Well, how did he know the Lord was with David in the matter? To say even as to a man like David that the Lord was always with him, was not necessarily right, for God has to say to David that *he* was not the man in His counsels; David's son was the man in the counsels of God. Although David has a unique place eternally with God, yet God does not imply all that Nathan would imply as to David. Nathan should have known too that Solomon was chosen by Jehovah, but he does not say that. He says to David "Go, do all that is in thy heart; for Jehovah is with
{17}
thee". Jehovah presently speaks about other things, and another person than David, and that was Solomon, and that he should build God's house. Nathan did not have in his mind the great thought of sonship. As Nathan thought this over his heart might condemn him, but God and His thought were greater.
L.E.W. Does the condemnation come in as regards our failing in love? He says in verse 19, "Children, let us not love with word, nor with tongue, but in deed and in truth".
J.T. The question of failing here is secondary really. If our heart condemn us, there must be some cause for it, but the point is that even that is an opportunity for us to be established in the knowledge of God. Even though the heart may condemn I am acquiring the knowledge of God. That is the great point that has been on one's mind, that the brethren should be established in the knowledge of God.
H.W. So that the saints are maintained. John would have in mind that the saints would be maintained in victory to the end.
J.T. Now passing on to verse 24 of chapter 3, John says, "He that keeps his commandments abides in him, and he in him. And hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given to us". Then chapter 4, verse 4, "*Ye* are of God, children, and have overcome them, because greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world". Here now we have another thought as to God: that He is greater as in us than he that is in the world. God is greater as in the christian, and so the christian is constituted greater than he that is in the world. The point is, that the greatness is in the christian. The Person who is in the christian is greater than he that is in the world.
H.W.R. Does that refer to the Holy Spirit being in us?
{18}
J.T. I think so, but the general thought in the passage is that it is God. It is a question of God and that God in the christian.
H.W.R. He that is in the world is Satan, I suppose.
J.T. Yes. The spirit of the world is Satan. The passage is to show us where the greatness is. It is in God, of course, as stated in the first verse, but then it is the Person who is in the christian, and as there He is greater than he that is in the world. It is quite obvious that God is greater *than* the christian and greater *than* the christian's heart, but John says that He is greater as being in the christian than he that is in the world; that is, God Himself inhabiting the christian is greater than he that is in the world. It is not simply that God is in heaven, and that He has raised Christ from the dead, but that in the christian He is greater than he that is in the world.
D.M.S. It is very encouraging to think that God is here in spite of the conditions.
J.T. That God has a people here too in whom He resides, and He is greater as in that residence than he that is in the world. The devil and all that he can muster, the Alexanders, the Napoleons and the Hitlers, if they were all put into one, would not be as great as God in the christian.
C.M.M. Would our walking in the light of this strengthen our position collectively, resulting in it being testified that God is among you of a truth?
J.T. Yes -- "in you of a truth".
W.S. Would you say that recovery from self-condemnation sets us in relation to God and His things, and we see that the things we are linked with are far greater than what obtains in the world?
J.T. That is the thing, so that as we think of this town and the christians in it we think of God in relation to them. God is saying that they are all
{19}
His and that He is greater than he that is in the world, not only in Himself, but as in these christians. That is a great matter for God, that He has such people in this city.
C.deK.F. Why is ministry so often ineffective with those around? Here John says, "He that knows God hears us".
J.T. That brings out what apostolic ministry was; the "us" refers to the apostles. It could hardly be said of christians generally.
F.A.C. Paul says, "When I am weak, then am I strong".
J.T. He says, "I have strength for all things in him that gives me power". Whatever anyone might think of him he was conscious that he could do all things by Christ who gave him power. The Lord sent him a thorn for the flesh, and he besought the Lord three times that it should be removed, but He said, "My grace suffices thee", and therefore Paul says, "Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities". He may be regarded as weak in that sense, but he says he can glory in his infirmities, that the power of Christ should rest upon him, so that there was no possibility of overcoming Paul.
H.W. Does John's ministry have particularly in mind spiritual formation in the saints; that is, the subjective side of the truth?
J.T. I would think that. He begins his epistle with "That which was from the beginning". He does not say, 'He who', but "That which". He speaks of Christ, but of the life manifested in Him as Man here. That life was from the beginning of christianity, and the whole epistle works out the idea of life and of what is in the fellowship that belongs to christianity. John says of the apostles, "We are of God". He also says, as referring to the apostles, "Our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ". He says "our fellowship".
{20}
That is something to have in mind. It was a question of "That which was from the beginning", and then he moves on to the thought of the fellowship in which this testimony from the beginning was preserved. The apostles¬ fellowship was with the Father and with His Son; that was something particular to the twelve apostles. When John says, "He that knows God hears us", he refers to apostolic ministry which has peculiar power. As in the testimony the twelve were linked up together with the Father and the Son, so there is no possibility of overcoming the fellowship. The apostles had a fellowship of their own. Many may not follow or understand this, but it remains a fact; it was a fellowship of their own, and it was with the Father and the Son.
A.M. Does the thought of children have in mind that the character of God is seen in them?
J.T. There are the persons that John designates as his children even as the Lord did Himself when here. The Lord speaks of the saints as children, which would be the point in the title in @Isaiah 9, "The everlasting Father". The apostle John had the same privilege in measure, and so did Paul, of designating the saints as children. Children of God are specially referred to in chapter 3: 2; "Now are we children of God". The apostles had a peculiar place, and they had the right and privilege to address the saints as children. None of us would assume to do that now.
L.E.W. The thought of children suggests moral likeness.
J.T. It would be so whether it be the children of God, or whether it be the children of one of the apostles. The fullest thought as to children is in @John 1, that we have the right to take the place of children of God. "As many as received him, to them gave he the right to be children of God". We have
{21}
that liberty, God gives it to us, and that dignifies us peculiarly.
L.E.W. I refer to the verse, "If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham". It was moral likeness.
J.T. That is right. The words "children of Israel" would also carry that thought.
W.J.S. The sense of the greatness of God, and His knowing all things, and that He is greater in us than he that is in the world, would stabilise our hearts to go on in days like the present.
J.T. The word 'stabilising' is good. Our hearts need it.
B.H.T. Largely it is to establish us against the spirit of antichrist.
J.T. Surely. There are many antichrists, but *the* antichrist is mentioned specifically by John as if we are to be awakened to the fact that he is nearby, perhaps living in the world already. There is plenty of denying the Father and the Son. It is to warn us of the character of the times; not simply that there are many antichrists characteristically, but there is *the* antichrist.
B.H.T. The great thought against that is, that here "now are we children of God"; and "*Ye* are of God, children, and have overcome them".
J.T. Just so.
W.S. The great test for us is whether we are really walking in the fellowship, or are walking in darkness. If we say that we are in the light and yet walk in darkness we lie and do not the truth.
J.T. That passage is very forceful.
A.P. What is meant by chapter 3: 6, "Whoever abides in him, does not sin, whoever sins, has not seen him or known him"?
J.T. It is what is called an abstract truth which is perhaps little understood, but we can never understand John's epistle unless we understand abstract
{22}
truth. "Whoever abides in him, does not sin", is abstract, but then it has a concrete side, and is applicable to christians having the Spirit who walk in the Spirit. Such abide in Christ even as the earth abides in the sun. To abide in Christ is to walk in the truth, to walk as He walked. We cannot deny that if we say that we have no sin we deceive ourselves, but there is this verse that "Whoever abides in him, does not sin". That is for us to weigh over. It is abstract truth, and applicable to christians under certain conditions.
A.M. It is said of Israel that God "hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen wrong in Israel", @Numbers 23: 21. That would be abstract, would it not? It is how God saw them.
J.T. Just so. God can say that; He can look at things as He pleases at any time. God has a right to shut out certain things at any time and only look at certain other things and speak of them accordingly.
Ques. Referring again to the children and the fellowship of the apostles, and the apostles¬ doctrine, does all this serve to emphasise the way in which christianity has been established, and what it is as of God in the world?
J.T. Yes; what it was at the inauguration. What men the apostles were! What power there was in them! There were twelve appointed by the Lord, and when, through the fall of Judas, another had to be chosen, heaven endorsed the choice.
P.L. Would the heavenly city manifest in the foundations what men they were; what they were intrinsically?
J.T. That is good. The description is given in @Revelation 21. The names are given in precious stones. Every precious stone indicates an apostle. The precious stones would mean new creation intrinsically. They represent in the highest way what is of God in His creation.
{23}
W.S.S. "He that knows God hears us", in chapter 4: 6, raises the question with us as to our recognition of the apostolic ministry at the present time.
J.T. Yes. How the apostles adorned the system! Others were added, but even Paul is not mentioned in the list we have in @Revelation 21, which brings out the adornment these men afforded by what they were.
P.L. They were the foundations of the glorious structure in @Ephesians 2.
J.T. Quite so. We should look at the whole of @Revelation 21 and what it contains in the sense of apostolic quality and how the assembly is bound up with that.
J.H. Can we have a little help on proving the spirits?
J.T. The word is, "Beloved, believe not every spirit, but prove the spirits, if they are of God; because many false prophets are gone out into the world". So that we have to do with a spiritual realm even in the bad sense, and we are to prove what is of God. The apostle says, "Hereby ye know the Spirit of God: every spirit which confesses Jesus Christ come in flesh is of God; and every spirit which does not confess Jesus Christ come in flesh is not of God: and this is that power of the antichrist, of which ye have heard that it comes, and now it is already in the world". That refers to the power of the antichrist, it is already here. We might name certain things, or persons in that sense, that have been proved antichristian, and it is very important to be able to look at things of that kind and name them. This chapter is intended to help us to name what is of the world and what is of God, and it is a question not now of physical conditions, but of spiritual conditions; what men are spiritually, even bad men.
{24}
C.M.M. Would the expression, "Jesus Christ come in flesh", involve both His humanity and His deity?
J.T. Yes, it is a Man of that kind, One *come* in flesh. Luke would help us to understand that. Luke says, "That holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God". The expression "that holy thing" shows that the Lord Jesus was intrinsically holy from the very outset, from His birth.
H.J.R. It does not say here that the truth is denied; it is *not confessed*.
J.T. Confessing is important. It is not that I am merely saying things verbally, but it is characteristic of me that I confess. Confession has a great place in Scripture.
H.W. Does it involve that the one who so confesses is marked by the features of that order of man, Jesus Christ, and that he is descriptive of it livingly as well as in what he says?
J.T. That is so. The confession of it is a matter of testimony. We say the things, not only verbally, but by what we are in all our relations. The confession of this Person means that He is my ideal spiritually. He is a wonderful Person, a Person to be worshipped.
C.M.M. Would both the proving and the confession show that it is incumbent upon us to move in the matter and to be aggressive?
J.T. It is so.
P.L. Is the non-confession a proof that one has come under the power of the antichrist?
J.T. The word is "every spirit which does not confess Jesus Christ come in flesh is not of God: and this is that power of the antichrist". The person who does not confess "Jesus Christ come in flesh" would range himself alongside what is of the antichrist. As a non-confessor he is building up what
{25}
is of such a power; it is seen in the matter of associations, unions and such like.
Ques. What is the import of "Jesus Christ come in flesh"?
J.T. It is not simply that He has been alive, but that He has come *in flesh*. Paul tells us that prior to the incarnation He was "in the form of God". He was not then *in flesh*, but as incarnate He partook of flesh and blood. That He has *come* means that it was His *own* act, that of a divine Person. He came into flesh, into that condition. It is a very full thought. The word "Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son a propitiation for our sins", involves Jesus Christ *come* in flesh.
P.L. "Ye ... shall die in your sin" (@John 8: 21) was said to such as refused to accept who He was.
J.T. Quite so.
H.J.R. Is the antichrist marked by an aggressive denial of Jesus Christ or by refraining from the confession?
J.T. It is more than the negative non-confessing which characterises the man who is called the antichrist. "*He* is the antichrist who denies the Father and the Son". That is positive, and that is the thing actually. Everyone that is doing that belongs to antichrist. He is of that spirit.
Ques. Does it manifest itself in hatred of Jesus Christ and those who belong to Him?
J.T. Well, the spirit of antichrist is seen in the negative attitude assumed; he is *not* confessing Jesus Christ come in flesh, which means that the whole truth of christianity is involved. John says, "*We* have seen, and testify, that the Father has sent the Son as Saviour of the world". That is what we get as a result of "Jesus Christ come in flesh".
P.L. The enemies of the cross are ranged against "Jesus Christ come in flesh". In @John 14 the stability
{26}
of the system of christianity is seen in this great Person going to the Father.
J.T. Yes. "Ye believe on God, believe also on me". The Lord Jesus is there presented as an object of faith, and it is a public matter that we are believers on Christ.
{27}
READINGS ON 1 CORINTHIANS (1)
@1 Corinthians 1: 1 - 31
J.T. The Lord has been calling attention to the epistles to Corinth, and it is thought that we should have something to say while together at these meetings as to them. The local idea attaches to the first epistle, hence it begins, "Paul, a called apostle of Jesus Christ, by God's will, and Sosthenes the brother, to the assembly of God which is in Corinth". Attention is here called to the fact that it is to the assembly of God which is in Corinth; that is to say, the assembly of God in a locality is addressed. It is the local character of the assembly. Following that attention is to be called to what is said in chapter 14, verse 23, where the whole assembly is spoken of as coming together in one place. We have before us in that the thought of the local assembly, even although there might be a hundred gatherings in the assembly in that city, or fifty, or twenty-five. The local idea is still stressed, although in chapter 14 emphasis is laid upon the *whole* assembly in the locality coming together, however many or few, for ministry. They come together at the same time and place.
So that when we come to Durban, it is a question now of how many there are. Perhaps we will never have all the saints in Durban together at any one time, for we are in remnant times, and we have to accept the public departure of many. Yet although we may be relatively few and there are only two or three gatherings in a place, all the saints there are supposed to be together in one place for the purpose of ministry, according to @1 Corinthians 14: 23. This is very important, because it brings out, in the saints all together in one place at a particular time, what God has before Him in a place, the whole idea as to the assembly that God has in His mind.
{28}
Then it is thought that we should see that the first nine verses of our chapter have an abstract character, that is to say, the saints at Corinth as viewed abstractly as being possessed of certain things, as it says, "I thank my God always about you, in respect of the grace of God given to you in Christ Jesus; that in everything ye have been enriched in him, in all word of doctrine, and all knowledge, (according as the testimony of the Christ has been confirmed in you), so that ye come short in no gift, awaiting the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ". That is what has to be called abstract, because the Corinthian saints were not actually as intelligent as is said here. You would almost assume that there was nothing at all missing, but it was not so. These are abstract thoughts, and God is speaking through the apostle of the truth in this epistle from His own point of view, and telling the Corinthians that there is nothing left out from His point of view, and it is a question of their finding it out in due time. Two epistles are written, so that the saints should know everything required to furnish them in their local position as God's assembly. That is why it has to be called abstract, because *everything* was not really true of the Corinthians in the fullest sense; they had to be taught. That is what I thought ought to be before our minds, so that we might see what God has in His mind for us in view of what is available in the assembly for the general service of God.
F.J.F. Do you think that it is a great advantage to have more than one gathering in a city?
J.T. Well, I think it is. If there are enough for more than one, I think that it is a great advantage. Paul says, in chapter 11, verse 18, "When ye come together in assembly": the article is left out before the word "assembly" because it is to bring out the general character of their coming together. No matter how many there are, they are all together *in assembly*,
{29}
the idea of being "in assembly" showing the character of the occasion.
A.W.P. Would the first nine verses refer to the work of God in its perfection, which will never break down, looked at apart from failure?
J.T. Quite so. That is what I am endeavouring to convey in the word abstract, for in God's mind the whole matter is there.
F.J.F. Is that true as regards the saints in Corinth as having the Spirit?
J.T. It is. The fact that they had the Spirit is the great point, and it could be developed, so that in time they would come to everything conveyed in the apostle's words, "Purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, according as ye are unleavened" (chapter 5: 7) is another abstract statement. Viewing the saints from the divine side, they are unleavened.
W.S.S. I suppose you would say that it is vitally important that we should have the abstract idea before us if we are to move at all according to the thoughts of God.
J.T. That is what I was thinking. We are so inclined to have before us the broken conditions in Christendom, and work from that, so to speak, instead of working from the abstract thought. We have failure at Corinth, and the brethren might well have been engaged and occupied with the failure.
W.S.S. We have failure in Christendom around us, and we might take our bearings from that, and say that anything is good enough. What struck me from what you have been saying is that if the abstract thought is before us, then we are helped to move in the light of it and in the truth of it.
J.T. Just so. The Spirit is here to bring out the truth of it. Hence chapter 14 is, as I said, a question of ministry, and we have the order of ministry and persons who are to minister. Gifts are in mind, as it is said here, "Ye come behind in no gift". It is
{30}
how one is to minister in view of this. That is, there is no defect from the divine side, but the thing has to be worked out.
W.S.S. So it says, "God is faithful, by whom ye have been called". If we move in the light of that do we find out practically what the abstract position is?
J.T. That is what our Bible readings are for, and, of course, our private readings too; but I am afraid many just leave their education to the public meetings, whereas private reading and the study of Scripture are essential to every one of us.
F.J.F. Do you mean in view of the assembly?
J.T. The assembly, of course, is the temple of God. We shall come to that, and see what is available for us when the saints, the whole assembly, come together at the same time. We have to study Scripture and pray about it, and ruminate, so that the thing becomes part of us.
P.J.T.F. What are the limits of the fellowship of His Son?
J.T. It is the full idea of fellowship. In chapter 10 the fellowship is that of Christ's death, but in the first chapter of this epistle Paul introduces the thought of the faithfulness of God in regard to fellowship. We have these references to the faithfulness of God on which we may count in regard of the fellowship, the first here in chapter 1, the second in chapter 10. There is a third in the second epistle, which stands related to Paul's service (@2 Corinthians 1: 18).
H.W. Will you tell us why that is so emphasised in reference to the Corinthians?
J.T. I think God intended the Corinthian epistles to be basic and universal in their bearing. The thought of fellowship is stressed in them, because we have to carry through every day in the week in regard of the testimony. On the first day of the week we have the Lord's supper, and all that enters into it, but the idea of the fellowship is to govern us as we
{31}
carry through throughout the whole week when we do not see each other, and we are not together all the time; therefore it is a question of reliability in each of us, that we are faithful and true to one another, true to God, true to Christ, true to the Spirit, but true to one another too.
J.H.T. Can fellowship be understood according to the Lord's mind unless we have the full knowledge of God's Son, Jesus Christ our Lord?
J.T. It is in chapter 10 that this is stressed. It is not exactly when we are together, but when we are not together; that is to say, when we are not under each other's eye. We are to have that confidence one in another, and each has to be true to the truth in order that the fellowship should be maintained. Another thing comes out in verse 10 of the chapter, which refers to the practical state of things amongst the Corinthians, and in regard to which he had to exhort them, "Now I exhort you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all say the same thing, and that there be not among you divisions; but that ye be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same opinion. For it has been shewn to me concerning you, my brethren, by those of the house of Chloe, that there are strifes among you". We now come down to the actual facts of the conditions at Corinth; there was division amongst them. The apostle immediately deals with that matter. There were many other such things, but the question of division was at once spoken about. In the verse spoken of in chapter 11 we are told, "there must also be sects". It is said, "I hear there exist divisions among you, and I partly give credit to it. For there must also be sects among you, that the approved may become manifest among you" (verses  18, 19). Well these are serious conditions, not at all in keeping with what is alluded to in the first nine verses.
{32}
W.S.S. It would appear that the divisions were due to the following of persons. Is that always a danger?
J.T. Party leaders. Paul has to say that he and Apollos were regarded amongst them as leaders in that sense. Undoubtedly he alluded to party conditions, local conditions, for it is said, "Now these things, brethren, I have transferred, in their application, to myself and Apollos, for your sakes, that ye may learn in us the lesson of not letting your thoughts go above what is written, that ye may not be puffed up one for such a one against another". That is to make clear that there were party conditions locally, and Paul has to transfer these thoughts to himself and Apollos, in order that they should know them.
R.J.D. Why does it add, "That the approved may become manifest among you"?
J.T. That was the point. As the second letter would show, there were very bad conditions: in chapter 12: 20, 21. Paul speaks of the conditions, and names the evil that was amongst them, but he said that he had reserved dealing with those bad conditions until the general state of the saints had come to this, that he could say, "Your obedience shall have been fulfilled" (chapter 10: 6). He was aiming at bringing about obedience among them in a general way, and he could then deal with the bad conditions, so that the point was to bring out the *approved*, and to support them, and then in due time to deal with what is not approved. There could not be an assembly at all unless there are some approved ones, and, undoubtedly the main number were approved, only that the party conditions amongst them were damaging them terribly. There are references to disputes, but there should be no debates in the christian assembly. It is to be a place where we are learning the truth in all subjection to one another. Opposition is abnormal.
{33}
The next part of the chapter is to bring out Paul's own services. "For Christ has not sent me to baptise, but to preach glad tidings; not in wisdom of word, that the cross of the Christ may not be made vain. For the word of the cross is to them that perish foolishness, but to us that are saved it is God's power. For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and set aside the understanding of the understanding ones. Where is the wise? where scribe? where disputer of this world? has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world? For since, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom has not known God. God has been pleased by the foolishness of the preaching to save those that believe". Here is a reference to those who are spoken of as disputers. "Where is the wise? where scribe? where disputer of this world?" meaning that there should not be anything of this kind in the christian assembly. There should be no debates, no disputations. It is a question of the temple of God, where we should be learning the truth in holy subjection one to another. Here we have reference to what characterises parliaments and that sort of thing, where we hear about the King's opposition, that is to say, normal opposition, whereas, in the assembly of God, it is abnormal and wrong. No such thing is to be allowed as opposition or disputations, or each saying what he wishes. It is a question of the temple of God, and what is suitable in it.
F.J.F. What belongs to christendom and its opposition are not to exist in the assembly, which should be in direct contrast to all that is found outside.
J.T. That is the idea. Hence disputing and differences of opinion are simply out of the question in the assembly. The assembly of God is something that God has here as a rebuke to all men, because His assembly is a united assembly. The Spirit of God is there, and there is no such thought as one having one
{34}
opinion and another one having another. We are to be of one mind.
P.L. "If anyone speak -- as oracles of God", @1 Peter 4: 11.
J.T. Quite so.
F.J.F. That would be the practical effect of having the one Spirit?
J.T. Just so; and the Spirit of God is here to effect that.
W.S.S. In Exodus, which corresponds with Corinthians, every detail was to be "as the Lord commanded Moses". That would give it to us in principle?
J.T. There was to be nothing different. Exodus brings out the idea, in type, of Christ, because Christ was the Pattern. The word "pattern" is used, and everything must go by that pattern, and so, in the assembly of God, all refers to Christ and the Spirit of God, of course, working in the saints, in order to bring about what is of Christ.
S.P.S. It is in that way that all come to the same mind and the same opinion.
J.T. Just so.
F.J.F. Would you say that that would be seen in the care meetings?
J.T. Just so. There should never be division in matters. We come together in subjection to the Lord of course, but in subjection one to another. We are enjoined to be subject one to another. In order to get the thought in the chapter, reference should be made to this matter of wisdom, and what we were saying about disputations is important negatively, that when we come together we are there to learn one from another, and the Spirit of God is ready to help us in that, for He adds His help to our weaknesses, so that there might be unity. So it says: "For since, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom has not known God, God has been pleased by the foolishness of the preaching to save those that believe. Since Jews
{35}
indeed ask for signs, and Greeks seek wisdom; but *we* preach Christ crucified, to Jews an offence, and to nations foolishness; but to those that are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ God's power and God's wisdom. Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men". Wonderful things are stated here. We marvel that God is pleased to come down to speak about His weakness, but it is to show that what is of God is always superior.
P.L. Would the weakness of God lie in the character of the instruments He selects to use, such as Paul; "*I* was with you in weakness"?
J.T. Quite so. In fact they said, "his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible" (@2 Corinthians 10: 10), but still people were being converted all round him.
Then another thing is that these very things would be despised by the natural man, by the Greek. It is said that "God has chosen the foolish things of the world, that he may put to shame the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the world, that he may put to shame the strong things; and the ignoble things of the world, and the despised, has God chosen, and things that are not, that he may annul the things that are; so that no flesh should boast before God".
F.J.F. In the cross there is a clearance of the man who offended God, and all that he stands for.
J.T. What man regards of great importance. God despises, whereas what God regards of supreme importance, man despises; and therefore the final word is, "But of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption; that according as it is written, He that boasts, let him boast in the Lord". Everything is secured in Christ. What we had in the first nine verses is seen here again
{36}
in practical bearing, that is to say, "of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption". We have everything in Christ, in a practical sense. He is made unto us all these things.
W.S.S. Would you say that what is of God here would always be marked outwardly by weakness?
J.T. I would think that. If anyone seem to be more than that he has to challenge himself as to whether he is not indulging, because it is a question of being weak and then being strong. It is not what one acquires in the universities or in the schools; it is a question of what one acquires as with God, not indeed that we do not need to learn to read and write, and to learn many things, but still it is what we are made in Christ Jesus that is the point.
W.S.S. Does it work out in the apostle in taking matters up with the Corinthians? He takes the place of weakness, and his ministry on that basis is effective, through God's power, it would seem.
J.T. Well, you can see that in the second epistle (chapter 12, verse 7), where he says he had been in the third heaven, and after that he had been given a thorn *for* the flesh (not a thorn *in* the flesh, but *for* the flesh), It was something to check the flesh, and he asked the Lord three times to remove it, and the Lord did not remove it, but He says, "My grace suffices thee". Paul had to learn the meaning of the thorn, that the flesh profits nothing. It was *for* the flesh; and therefore he says, "Most gladly therefore will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may dwell upon me". That is how learning is reached.
F.J.F. Does he summarise the epistle in verse 30? There is what he is going to speak of later, wisdom in the temple, righteousness, the kingdom, holiness, and so on, and redemption in chapter 15, including the body.
{37}
J.T. Very good. Every chapter is in order to bring out these things in a practical way amongst the Corinthians. The Corinthians seem to have been taken up particularly by the Lord, by God too, to work out the truth, especially assembly order and the service of God, and so much time is devoted to them. Therefore the Lord says to Paul, "Fear not ... because *I* am with thee ... I have much people in this city", @Acts 18: 10. He was there eighteen months to bring out the truth in Corinth, and that is why there is so much in it that is needed at the present time, and it is proposed that we should learn the truth governing the service of God in the assembly. It is a question of what is in the assembly, and the assembly of *God* at Corinth is the pattern.
C.M.M. Would you say a word about the expression, "in Christ Jesus"?
J.T. Well, I think it is a question of power. The preposition "in" is meant to convey the thought of power, "of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus". The saints are viewed as placed in Christ Jesus by God. The truth was worked out in them, not simply as so many units in themselves, but as in Christ; all viewed as in Christ Jesus.
W.S.S. There is no weakness there.
J.T. Well that is the idea of the preposition, I think. There is no weakness at all there, it strengthens in a spiritual sense.
E.A.W. Do we hold what is abstract in our minds, and work on until we see it answered to amongst the saints?
J.T. Quite so, and that is exactly what Paul is characterised by, the great skill and care he used to bring the truth to the saints, and nowhere is this seen more than in the epistle to Corinth. In the epistle to Ephesus he says, "Whereby ... ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery" (@Ephesians 3: 4); that is to say, there was so much he knew, and the
{38}
abstract would agree with that. There was someone who knew, and God has always someone, here and there, whom He can use to bring out the truth to all who are local.
W.S.S. The household of Chloe were not satisfied with what was merely abstract. While we have the abstract in mind, we are not satisfied until we see the thing working out practically. The household of Chloe wanted to see the truth worked out substantially in Corinth.
J.T. Hence it says, "If any one speak -- as oracles of God" (@1 Peter 4: 11), not merely speaking, but speaking as oracles of God.
W.S.S. You mean not merely as knowing the Scriptures, but having things substantially?
J.T. Quite so. I think John's gospel was intended to furnish all this, and to weave it with Paul's doctrine, because so much is there made of instruction, hence the Lord is called "Rabbi", or "Teacher". "Rabbi, where abidest thou?" The first two who followed Jesus had that in their minds, and Mary Magdalene in chapter 20 calls the Lord "Rabboni", that is to say, 'My Teacher'. So that we do not speak of a certain one as a great teacher, having great ability, but what is he to me? What am I getting through him? That is what Mary Magdalene meant when she said, 'My Teacher'.
P.L. We are to remember from whom we learn things. Would that be to be sure that the persons are reliable?
J.T. Yes. They had proved themselves to be that, "Knowing of whom thou hast learned them", @2 Timothy 3: 14.
C.M.P. Say a little more about "of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus". One gets the impression that it is linked up with a divine work which makes what is abstract practicable.
{39}
J.T. I think "of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus" would mean that each is set in that position, in the attitude of his mind, and that is the ground we are on. Here in Durban we are on that ground; brothers and sisters are on that ground. God has placed us "in Christ Jesus", and *He* is made unto us all these things, hence they have to be worked out. Paul says, "Who has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption". God has placed us in Christ Jesus where these things are, but though He has been made them to us, they have to be worked out, and teaching is for that purpose. Gift is for that purpose.
I believe one of the most important things to keep in our minds, is what gift is *meant* for. It is not simply what Scripture says in the letter, but what *gift* teaches. Christ has gone beyond all the heavens, and He received gifts in Man (@Psalm 68: 18); that is to say, *as* Man and for man, and they are all with a view to the work of the ministry. He has given "some apostles; and some prophets; and some evangelists; and some pastors and teachers". All are "for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ", @Ephesians 4: 10 - 12. That is the point of it all, therefore the gifts are essential.
P.L. Does it add lustre to them to see that they are the spoil of the exalted Man?
J.T. That is good. We have already alluded to His "having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this", @Acts 2: 33. The Spirit brought all the gifts with Him, but Ephesians goes further, and says that Christ has gone beyond all the heavens, and He has received gifts in Man, and then we are told what the persons *are*; not simply that they *have* gifts, but that they *are* gifts. That is the idea in Ephesians. Every
{40}
person involved is a gift, apostle, prophet, evangelist, pastor and teacher, these latter being one gift.
F.J.F. And they are irresistible as they are in the power of the Spirit.
J.T. Well that is the idea, that they are beyond anything that man can do or is. They are the gifts that Christ has given from above.
P.L. Irresistible in love. It says, "And falling upon the neck of Paul they ardently kissed him", @Acts 20: 37.
J.T. Paul went *down* to Eutychus, and enfolded him in his arms. That was not the exercise of his gift in speaking, but the exercise of his love.
W.S.S. The converse of their ardently kissing Paul, would be the love they had for him, not because of his gift, but what he was personally, would you say?
J.T. Quite so. That is seen in @Acts 20; what affection they had for him! It is a great love chapter, for it is love worked out largely in gift. It says, "And having said these things, he knelt down and prayed with them all. And they all wept sore; and falling upon the neck of Paul they ardently kissed him". It is well to stop at times to ponder the examples that God gives of His work in the early christians. They show what love really was, and it is right to ask whether we can compare it with what there is now amongst us. As far as I can note, I do not recall a time when there was more concern about the truth than there is now, and God is helping. The word "more and more" is the point.
J.H.T. Does boasting "in the Lord" refer to a general attitude, or to a special occasion as when the assembly comes together in one place?
J.T. It is a question of boasting in the *Lord*. One just wonders whether the brethren understand how the word applies at the present time. We do not want to be boasting in a natural sort of way,
{41}
saying that we are a nice number here in Durban, and we are getting on very well. We do not want to be on that line. It is a question of boasting *in the Lord*. The word 'boast' is a remarkable word in the christian vocabulary.
R.S. Is the thought that the local assembly becomes a witness to all this truth and boasting in the Lord?
J.T. That is right. That is what is meant in chapter 14, that has been alluded to, when the whole assembly comes together in one place, not simply a meeting, but the *whole* assembly; it is like the "hill of God", @1 Samuel 10: 5. The truth that God has in any given place is to be known there. Therefore it is said, "If all prophesy, and some unbeliever or simple person come in, he is convicted of all". It is a simple person, but he has come into the assembly, the christian assembly. He may have been to other assemblies, perhaps Jewish assemblies and pagan assemblies, but when he comes into the christian assembly "he is convicted of all, he is judged of all; the secrets of his heart are manifested, and thus, falling upon his face, he will do homage to God, reporting that God is indeed amongst you". That is a wonderful result.
J.v.R.N. Is that because they are gathered together in the light of what you have been saying about the abstract?
J.T. That is right, and just what I mean.
{42}
READINGS ON 1 CORINTHIANS (2)
@1 Corinthians 3: 1 - 23
J.T. It is thought that we should read the third chapter with a view to speaking of the temple, but also touch on chapter 2. In these epistles to Corinth there is much allusion to Paul himself, to his ministry and to himself generally. It is to be noted because it indicates that he was intended to be a model. We mentioned yesterday that the book of Exodus has in it a suggestion of *the pattern*, and there was to be no deviation from that pattern. It is thought that the apostle Paul, like the Lord Jesus, is an example of everything as Paul himself says, "Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ", chapter 11: 1. Paul is not excluding Christ from the idea of pattern, yet Paul, a creature like ourselves, is intended to represent the mind of God in ministry, as well as being an example of christianity or christians. According to Genesis, at that time in the history of man, the speakers, or servants of God were generally left free as to what they might say or do, but in Exodus God is very particular as to pattern, and Moses was responsible as to the pattern, the pattern of the tabernacle shown him on the mount.
Now in view of all this, chapter 2 says "And *I*, when I came to you, brethren, came not in excellency of word, or wisdom, announcing to you the testimony of God. For I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified. And *I* was with you in weakness and in fear and in much trembling; and my word and my preaching, not in persuasive words of wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your faith might not stand in men's wisdom, but in God's power". The apostle thus shows us the example
{43}
intended to be followed in these epistles, and in a wider sense in the whole assembly at all times. Ministry therefore is to be gauged by what the saints may be in any given place, what their measure may be, what they have already acquired in the sense of knowledge or growth, and so Paul here says that when he came to them, he did not come in excellency of speech, or of words or wisdom, but he says further, "I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified". It is a very remarkable thing that a minister, whoever he may be, is not to assume to be beyond the measure of the saints to whom he is ministering. He does not wish to convey to them that he is far beyond them, but rather that he is one of them and would learn with them, but at the same time be an example to them, using skill in this sense.
F.J.F. Would you say that in Genesis there was no established economy regulating men, but in Exodus God establishes His economy, even as today?
J.T. Very good. There is an economy, although it has been sadly departed from; in fact, we might say that the thought of it is given up in general amongst the professing people of God. It is, therefore, all the more needed that those of us who would walk in the truth and follow the Lord as Paul did, should be guided by the example that has been spoken of, the example that Paul sets before us, as he said, "Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ". So that Christ is still the example here, only He is to be apprehended through Paul. The Lord speaks of him as "an elect vessel to me", @Acts 9: 15. He had been selected by the Lord for this very purpose, not simply that he should be a christian, but that he should be an example to all christians in regard to the teaching and principles governing christianity and the assembly.
{44}
A.W.P. What you are speaking of is referred to in @Galatians 3, "To whom, as before your very eyes, Jesus Christ has been portrayed, crucified among you".
J.T. Paul's example, even going so far as to portray Christ crucified, as though He was crucified *among them*. They had the full thought of christianity set before them, but they were deviating from it, even more than the Corinthians, especially as taking up judaism.
H.W. Would you say these first five verses of chapter 2 give us what is basic, and must remain while what is for the Lord is here? "Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified" and the Holy Spirit the power of things.
J.T. I think it is well to keep that in mind, because verse 5 says, "that your faith might not stand in men's wisdom, but in God's power". What is current amongst christians generally today is not simply God's wisdom or God's word, or God's principles, but man's, very largely; hence men are sent to college to be ministers; not that there is anything wrong in learning so long as it is under control, and that we are using it for the sake of the truth. The wisdom of the brethren is to keep within the range of the knowledge of any given company or of the brethren generally, so that all should learn together, that the principle of mutual feeling should govern our dealings one with another. The one who serves amongst them can afford to be like them, to get down to the same level so that all should learn together; the principle of mutual feeling should govern our relations one with another. So he says in verse 6 of chapter 2, "We speak wisdom among the perfect; but wisdom not of this world, nor of the rulers of this world, who come to nought. But we speak God's wisdom in a mystery, that hidden wisdom which God had predetermined before the
{45}
ages for our glory". The full progress of any one in any company is to be recognised, but he would be glad, though the brethren recognise it, to fall in with where they are, and move with them in so far as they can move together in the truth.
P.L. "Ourselves your servants for Jesus¬ sake", @2 Corinthians 4: 5: Would it be in that spirit?
J.T. Just so. We are to be the servants of the saints; not simply the servants of Christ, or the servants of God, but we are the servants of the saints too, which is a very sobering thing to keep before us as ministering.
P.L. "Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas", and so on, "all are yours".
J.T. And then to guard that, to balance it, "*Ye* are Christ's, and Christ is God's".
F.J.F. Would what you are speaking of be in practice the truth of the body carried out experimentally as we learn together?
J.T. Very good; and so it is, as we hope to come to it in the Lord's supper. We have the word "I speak as to intelligent persons"; that is to say, as partakers of the Lord's supper, as having part in the assembly in principle, we should be intelligent; even although recently converted, we should be intelligent according to measure. As christians we have more wisdom than the angels, in that we have the Holy Spirit and therefore we should be intelligent.
J.P.v.N. Would you say that the Lord Jesus gave us an example when He laid aside His garments and girded Himself with a towel to wash the feet of His disciples?
J.T. Just so. He led the way for them, not as to their teaching but an example generally. We are supposed to serve the saints, to wash their feet, as "servants for Jesus¬ sake". It is not out of the way for a servant to go to the very lowest point to serve the saints and so the Lord said He was amongst His
{46}
own "as the one that serves". @Luke 22: 27. Paul too worked with his own hands to earn wages in order to be able to give to the saints.
C.M.M. Would the wisdom of chapter 2 and the meat of chapter 3 be what Paul was ministering at Ephesus at that time? Would he be adjusting the truth to suit the Ephesians in that way, and on a lower note the Corinthians?
J.T. Very good, and he says to the Ephesians: "Whereby ... ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery". He wished them to know *his* knowledge, what his measure was.
P.L. Does this fit into the portion of "meat in due season" as referred to in @Psalm 104: 27 and @Psalm 145: 15? The due seasons bear on it.
J.T. The Lord intended that the household, meaning the saints viewed as a household, the assembly, should have meat in due season. The apostle here follows that principle, because he determined to know nothing amongst the Corinthians but Jesus Christ and Him crucified; that is to say, he gauged what they needed. And again in verse 6 of chapter 2, "We speak wisdom among the perfect" and he goes on further to speak about this wisdom; "We speak God's wisdom in a mystery". This is a point for us all to bear in mind, that christianity is not a thing to be understood by everybody, by persons uninstructed or unconverted; it is mysterious, and we are to take on that attitude, as those who are entrusted with the mysteries of God. It seems to me they are available to us, and so, "We speak God's wisdom in a mystery, that hidden wisdom which God had predetermined before the ages for our glory: which none of the princes of this age knew", showing that the most learned people of the world know nothing about these things, and are not able to follow them either, "for had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory;
{47}
but according as it is written, Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God. For who of men hath known the things of a man except the spirit of the man which is in him? thus also the things of God knows no one except the Spirit of God". Paul then adds, "But we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we may know the things which have been freely given to us of God: which also we speak, not in words taught by human wisdom, but in those taught by the Spirit, communicating spiritual things by spiritual means", In the '*we*' of this passage he would include himself particularly as representing the highest feature of instruction, but at the same time, he would lead all the brethren into it, and give them instruction such as they could take in and assimilate.
F.J.F. All the learning of the Greeks would be shut out as one comes into the things of God?
J.T. Just so, because the Greeks seek after wisdom, that is what is of man, what is called the classics, of course. It puffs up man, as learning does, but this epistle is to keep us lowly, so that we go along with the lowly. Let us learn all we can, but learn it in a spiritual way.
W.S.S. The apostle was among them as speaking these things; that is, the things of God. It says, "Which have been freely given to us of God: which also we speak".
J.T. Quite so; "which also we speak". How striking it must have been to hear that one man speaking the full thought of the Scriptures. As we remarked yesterday, we are to move together in a mutual way, not assuming to lord it over God's heritage, or to be superior to the brethren, but move
{48}
with them, and in moving with them to show what can be amongst us, although it may be only in one, for it is well to observe what there is in each one, what brethren *are*, what they may have, what they are able to do and say, so that we might reach their way and learn from them as Paul says, "The measure ... to reach to you also".
F.J.F. Would that be by basing everything upon Scripture? How would it practically take form?
J.T. Scripture, of course, is our guide for everything in a literal sense, but then we, especially young people, have also to observe what older people do and say and how they say things. It is said of the Lord Jesus, "He hath done all things well: he maketh both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak", @Mark 7: 37. The Lord is the example in that sense, but there is also now what we are coming to in chapter 3; what is called the "temple of God". The body of every christian is a temple in a certain sense, because he has the Holy Spirit, but the word 'temple' in chapter 3 is a collective thought; "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God ... ?"; *ye*, that is to say, the saints at Corinth, and that is because they not only were converted but they had the Spirit of God dwelling among them and had understanding too. Therefore, a local company anywhere as formed according to the truth of the assembly, could be designated in that way and therefore when they come together to look into the things of God, they have the character of the temple of God. The word 'temple' was applied even to the body of Christ when here. In chapter 2 of this epistle the word 'mind' is applied to us as to Christ. "*We* have the mind of Christ"; the same mind as Christ has, meaning the same thinking faculty that He has, and so therefore we can take in the things of God. However deep they may be, according to the measure that is possible we can take them in, therefore we
{49}
should not give up, or think that we do not understand. We have the Spirit of God, and as Paul says elsewhere, "Think of what I say, for the Lord will give thee understanding", @2 Timothy 2: 7. If we are attentive to the ministry, and perhaps do not understand, the Lord will give understanding. Let us pray if we have a difficulty, and He will give understanding.
C.M.P. Is the knowledge of the things of God connected with the Spirit searching all things?
J.T. The allusion is to the *depths* of God. The Spirit searches them. John says in his first epistle, "Ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things". It is a somewhat different word from that usually employed for the Spirit, but it refers to the Spirit, and what we have as a result that we may know all things.
W.S.S. Does the thought of the temple in verse 16, link with the Lord's remark in @John 2, when He says, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up"?
J.T. Well, it is the same word, but in an infinite sense applied to Christ; He alludes to Himself in speaking thus. It refers to Christ's body, as a Man, that although they might kill Him, He would be raised; He could raise Himself, because He is a divine Person.
P.L. So He is viewed there as the shrined Deity.
W.S.S. Was the shrine here in the Lord personally, but the shrine is still here, is it not?
J.T. Well, the word 'shrine' conveys what we are dealing with. It depends on the presence of the Spirit now, not the Spirit as in the Deity Itself, but as in the saints; that is, in the assembly.
H.W. Would you connect the temple with the hidden wisdom in the previous chapter? It was the inward side of christianity that was lacking in Corinth.
{50}
J.T. I would say that God has helped the brethren as He has helped the saints from the very outset of christianity, so that they have learnt to come together, and to read the Scriptures together and to pray together and to worship together. Matthew enlarges on these thoughts in saying, "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". That is the Lord's own word, spoken as recorded by Matthew to show that, however reduced we are in numbers, this thought that we are now treating of may apply to us; that is, the thought of the shrine, the temple, because Christ is with us. It is also consequent on the saints being together, not simply so many persons, but *together*, which would mean, *together in assembly*. "Two of you" would mean two of the assembly, those who have the Spirit and understand the assembly; "two of you" are of that class. They have part in the assembly and can function as of the assembly.
C.M.M. In that way we can count on the Lord for a measure of temple light in all our Scripture readings together, although the temple in its fullest sense involves the whole assembly in the city.
J.T. I think that will come before us later. It is well to bring it up now, so as to make the position clear. The Lord has helped us I believe in these last days, during the time of the revival, extending back now nearly one hundred and twenty years, in which the Spirit of God has been freely operating. During this time certain methods have been taken on which are scriptural although they may not be exactly as they were at the beginning; that is to say, Bible readings and addresses among the brethren and there are many other things like that. So that we are learning, steadily learning, and coming to a knowledge of the truth; not *ever* learning, and never coming to a knowledge of the truth. The important
{51}
thing is to be learners, to be ever learning and learning in a true sense. The prophet speaking of the Lord Himself in the days of His flesh says Jehovah opened His ear morning by morning as the learner, so that He might speak a word to him that was weary, a word in season.
F.J.F. If there are only two or three in a small city or town, who come together thus, appreciating that God's mind with regard to the greatness of the truth is not altered, they can count upon the Spirit helping them.
J.T. Quite so. They can use written ministry too, I suppose you would say. We have written ministry, very often used, and very rightly used too and very important. Written ministry is what may be called an aid to the teaching of the apostle. So Paul himself asked Timotheus to bring the books, certain books. It does not indicate that they were his own writings; and then he said "especially the parchments". The notes that are taken amongst the brethren in recent years are of great value, because they afford the means to carry the truth to distant parts, to persons who are at a distance from the ministry.
F.J.F. Would that be recognising the temple in its fullest sense?
J.T. I think so. The temple, of course, always refers either to Christ, or to the Spirit in the saints. It does not refer to one isolated person, but to the saints who love one another coming together at any time and looking into things; the Spirit of God is with them and they take on the character of the temple as referred to in @1 Corinthians 3. The apostle Paul proceeds in chapter 3 saying, "And *I*, brethren, have not been able to speak to you as to spiritual, but as to fleshly", showing how gatherings, local companies, may become very low in their state, in not availing themselves of what is to hand and in
{52}
not improving themselves, so that they might grow in the true knowledge of God. Paul has to say that they were not spiritual, but fleshly, as babes in Christ. Peter alludes to babes in another sense. In saying, "as newborn babes" Peter brings out that newborn babes have good taste and discernment as to food. Such are fresh and their minds are clear and so it is not a derogatory thought in Peter, but it is here in Corinthians. To remain babes as Paul speaks of them is derogatory because we should be steadily growing.
M.T.S.V. You referred last night to prayer being linked with current events in the assembly. Might the parchments refer to current ministry?
J.T. Quite so. It is not very clear, but they would refer to something written by Paul, because they are distinguished from books. The service of writing or of taking notes of spiritual ministry is important, because they can be passed on, so that brethren elsewhere may get the gain of what there may be in that sense. To the Corinthians the apostle says, "Ye are yet carnal", which means they are just natural men, and they have not developed in the truth and thus become spiritually grown men. I think this reminds us that the apostle Paul is dealing with the Corinthians as recently converted people. No doubt many were converted much earlier than they were, but in general, I would say, the Corinthians were recently converted and therefore treated very tenderly by the apostle. Some amongst them were going on very badly, for in the second letter he says he is reserving what he had in mind in the sense of vengeance, or judgment, until the generality of the saints at Corinth had arrived at the truth, as he says, "When your obedience shall have been fulfilled". Chapters 2 and 3 of the first epistle are specially aimed at that, as he calls attention to how he came down to just where they were, and brings
{53}
himself in, not treating them as chapter 5 does. He does not at the outset treat of the persons who were practising wickedness; he does not touch on them until chapter 5, where he deals with one of them whose conduct was worse even than that of the nations. In these earlier chapters Paul is dealing with them as a whole; they had not advanced very much, so he did not want to damage them, or to cause anything, as it were, to scare them. Paul did not want to do that as to the Corinthians, to scare even the young ones lest they might be turned aside.
C.M.P. Would there be help for us in dealing with what may be morally very low, that if the spiritual state is improved a truer moral judgment may be reached in individuals?
J.T. And to lead them on, as we shall see, is Paul's method with the Corinthians. He said to them in chapter 4 that he had sent Timothy to them. He did not want to come himself, because if he came, he would have to resort to apostolic authority, and therefore he sends a younger man; that is Timotheus, his own child in the faith, so that they might observe Paul's ways, and learn the truth from such a one as Timothy.
F.J.F. So he acted very tenderly towards them.
J.T. Quite so. We are struck too with the success of it.
J.E.M. Is what you have been saying in connection with the first and second chapters basic, as we approach the thought of the hill of God, in its present position relative to the Philistines, with a view to our getting further help in the midweek readings? Christ as God's power and God's wisdom and the Spirit of God are available, indicating what there is in a locality for correction, and for the building up of what is for God among the saints in the locality.
J.T. That raises the whole question as to ministry and what has come before the saints during recent
{54}
years as to the weekdays, that is to say from Monday to Saturday. The first day of the week when we have so much that is spiritual, has a distinction of its own that no other day has. It is the day on which Christ was raised by the *glory* of the Father, not simply by the *power* of the Father, but by the *glory* of the Father, and hence the peculiar distinction attached to the first day of the week, affording much instruction too for us, but then the other days of the week have not the same spiritual advantages. The midweek meetings, therefore, afford help, specially for the brethren as having to do with this world's affairs and the earning of their living and providing for their wives and children; they have to come in contact with what is defiling and what would tend to weaken them spiritually, and hence the great need for other meetings besides what there are on the Lord's day. Alluding to the midweek meetings, a meeting, say, on a Thursday (brethren will understand I am speaking very simply and practically) affords help to the brethren in the days when it is specially needed. In addition to the first day of the week and the prayer meeting on Monday night, which has now become customary, they have another meeting, not simply for the readings at the different rooms in any given town, but for the whole assembly in the place to come together *at one time* and in one hall; that is in chapter 14. The gathering together on other days in the different rooms is also right, even as the breaking of bread, but if the thought of "the hill of God" be understood and apprehended, then we must have the whole assembly come together at one time for ministry. All the gifts that may be available in the town are there, the prophetic men ministering and these are all available to all the saints in the place. That is what is in mind. What our brother has alluded to, the midweek meetings, have in mind the additional thought of supporting
{55}
and furnishing and helping forward generally all the saints in a town at the same time.
F.J.F. It gives us a very needed stimulus to go on throughout the whole week as being encouraged in coming thus together.
J.T. The "hill of God" alluded to in @1 Samuel 10 was in the camp of the Philistines; it should not have been there. Where the saints are walking in the light of the assembly and in the power of the Spirit, the Philistine will not have his place there. He has not such a place here today for instance. If we resort to Scripture and the ministry the Spirit affords, the hill of God will be in the hands of the saints themselves and they will be able to help one another. They will not need a clergyman or ordained minister, as he is called. They will be able to help one another, which is a great matter.
S.P.S. Would you make any distinction between that which is called the city reading and those in the different gatherings in a place? Is there anything different in character?
J.T. There would be less power in the smaller gatherings because all the gifts cannot be there. I am supposing that there are gifts, and there are (this epistle contemplates that there were gifts at Corinth), and they should be there when all the saints are together at one time. The gifts should be there, and hence the instruction in @1 Corinthians 14 is of prime importance.
C.M.M. You would encourage us to continue with both readings?
J.T. Quite so. It is because we need them. If there are many saints, as for instance in London, or in other large places, where there are several meetings in a city, they afford additional help in each part of the city beside the city meetings when all in the place come together.
{56}
F.J.F. The Lord seems to come in in a very special way in these midweek meetings. They seem to convey a very tangible sense of the assembly as gathered together which we do not have on other occasions.
J.T. Hence the assembly would throw light on the whole position. @1 Corinthians 12 tells us about the gifts; "Concerning spiritual manifestations, brethren, I do not wish you to be ignorant. Ye know that when ye were of the nations" (he is alluding to that because they had not been long away from paganism) "ye were led away to dumb idols, in whatever way ye might be led. I give you therefore to know that no one, speaking in the power of the Spirit of God, says, Curse on Jesus;" (that is a test), "and no one can say, Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit". Well, that ought to appeal to every single one of us to say, "Lord Jesus", but the apostle in saying this implies that it is not simply the words, "Lord Jesus", but the power that accompanies the words. "There are distinctions of operations, but the same God who operates all things in all. But to each the manifestation of the Spirit is given for profit. For to one, by the Spirit, is given the word of wisdom; and to another the word of knowledge, according to the same Spirit; and to a different one faith, in the power of the same Spirit, and to another gifts of healing in the power of the same Spirit; and to another operations of miracles; and to another prophecy; and to another discerning of spirits; and to a different one kinds of tongues; and to another interpretation of tongues. But all these things operates the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each in particular according as he pleases. For even as the body is one and has many members, but all the members of the body, being many, are one body, so also is the Christ". Now that is the general thought, as when we are together.
{57}
In the concluding verses, the *gifts* are mentioned, so that we have to distinguish the first part of chapter 12, as applying to a local company, and the second part which applies to the whole assembly in a universal sense. When we touch the whole assembly then all the gifts are there, and hence the great advantage of large gatherings such as we have had in Glasgow and London and that we hope to have in Sydney and elsewhere, so that we might get the gain of all the gifts as far as possible, whatever they are.
A.M. Is the thought of gifts linked up with the idea of building, developed in chapter 3? It is for edification.
J.T. Just so, so that we have here Paul and Apollos and Cephas. He says, "Who then is Apollos, and who Paul?" The answer to that is "ministering servants, through whom ye have believed, and as the Lord has given to each. *I* have planted; Apollos watered; but God has given the increase". That is to say, we have in these two men the idea of gifts and how they work, the one plants and another waters and God gives the increase.
A.M. I am not quite clear as to the link between the agricultural thought and the constructional thought of the building.
J.T. We have already touched on the agricultural side, the watering and the planting; but then it goes on to say in verse 8, "But the planter and the waterer are one; but each shall receive his own reward according to his own labour. For we are God's fellow-workmen; ye are God's husbandry"; that is the agricultural thought; then "God's building"; that is the structural side. Paul says, "According to the grace of God which has been given to me, as a wise architect, I have laid the foundation, but another builds upon it". We have
{58}
the two sides, the structural side is a question of building, and skill in it. Paul uses the word *architect*, "a wise architect". He had a special place. Paul alone was the architect, Apollos was not the architect. It is in keeping with what is said to Peter by the Lord Himself in Matthew, "*Thou* art Peter" meaning that he was material for the building, and the Lord says, as to Peter's confession of Himself, as the Son of the living God, "And on this rock I will build my assembly, and hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it". It is to bring out what we have here, but more. Peter is not the builder, as some would say; he is the *material* for the building. The word is, "thou art Peter", whereas the Lord had already laid the foundation.
W.S.S. I was thinking of what the apostle says, "as a wise architect, I have laid the foundation, but another builds upon it". Paul's ministry would all be linked with that, would it not?
J.T. Therefore, we can see that Paul has a distinct place. Peter had one too. Peter and Paul had distinct places in regard to the structure, the building, and Paul, it would seem, is especially taken on in regard of the assembly. Peter is not taken on in that full sense, he is taken on administratively. The Lord says to him, "I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens; and whatsoever thou mayest bind upon the earth shall be bound in the heavens; and whatsoever thou mayest loose on the earth shall be loosed in the heavens". But he was not given the ministry of building; Paul was given that. Peter does allude to the material, the stones, but Paul was the architect. Peter is never said to be that, nor is anyone else. Paul is an elect vessel unto Christ, and therefore in the chapter we are dealing with now, he regards himself as the architect of the assembly.
{59}
W.S.S. Does the word, "But let each see how he builds upon it", put every one of us under responsibility?
J.T. Just so, but I would say specially persons that are in special service.
W.S.S. And it was to be upon that foundation.
C.M.P. Is that because it must be in accordance with the pattern?
J.T. I would say that; the pattern must run through. The pattern in Exodus is just a type, whereas the New Testament furnishes the *reality*, what comes from the hands of Christ and His apostles in the power of the Spirit, but the Old Testament helps greatly. It says, indeed, that every Scripture is divinely inspired, in alluding to the Old Testament as well as to the New, and this accounts for the help we have in ministry from the Old Testament.
A.M. All true building is to be God's building in character by the Spirit.
J.T. Just so. That is what they were at Corinth, God's building. We must come back to God. That is the general principle of the scripture. We must come back to God in everything.
E.A.W. Will you help us a little in relation to the recognition of gift?
J.T. Where such may be there is special ability from God which must be treated as universal, and on this basis the saints, "all that in every place ...", should be sure to avail themselves of it. It is a question of God, and His workmanship. God is the Giver of the increase. "The planter and the waterer are one; but each shall receive his own reward according to his own labour. For we are God's fellow-workmen" (which I think would allude to Paul particularly); "ye are God's husbandry, God's building. According to the grace of God which has been given to me, as a wise architect, I have laid
{60}
the foundation, but another builds upon it". I think that "another" would allude to a workman in a special sense, although I would not exclude the general thought, for every one can do something in a sense of edification.
W.O.S. In regard to this question of recognising gifts, would Paul correspond with Moses in having received what he ministered from the glory? The Israelites were able to take account of Moses¬ face, that it shone.
J.T. Paul in that sense would correspond with Moses. In fact he speaks of himself in that way in certain places, and we can see that God has His special men, particularly men like Paul, outstanding men; there are none like them. In chapter 12 of Numbers, God tells us what He thought of Moses. As to Paul, I would think that the Lord gave him special liberty to speak of himself; I do not think he had any great pleasure in speaking of himself, but he does so because he was a typical man, a man that should be followed. He tells us too, how much he worked; it is most remarkable, the enormous amount of work he went through and the amount of travelling, so that we can rightly understand what the Lord meant when He said, "This man is an elect vessel to me".
P.L. Gideon said to his men, "Look on me, and do likewise", @Judges 7: 17. Then at the end of the verse, "it shall be that, as I do, so shall ye do". Is that leadership?
J.T. Just so. There are many like them, but as regards Moses and Paul, they are unique.
F.J.F. Are you referring to chapter 4 of the second epistle in saying that Paul had liberty to speak of himself and all he passed through? It is practically the subject of the whole chapter. "But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the surpassingness of the power may be of God, and not
{61}
from us; every way afflicted, but not straitened", and so on. He gives a great list.
J.T. Yes. As you run on through that epistle you come to a list of things that he mentions in chapter 11. He descends to the thought of folly, as if he were at liberty to do this, to speak in folly so as to help the Corinthians, and he tells them the things that he did and that God had done through him, and so he says, at the end, verse 29, "Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is stumbled, and I burn not? If it is needful to boast, I will boast in the things which concern my infirmity. The God and Father of the Lord Jesus knows -- he who is blessed for ever -- that I do not lie. In Damascus the ethnarch of Aretas the king kept the city of the Damascenes shut up, wishing to take me; and through a window in a basket I was let down by the wall, and escaped his hands". And then he goes on to the visions that he had, that he was caught up to the third heaven and into Paradise, showing what an extraordinary man he was, what extraordinary experience, and what extraordinary power was given to him towards the Corinthians.
J.E.M. It is well to bear in mind in our localities that Paul has the last word in regard to assembly matters. It was given to him to complete the word of God.
J.T. Quite so.
J.E.M. And then Peter, his great contemporary, speaks so favourably of him, saying, "According as our beloved brother Paul also has written to you according to the wisdom given to him, as also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these things; among which some things are hard to be understood, which the untaught and ill-established wrest, as also the other scriptures, to their own destruction". The instructions necessary for the locality are to be found in Paul's writings.
{62}
J.T. Well that is what I would say, not indeed that Peter is excluded, because in his first epistle he does speak in similar language to Paul's, but you do feel that Paul has the very last word, as it were from heaven, even as the completion of the word of God. Surely the Lord should have liberty and right to present such a vessel, admiring him as He did, His own handiwork. He would guide Peter, His other great servant, to call Paul "our beloved brother Paul", and to make clear that his ministry was the word of God, "as also the other scriptures". Paul's letters are designated in that sense as the word of God by Peter.
W.S.S. So that in matters of local exercise we should pay strict attention to what Paul had to say and not take our directions from the Old Testament.
J.T. I think it is well that you have brought that up, because one has observed that the Old Testament scriptures are sometimes brought in by themselves, and Paul is overlooked and Peter overlooked, whereas at the beginning of the dispensation the word says that the believers "persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers". It was not in the Old Testament service, but in that of the apostles; it was not Moses, not Abraham, not any of the Old Testament servants, but the apostles, showing that we are all to understand the character of this dispensation, that it is unique. We belong to it and we should *shine* in it.
S.P.S. Would you help us more on the question of recognising gift?
J.T. I think Paul in using himself so much covers the whole ground. No one speaks so much about himself as Paul, and that is clearly not that he wanted to, or that he was boastful of himself, but rather that the Lord used him in that sense, the
{63}
Spirit of God had liberty to use Paul in that sense to bring him out as a model for all saints at all times.
C.M.M. Were the Corinthians going to be tested by the coming of Timotheus? "Now if Timotheus come, see that he may be with you without fear". They would have to recognise gift, would they not?
J.T. Quite so. He was a timid man, apparently, and Paul probably had that in mind in sending him. He did not go himself because he might have had to use the rod, in fact he raised the question with them as to whether they would prefer to have him come, but he did not go, showing that he was careful about the young Corinthian saints, that they should not be turned aside by anything and that wisdom should be used in all that was done for them.
W.S.S. That passage may help in regard to this question of recognising gift. "I have sent to you Timotheus, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who shall put you in mind of my ways, as they are in Christ". Such a brother coming among us and putting Paul's ministry before us would be recognised as one with gift.
J.T. Quite so. And things are gathered up in that way, and it is all tending to the completion of the assembly, so that the assembly should be fit for translation.
H.W. With regard to acknowledging gifts, the apostle says, "Be not negligent of the gift that is in thee, which has been given to thee through prophecy, with imposition of the hands of the elderhood", @1 Timothy 4: 14. Would you expect anything of that kind today?
J.T. Well, "the hands of the elderhood"; there is such a thing as elderhood today, I suppose.
H.W. I was wondering whether we could look for any movement of the Spirit of God in that way, or whether gift is more set out in a man like the apostle.
{64}
J.T. The idea of eldership should be fostered, and the two epistles that speak of it especially are 1 Timothy and Titus. I think it should be fostered, and hence it is that we have the description of an elder and what should characterise him, but it has to be remembered that eldership never extends beyond a local position; it is always local. They were ordained for every assembly, or for cities, though they are not in the same category as the gifts referred to in @1 Corinthians 12 or @Ephesians 4. At the same time they fit in with the truth of Ephesians, because the elders of Ephesus were called for by Paul at Miletus. They were called over to meet him, and he spoke to them as if they were representatives of the whole assembly, but I think that has to be taken with intelligence, because elsewhere elders are only for the local position.
{65}
READINGS ON 1 CORINTHIANS (3)
@1 Corinthians 10: 14 - 22; @1 Corinthians 11: 17 - 34
J.T. The subject will be the Lord's supper. We shall find in looking at these scriptures that they cover the truth of the Lord's Supper: in chapter 10, the fellowship involved in it, and then in chapter 11, the order that relates to it. Chapter 10 does not contemplate the saints together, although the coming together is necessary in order to fill out the truth, but as involving the fellowship, as we have said, it treats largely of our ordinary occupations, our having to do with everyday life. It therefore raises the question of loyalty to the truth; that is, to God and Christ and the Spirit, and lastly to the saints. It is a question of loyalty, beginning really at chapter 5, because there we are told that Christ, our Passover, is sacrificed for us. Therefore, we are to keep the feast with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. The keeping of the feast necessarily implies the formal coming together of the saints, which is chapter 11, but the keeping of it extends to everyday life, as we said, and how we behave, and how we maintain what is due to God in our everyday life, and what is due to one another too, for we have obligations to one another which the fellowship implies.
W.S.S. Does chapter 10 bring before us the general position, and chapter 11 the working out of the truth locally?
J.T. Just so; our being together. The passage in chapter 11, verse 18 reads, "For first, when ye come together in assembly". This has in mind how we act when we are together, that is to say how we conduct ourselves, as it were, inside in the assembly, whereas chapter 10 is conduct outside in our ordinary affairs.
{66}
F.J.F. Does it affect us as to associations, as well as our conduct?
J.T. I would say so. Verse 14 says, "Wherefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry. I speak as to intelligent persons: do *ye* judge what I say. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of the Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ? Because we, being many, are one loaf, one body" Then Paul proceeds to say, "See Israel according to flesh, are not they who eat the sacrifices in communion with the altar?" So that associations are in view, the assembly being in mind and spoken of. One body is the only association that is allowed. Others would be contrary to the position, contrary to the truth, contrary to the fellowship. In the second epistle the matter of fellowship or associations is touched again. It says in chapter 6: 14, "Be not diversely yoked with unbelievers; for what participation is there between righteousness and lawlessness? or what fellowship of light with darkness? and what consent of Christ with Beliar, or what part for a believer along with an unbeliever? and what agreement of God's temple with idols?". Thus the idea of associations is in mind in both epistles.
C.M.M. Why is the cup put first in chapter 10?
J.T. It is, I think, to make clear that the fellowship involves our everyday life. The cup would appeal to us as to the blessing involved in the fellowship, blessing resulting from Christ's death; so it is the communion of the blood of Christ; it is what is external. The order of the Lord's supper is not in mind there; that is in chapter 11, and that requires that the bread should be first.
S.J.C. Is what is outside governed by the Lord's table?
J.T. Well, the Lord's table is just a term used, because of the allusion to the altar. It is really in
{67}
a Jewish setting in that sense. Reference is made to idolatry, in the table of demons, so that the idea of the table is there. The table suggests that in which we participate together; we have it introduced in @Exodus 25: 23 - 30. There is the bread on it and the vessels for what is poured out; there is the idea of eating and drinking. The altar is alluded to here. "See Israel according to flesh: are not they who eat the sacrifices in communion with the altar?" and then in the epistle to the Hebrews it is said, "We have an altar", which carries the same idea as the table. "We have an altar of which they have no right to eat who serve the tabernacle"; that is, our altar is exclusive. The Lord's table is not the idea of an ordinary table, for it indicates that we have fellowship with one another, have joint participation together.
S.J.C. Suggesting the character of things?
J.T. Just so, and involving persons.
W.S.S. Would the altar bring before us the thought of the death of Christ as the basis on which everything is established?
J.T. That is so. I think the allusion in chapter 5 would be that. Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Christ is our Passover, then all that is carried over in ourselves when we are together according to chapter 11. At Corinth there was conduct which Paul could not approve, and he refers to it in chapter 11, when speaking of their coming together. The apostle used the word 'together', but not as approving their conduct. It was right to come together, in fact they could not have the Lord's supper without coming together, but their conduct was bad.
W.W. "We, being many, are one loaf, one body" in chapter 10, does that come into the Lord's supper?
J.T. It comes into the Supper in our minds. That we stand in relation to one another is a very
{68}
important matter, as Paul says, "we, being many, are one loaf, one body; for we all partake of that one loaf".
W.S.S. Would you say that the truth that is presented here should govern us through the week; whether as to the altar, or the one body?
J.T. Quite so. What is in mind in chapter 10 is the actual celebration of the Lord's supper, but not the order of it. The cup is presented first, because of the peculiar preciousness conveyed in it, not to imply that the drinking comes first in the order of the service, because it does not. The order is in chapter 11, where the bread comes first.
A.M. Would it be right to say that chapter 10 sets out the public position, the setting in which the Supper is found? Its holy character demands that it should be celebrated in a clean and holy setting.
J.T. Without stressing the order. The things belonging to it, of course, are there, but the order is in chapter 11 only, and this order implies the bread first. In chapter 11 the thing in mind is the memorial, or celebration of the Supper. There is a touching value attached to the emblems, and especially to the cup. "In like manner also", it says, "the cup", because it was a question of drinking. I think there is special value attached to the drinking, especially as linked with the word, "*We* have been all made to drink into one Spirit". It is a grand thought, a full and blessed thought that enters into the Lord's supper, "one Spirit"; hence we sing,
<blockquote> '"One Spirit", glorious Lord! <br>O blessed, wondrous word! <br>What heav'nly light, what power divine, <br>Doth that sweet word afford!' </blockquote>
I think the brethren will follow that we have to distinguish between the things as denoting our fellowship, and as usable in the celebration and the order of the Lord's supper.
{69}
P.L. Is the value of the partnership emphasised in the light of what it has cost Christ to establish it, the blood of the Christ?
J.T. That was what I was thinking. What it has cost Him. It was the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot.
F.J.F. That makes it clear that the fellowship is entirely of God.
J.T. Yes; entirely of God. In @1 John 1: 3, the word 'fellowship' is linked up with the apostles only. They have a fellowship of their own according to John's epistle, but that is not the fellowship of Christ's death or the blood of Christ, but rather the fellowship of life, the fellowship the apostles had in regard of life, and therefore the life is presented in that epistle as "That which was from the beginning", @1 John 1: 1. The apostles have a peculiar fellowship in that respect, and it is with the Father and with the Son. We could hardly link these thoughts of the Father and the Son with the thoughts connected with the Lord's supper. The Lord's supper is an institution by itself; it is the *dominical* Supper. He has authority over it and has to say in an authoritative way to those who partake of it, and then it is linked up with the first day of the week.
H.W. Would it be right to infer from chapter 10 that they were going on with what was really idolatrous?
J.T. That is the very thing that is alluded to; "Wherefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry", @1 Corinthians 10: 14. He has that specially in mind, although he touches on judaism too, but idolatry was the immediate thing that was in his mind, for they had just come out of it. He is always tender about them lest he should do anything that would turn them away, because they were so lately brought out of the thing and might go back into it again. There was the Jew,
{70}
and the gentile, and the assembly of God, these three things are spoken of in this epistle. One might go into one of their places of religious service and another into another of them, and there can be no doubt that chapter 14 has in mind one who has done that, and he finally comes into the christian assembly and he finds that God is there. Prophesying is proceeding, and God is brought to the conscience in prophecy, so that the man falls down and is convicted of all; he is judged of all and falling down he worships God and reports that God is indeed amongst them.
W.S.S. So the temple of God is reached in the way you were speaking about this morning.
J.T. Just so. The temple of God is holy, and we are that temple, because "the Spirit of God dwells" in us. I thought we might link that on with what we had this morning. We spoke about the shrine, which is the holy thought as to the temple where God's mind is made known. The psalmist says, "To enquire in his temple". It is the place of inquiry.
W.S.S. I was struck with the link between chapter 3, "Ye are the temple of God", and what you were speaking of from chapter 12; what one might speak of as the activities which are connected with the temple, although it is the body that is spoken of in chapter 12. The Lord in the second chapter of John, to which we have referred, spoke of "the temple of his body". Then I wondered if in what has just been alluded to in @1 Corinthians 14, "God is indeed amongst you", we have the thought of God being there, and are not these chapters 10 and 11 necessary to reach that end?
J.T. That is good. The temple as we had it this morning is essential to the idea of the service of God and the worship of God.
{71}
W.S.S. Without the truth of these two chapters we could not reach it practically, could we?
J.T. Quite so.
P.L. Would the delicacy of feeling with Paul suggest something of the spirit seen in relation to Christ; "a bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, until he bring forth judgment unto victory", @Matthew 12: 20. Is that what in a certain way Paul secured in the Spirit's power?
J.T. Just as we were saying today, that he sent Timotheus, instead of going there himself, because if he went by himself he would have to correct everything. He could not be there, with such conduct as is found in the second epistle, without dealing with it, and so he sends Timotheus who is a sympathetic young brother. The apostle speaks of him in that light, saying that he was to be with them without fear. That would mean that the ministry was modified amongst them, so that they might not be in any way scared away from the fellowship, from the assembly, and the service of God. The man contemplated in chapter 14 is said to report (it is a very important thing to have in mind the public side) that God was amongst them of a truth. How could God be there except in a holy way? God is holy; the temple of God is holy.
I think we might say we have touched sufficiently, for the present, on chapter 10, involving the fellowship, distinguishing it from chapter 11 which involves the order of procedure in the Lord's supper; that is to say, what we do, why we do it, the order in which we do it; and so the first verse of chapter 11 says, "Be my imitators, even as *I* also am of Christ". Paul brings himself in again in a very striking way, and then he elaborates on the question of headship, involving the covering of the head by the sisters. Then in verse 17 he begins to speak of the order of the Lord's supper as actually celebrated, and the
{72}
apostle condemns what *they* were doing. It is quite obvious that the thought of headship should precede this instruction, and so he says, "I wish you to know that the Christ is the head of every man, but woman's head is the man, and the Christ's head God. Every man praying or prophesying, having anything on his head, puts his head to shame. But every woman praying or prophesying with her head uncovered puts her own head to shame; for it is one and the same as a shaved woman. For if a woman be not covered, let her hair also be cut off. But if it be shameful to a woman to have her hair cut off or to be shaved, let her be covered. For man indeed ought not to have his head covered, being God's image and glory; but woman is man's glory. For man is not of woman, but woman of man. For also man was not created for the sake of the woman, but woman for the sake of the man. Therefore ought the woman to have authority on her head, on account of the angels". Verse 10 is one which we should especially notice; there is to be with the woman a token of the authority under which she stands, that is, the authority that is over her. She is to recognise that there is authority over her, and that there is authority over the man too, and that authority is Christ, and even over Christ is God. So that the order is from God to Christ, from Christ to the man, and the man to the woman, and verse 10 is to bring the thing home to the woman, so that she is to be covered in the recognition of the authority under which she stands.
F.J.F. Would that mean that the apostle approaches the subject of order in the assembly by way of showing that there is order in the universe of God? Has that to do with the universe?
J.T. I would think so. You see from God to Christ and from Christ to man; the word used for man means man as distinct from woman. Therefore
{73}
the authority is from God to Christ, and from Christ to man, and from man to woman, and then in this instruction we are told that nature should teach us, so that universal authority, I would say, or ornamentation if we may use that word, is in mind. The ornamentation implied in the order of God from Himself down to Christ, from Christ down to the man and from the man down to the woman, is something that we have to ponder over, and see what is meant by it. Why should what is the mere physical action of the woman covering her head, or the man not covering his head, why should these things be mentioned? Surely there must be a very good reason for them to be mentioned and especially in view of the fact that the Lord's supper is just immediately to be celebrated in the chapter.
R.J.D. Why are the angels brought in here. What relation are they to the Supper?
J.T. They are creatures, one of the great families of God, and their intelligence is remarkable, their power is remarkable, both these things are alluded to. You see for instance in the case of Manoah, the husband of the woman to whom the Angel appeared, how intelligent the Angel was, and how he acted as God really before Manoah, and his wife, and then how his wife is instructed as to the child that she is to have and how he is to be brought up in the light of power, in the light of his mother and father.
P.L. Have these angels maintained subjection in the presence of insubjection around? They left not their first estate; they are referred to as holy angels.
J.T. There is a family that left not their first estate, and they are viewed as obedient, and are called elect angels. The apostle Paul charged Timothy in the presence of the elect angels, showing how intelligent and important they are in the presence of God.
{74}
C.M.M. Would it be correct to connect the thought of "the head of Christ is God" with the Son being placed in subjection in chapter 15?
J.T. I think that is quite right. The Son shall be in subjection, we are told.
F.J.F. Would you say that the angels all know that the saints are much beloved? The one that spoke to Daniel said, "O ... man greatly beloved", @Daniel 10: 11.
J.T. They are conversant with what is current in heaven, and with what is current on earth, too, because they are sent out to minister on account of those who shall be heirs of salvation; they are all sent out for that.
P.L. To reflect heaven's interest providentially in the care they exercise.
J.T. Very good; that is very largely how they act, and they are serviceable to God in His providences.
H.R.H.T. Is this acknowledgment of the authority under which the woman stands called for only in the assembly?
J.T. I would say at all times. I do not mean when she is sleeping or resting or the like, but where she is functioning in any capacity that a woman should function in. That is what I understand.
H.R.H.T. Praying in the home, would she be covered?
J.T. Quite so. It is to bring in the order of God. We may say, Why should it be? Well, God says so and that ought to be enough for every subject heart. If we bow to Scripture, then we get understanding about it.
P.L. So that subject holy women would love to reflect this subjection in that economy of blessing in which sovereign love and mercy have set them.
J.T. You see how much pleasure God has in these holy women; such as Sarah and others. God
{75}
dignifies them in the way they are spoken of; Mary too, and many others that could be cited, all as examples for us now. We have remarkable things mentioned here too, the creation of man and woman in verse 8, "For man is not of woman, but woman of man. For also man was not created for the sake of the woman, but woman for the sake of the man. Therefore ought the woman to have authority on her head, on account of the angels. However, neither is woman without man, nor man without woman, in the Lord". Neither is left alone, each is provided for, but all "in the Lord", and that is the great point that the Lord is stressing, as a warning against the evil of mixed marriages. God undertook to provide a wife for Adam, and if so, why should not He take the same pains as regards ourselves, both sisters and brothers, as to marriage? but they all should be "in the Lord", because the whole economy is in the Lord. Why should anyone break through it for the sake of getting a husband or a wife, breaking through the economy of God, the order of God?
P.L. And in so doing snapping, one might say, ruthlessly, the most sacred bond that divine love could forge here in relation to the fellowship.
J.T. Great thought is taken as to it. Man is mentioned first in @Genesis 1, but chapter 2 brings out the distinction, and the result, "therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh". That is the great result reached and it has come down the line to us, and it is to be carried out in the assembly, for the assembly is peculiarly representative of what is feminine. She is the bride of Christ, including brothers and sisters. "I have espoused you unto one man", the apostle says, and that one man is Christ, and the bride, the person who is espoused, is the assembly.
{76}
S.J.C. If the truth of this, in the early part of chapter 11, were really held, and everything related to God was in order, there would not be room for division.
J.T. It must necessarily affect the unity of the saints as spoken of in the latter part of the chapter, where the Lord's supper is celebrated.
F.J.F. So the assembly would reflect in every detail the mind of God?
J.T. That is what is so important now, and the Lord is helping the saints in regard to it, so that the assembly may be representative of the presence of the Holy Spirit here upon earth as taking care of what belongs to God, and a sure guarantee of the preservation of all that belongs to God subjectively. God is greatly helping the brethren on those lines.
H.W. What is the difference between being "in Christ" and "in the Lord"?
J.T. I think "in Christ" is a fuller thought than "in the Lord"; because *the Christ* is really an expression which means that the person so named is the One who does things for God. He is the One that does everything for God. We read, for instance, as to the creation, that not one thing was made without Him. "All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made". @John 1: 3. Well, that is very important; there is nothing without Christ, and it is to bring out fulness, I think, in all that is done. How thoroughly He is in the hand of God as John says in his gospel, "The Father loves the Son"! It brings out what the Father finds in that Person, because He does things for Him, and therefore it says. He "has given all things to be in his hand", @John 3: 35.
Having said so much about the first part, then we might proceed to the second part; that is to say, the order in which the Lord's supper is to be celebrated, and it says in verse 17, "But in prescribing to you
{77}
on this which I now enter on, I do not praise, namely, that ye come together, not for the better, but for the worse". This shows that because of the disregard of these things of which we have been speaking, there is a worse condition than if we were not together at all. We may thus come together for the worse, rather than for the better, and then it goes on to say, "For first, when ye come together in assembly, I hear there exist divisions among you". We have had that already in chapter 1; it is the first thing mentioned as exhorted against. Here it is brought in again in regard to the Lord's supper, that division is apt to be there, for it says, "For there must also be sects among you, that the approved may become manifest among you". That is to say, the approved were not only present, but they were *manifest* among them; "that the approved may become manifest among you", Paul says.
W.S.S. It is remarkable that in such conditions there comes to light that which is pleasing to God. Despite the breakdown suggested here in sects or schools of thought, those who are approved of God become manifest.
J.T. Very good. It does not say, *If* they be approved; they are assumed to be there.
W.S.S. And by reason of these conditions (in themselves, matters of a distressing character) that which is approved of God is brought to light.
J.T. Showing how God carries out His will.
P.L. "For he will be like a refiner's fire, and like fullers¬ lye", @Malachi 3: 2.
J.T. Very true.
F.J.F. Would that mean that the approved would have the Lord's support and the others would feel that? Is that the way it would be manifested?
J.T. Well, I think you have illustrations throughout Scripture of how God intervenes on behalf of those who are approved of Him. For instance, when
{78}
Moses came down from the mount to find that the golden calf was being worshipped, he said, "Who is on the Lord's side?", and the Levites rallied to Moses¬ side. God intervened at once; the matter was made clear. When Aaron and Miriam questioned Moses, saying that the word was not only given to him, but to them too. God immediately intervened and demanded that they should all come out to the door of the tabernacle and the result was that Miriam was smitten with leprosy; thus Moses was supported and there were those approved of God. To Timothy it is said, "Shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed", @2 Timothy 2: 15. I am sure God is proceeding on those lines since Pentecost and even from the very first, from the introduction of sin. God has been there to show His approval, as of those who stand in a day of evil. In Noah and Abraham and all the prophets there was always manifest approval of God for what was right, so that we need not fear. "Only be strong and very courageous", @Joshua 1: 7. It is a question of being strong and firm in what is right; therefore the word is, "follow righteousness"; let us make it our leader.
F.J.F. It is said even of the Lord Himself "a man approved of God"; @Acts 2: 22.
J.T. Just so. There is much in our minds just now as to this passage; that is to say, the actual order of the Lord's supper, and it is now a time when we might have help from one another. The Lord's supper is the one thing that is really introductory to the whole service of God.
S.J.C. Is what is connected with the cup wider than what is connected with the bread?
J.T. Well I would make it all one thing, there is only one supper, it is the Lord's supper; it has a dual character and is viewed as it is now before us.
{79}
I should not like to put one part of it before another, although the order puts the bread first.
C.M.P. What is the distinction between the coming together "in assembly" (chapter 11: 18), and "the whole assembly come together in one place" (chapter 14: 23)?
J.T. I am glad you bring that up, because it will help us to distinguish between what we have in the service of God on the first day of the week in cities where there is more than one gathering and what is in chapter 14 regarding a gathering for the service of ministry. In this chapter it is just "in assembly" whereas in chapter 14 it is "the whole assembly". "If therefore the whole assembly come together in one place". The article is before, "the whole assembly", whereas it is just "in assembly" in chapter 11. The article being inserted in chapter 14 is to show that all the saints in a town or city are in mind, whether there is more than one meeting or only one, all are to come together into one place.
W.S.S. The whole assembly would mean that all the saints available in the city are to come together.
J.T. That is right; whereas the article is omitted in chapter 11; it is just "in assembly", not "in the assembly"; it is the character of the gathering together.
W.S.S. If there are 500 or more brethren in a city they could not very well come together to break bread all in one place.
J.T. Quite so.
F.J.F. They should all come together 'in assembly'.
J.T. There used to be larger meetings in large cities, sometimes up to three hundred together to celebrate the Lord's supper, and, of course, it was somewhat unwieldy. The Lord helped us as to this in accord with the facts in the beginning of the Acts where it would be very clear that the Lord's supper must have been celebrated by a large number, and
{80}
that it must have been in several rooms or halls. There were at least three thousand, and you could hardly imagine the Lord's supper being celebrated by three or four thousand actually together; it would occasion great difficulty, because of the largeness of the company. Undoubtedly they had smaller companies, because it says, "breaking bread in the house"; that is the word used in @Acts 2. You could hardly think that there was a house in Jerusalem large enough to accommodate three thousand people, but the word is that they were "breaking bread in the house", and we have mention in the epistles of several houses which were used in that same connection.
R.J.D. Do I understand that when brethren are together in large numbers for conferences, extra rooms are used for the breaking of bread?
J.T. We do have smaller gatherings. In America we have about twenty gatherings a year, which we call 'general gatherings', where the saints continue together for three days in view of ministry. On the first day of the week the ordinary rooms are far too small to accommodate all that come together, and so we hire other rooms, or use rooms in private houses, and the Lord greatly blesses that, I have noticed. I suppose it is so here, too.
C.M.M. Would the assemblies in the house of Nymphas, Aquila and Philemon suggest the idea?
J.T. I think they would, and these that I allude to are very frequent and very simple; we are all familiar with them in America, and I have no doubt they are in Australia. These larger meetings are not so frequent in Great Britain, because the gatherings are so near together, and there is not the same need to come together for three days; they have so many meetings, but at the same time the principle is here that I am speaking of. If there are more than can be accommodated properly according to the second
{81}
of Acts where the breaking of bread was in the house, then we should have several houses, or several rooms, or whatever they may be called, and the Lord will be in each of them; that is to say, as we are in assembly; we gather in assembly, in each room or house.
W.S.S. You have in mind the possibilities which are connected with coming together in assembly in connection with the service of God leading from the Supper?
J.T. Just so. Usually we might say in any one of those meetings that we have on the Lord's day, we have the general order of service recognised to be right, and even although the number may be smaller, yet we proceed on the same lines; that is to say, we have service in God's assembly.
C.M.M. "This do" in connection with the loaf would be what the Lord did, would it not, the giving thanks and the breaking of the loaf? Then in connection with the cup, "this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me", would be what the Lord did, as giving thanks for the cup?
J.T. That is what I understand.
C.M.M. Not the drinking.
J.T. In what happened at Emmaus, the drinking is not mentioned. The Lord vanished as He broke the bread, after He gave thanks for the bread. The drinking is not mentioned, but the Lord's supper requires the drinking, for there are two parts to the Lord's supper, the first is the breaking of the bread and the second is the drinking of the cup. It says, "In like manner also the cup".
C.M.M. The Lord did not drink of the cup, did He? The "this do" is connected with the giving of thanks for the cup rather than with our drinking of it. Is that right?
J.T. Paul says, "For *I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord
{82}
Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you, this do in remembrance of me. In like manner also the cup, after having supped" (that word 'supped' means 'taking supper', that is the passover supper) "saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood, this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me". I would say, that "this do" is just what is said in this verse. The Lord took the cup and passed it to them, even as He broke the bread, but there must have been some action in regard of the cup, which is covered in the word, "In like manner also the cup". I think it ought to be understood spiritually, but there must have been something *in like manner*; that is to say the same idea would be attached to both the bread and the cup as to what the Lord did.
F.J.F. He took it apart from the passover supper.
J.T. That is right. He took the cup too, apart from the passover supper. There was the cup in connection with the passover supper, because He said that He would not drink it *again*, but then the cup He took later belonged exclusively to the Lord's supper which He was instituting.
R.L. Should the brother serving on that occasion give thanks for the bread and "in like manner" for the cup?
J.T. Yes; that is the order, and we would have to do that to follow what the Lord did, because "this do" is what He did; it is part of the institution; it is 'for the calling of Me to mind'. That is what the Lord has specially before Him; that He should be remembered.
A.W.P. Is there the thought of the Lord making Himself known to us as the Mediator of the new covenant, and our getting a fresh sense of the love of God?
{83}
J.T. Well, that is said, I know, but I prefer to confine all to the Lord, for it is the Lord's supper; it is never spoken of as God's supper, nor the Father's supper, nor the Spirit's supper. It is the Lord's supper, so that what is done ought to bring forward the Lord, not God, or the Father or the Spirit.
F.J.F. Is that why it is called the dominical Supper?
J.T. Just so; we are right in saying that, and it agrees with the Lord's day, the dominical day.
J.P.v.N. Would you say that we remember the Lord as risen; not the sufferings, but the Person?
J.T. Of course, the Lord is risen; that is true, but I do not think He is stressing the fact that He is risen. When He first appeared to Paul, He said to him, "Why persecutest thou me?", @Acts 9:4. Viewed simply and abstractly as risen, He is not persecuted. He is at the right hand of God and in power; He is not persecuted there. What we remember refers to where He is down here and what is going on down here, not in heaven. When He appeared to Paul and said, "Why persecutest thou me?" Paul was really persecuting the saints; so that when the Lord said that, He was identifying the suffering saints with Himself. The Lord is in heaven, of course, corporeally, but then the Lord is also regarded as having part in the sufferings of His own here, and I think that we ought to bear that in mind, in partaking of the Lord's supper, that it is a question of the sufferings in which He is in His body here, in His people, and how He feels things.
S.J.C. Is that why the setting is always given as one of betrayal?
J.T. Just so. It was the night on which He was betrayed. Why should that be said? That is carried through by Paul in 1 Corinthians, it is the public setting of the Lord's supper.
{84}
READINGS ON 1 CORINTHIANS (4) PART 1
@1 Corinthians 15: 1 - 28
J.T. This scripture is a most important section and what comes into it immediately is the matter of the Lord's appearing. It runs on from the first verse, "But I make known to you, brethren; the glad tidings which I announced to you, which also ye have received". The apostle is stressing the fact that they not only heard the truth, but that they had *received* it. He further says, "in which also ye stand, by which also ye are saved, (if ye hold fast the word which I announced to you as the glad tidings,) unless indeed ye have believed in vain". He is stressing the fact that the glad tidings were preached through him, and they had received it, and they would be saved by the glad tidings. All these are very important facts to keep in mind. But then he says, "For I delivered to you, in the first place, what also I had received" (verse 3). These words are also found in chapter 11, as to the Lord's supper. But here he says, "What also I had received, that Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures; and that he was buried; and that he was raised the third day, according to the scriptures". These are facts to be noted, and as I have said, what has been read refers to the basis of the gospel; that is to say "that Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures". The Scriptures are stressed, "and that he was buried; and that he was raised the third day, according to the scriptures". The only point that I would further stress is that "he was buried", for that is included in what is necessary for redemption; that is, for the testimony in the gospel. Christ not only died, but He was buried, and then He was raised the third day, according to the Scriptures. Do the brethren have that in mind as an item of the gospel, and an
{85}
item of the means of salvation; that is, the burial of the Christ?
J.P.v.N. Would that mean that we have been put out of sight in the grave? The Lord was put out of sight in the grave.
J.T. Put out of sight. There is scripture for that, because Abraham said of his wife, "That I may bury my dead out of my sight". We have to speak very carefully and holily as regards the Lord Jesus, but He was actually put out of sight. He not only died on the cross, but He was buried, put out of sight, as our brother says. And He was there for three days and three nights, as He said Himself, "three days and three nights in the heart of the earth", @Matthew 12: 40.
P.L. Vicariously, for He was buried for the sake of others.
J.T. Just so. That is part of the vicarious work of Christ; not only that He died, but that He was buried. The passage brings out the place that Scripture has in the testimony, that everything must be supported by Scripture. The Bereans tested what Paul said; it is said that they searched the Scriptures as to whether these things were so, whether they were so according to Scripture.
F.J.F. Would "according to the scriptures" cover both those statements "that he was buried; and that he was raised the third day, according to the scriptures"? The Scripture says that men appointed His grave with the wicked, but that He was with the rich in His death.
J.T. I would say that. Speaking with the utmost reverence, let us think what it was to God Himself; what it meant to Him, that His beloved Son should lie in the grave for three days and three nights. What is that to you? What do we understand by that?
P.L. He could say to His God, "Thou hast laid me in the dust of death", @Psalm 22: 15.
{86}
F.J.F. Was the teaching behind that, that the first order of man had to be removed?
J.T. Yes, removed out of sight, as our brother said, that is to say, He was put into the ground. The judgment on man was, "dust thou art; and unto dust shalt thou return". We could not apply that to Christ, for He was the Holy One of God, and saw no corruption, but He was laid in the grave, "the heart of the earth", as He said.
F.J.F. There is no revival of the man that was removed in judgment.
J.T. No revival at all. In resurrection Christ came out of it all, a Man of another order really. We have to apprehend that; and not only that, but that He has gone into heaven. The Lord is spoken of in @Philippians 3: 20, "*Our* commonwealth has its existence in the heavens, from which also we await the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour, who shall transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory". Now I just wish to call attention to that; it was not His body of resurrection simply, but His body of glory. We are to be conformed to that, hence the greatness of what we are coming into, in translation. We are to be made like the Lord Jesus, to His body of glory.
F.J.F. No one knows what that is like.
J.T. Well, John would say, "When he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is", @1 John 3: 2. It is not as He *was*, but as He *is*. That is what I gather the passage means, that the present state in which Christ is in heaven, His body of glory, is what we await.
H.W. Do you connect the thought of order or condition with the Lord's present position? He is spoken of as a Man of another order in resurrection.
J.T. Quite so. Both words are right, I would say, either 'order' or 'condition', though each word has its own distinctive meaning. The Lord's present
{87}
condition is not simply that He has risen, but that He is glorified.
H.W. Would you connect the thought of order with what He was here in flesh and blood? I would like to get clear as to Christ being of a different order, although here in human condition?
J.T. Well, it refers to what He was morally, but still He was a Man. His condition then was spoken of as "in the days of his flesh", @Hebrews 5: 7. I think that ought to be paid attention to.
H.W. "The second man, out of heaven". That would be connected with the days of His flesh.
J.T. He was in a unique condition. There never was anyone like Him, before or since, because He was sinless, not only sinless, but righteous, such being predicated of Him in a moral sense, but still He laid down His life. He laid it down. He said, "I lay down my life, that I might take it again". "That I might take it" is in another condition.
F.J.F. Mr. Stoney used to refer to the Lord as *sui generis*; that is, of His own order.
J.T. That is good. So even as regards the days of His flesh, He was of His own order morally, but the words "flesh and blood" have to be recognised; "the days of his flesh" implies a condition that had to be given up, and it was given up. He took it to give it up, and so "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit", @John 12: 24. That includes, I apprehend, what we are just speaking of, the three days and three nights, that He not only died, but that He was buried and came out of the earth in *another* condition of manhood, and that condition is resurrection; but then there is a further thought, that He is in a glorified body. John says, "We shall see him as he is"; not as He was, but as He is. So, too, John says that "as he is, so are we
{88}
in this world", @1 John 4: 17; that is to say, morally we are that; as He is, we are that in this world.
J.P.v.N. Shall we have resurrection bodies?
J.T. Well, we shall be raised, of course, as we have read. The stress here is on the resurrection; we shall have risen bodies, but then we shall have glorified bodies, which is an additional thought. We shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. That was not during the forty days when He was here in the flesh; it is His heavenly condition. These instances of His appearings which we have in our chapter refer almost entirely to the forty days of the Lord's sojourn before He went to heaven. But of Paul it is said in this passage, he says it of himself, that Christ appeared to him too, so that he saw Christ as He is; that has to be kept in mind. The list given is as follows: "And that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve. Then he appeared to above five hundred brethren at once, of whom the most remain until now, but some also have fallen asleep. Then he appeared to James; then to all the apostles; and last of all, as to an abortion, he appeared to *me* also. For *I* am the least of the apostles, who am not fit to be called apostle, because I have persecuted the assembly of God. But by God's grace I am what I am; and his grace, which was towards me, has not been vain; but I have laboured more abundantly than they all, but not *I*, but the grace of God which was with me. Whether, therefore, I or they, thus we preach, and thus ye have believed". Paul is included in those to whom Christ Himself appeared, and I think that is worthy of consideration, because it raises the question of the Lord's coming to us, according to @John 14: 18. The Lord says there, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you". Well, there the question is whether that coming to us is in His heavenly, glorious body, or whether it is a spiritual matter, only meaning that
{89}
He comes to us in the power of the Spirit when we are in assembly. That is the question which I think is worthy of consideration.
J.E.M. The Lord served in His body of flesh and blood and then in His resurrection body. Are you suggesting our apprehending Him in some sense, as He comes to us, in His body of glory?
J.T. I would say that exactly. It is a wonderful thing. We may say we have not seen Him thus and, of course, I go with that. At the same time there are the scriptural statements and the fact that Paul saw Him. "Have I not seen Jesus our Lord?" he asks, @1 Corinthians 9: 1. And he did not see Him as He was in the days of His flesh, nor is it what the others saw in the forty days before He ascended. Paul saw Him in His body of glory. So that whether it be in His body before He was glorified, or after, these statements refer to Christ, and Paul is singular in that he said, "Have I not seen Jesus our Lord?" We know that he saw the Lord Jesus; he saw Him, and heard His voice. So that in this very dispensation in which we are, Christ was apprehended corporeally, that is to say in the body, here, by a christian. The question, therefore, is now brought down to this: whether these instances of the Lord's appearing to His own in this chapter were in His state before He ascended, and thus in a corporeal sense as Man, but a glorious Person, a risen Man, and whether they also include, and we know they do in Paul's case, seeing the Lord in His body of glory?
W.S.S. Is the apostle here establishing the truth of the resurrection, and these facts are brought forward in support of it?
J.T. That is what this passage is dealing with really, but what we are now touching is a little more than that. The Lord we are told, has a body of glory, and we have to take account of that.
{90}
F.J.F. Do you think in assembly, that we should look for these manifestations to be conscious that we are in the presence of One who is glorified?
J.T. I think that is quite in order, only that, according to what is said in @Acts 1 of the forty days. He presented Himself living, being seen by them. The conditions were somewhat different from what are indicated in Paul's case.
H.W. These four great facts have to be held in our mind to the end as characteristics of christianity, Christ died, was buried, was raised, and appeared; the last equal to all the others.
J.T. Very good. In whatever sense the word 'appearing' may be used, it enters into assembly service and privilege.
C.M.P. In what aspect would "seen" be used? Paul no doubt saw Him with his eyes. Do we see Him with the eyes of our heart?
J.T. No one would attempt to say anything beyond that, as far as I know, but certainly Paul saw something more than that. John would say, "We shall see him as he is". He does not say, 'We have seen Him as He is'; it is a future thing that is in his mind. So in Philippians His "body of glory" is what we are to be like.
W.O.S. Would it be right to say that the attitude of the assembly is looking for the Lord Jesus? "Even so, come, Lord Jesus", @Revelation 22: 20.
J.T. The word as to that is very touching. Those that love His appearing, not simply that He will come according to @1 Thessalonians 4, "The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first". It is not only that, but as John says, we shall see Him as He is; it is to those that love His appearing. It is as well to keep in mind that we love His appearing, not simply that we love to see Him as risen, but that
{91}
we love His appearing, alluding to the condition He is in today. The condition He took up after the forty days was a glorious condition. It was after He ascended, according to the facts, that He took up the condition that Paul calls "his body of glory" and that is what we are looking for. We love His appearing.
J.W. "We shall see him as he is". Does it involve that we shall be like Him, when we see Him?
J.T. I think so; "for we shall see him as he is". Then there is the other word in John's epistle, "Even as *he* is, *we* also are in this world", @1 John 4: 17. It alludes to His present position, and the place divine love has given to us. His appearing literally will be in His body, His body of glory.
F.J.F. Paul gets the crown then, does he not? The crown of righteousness shall be given not only to me, he says, but to all those who love His appearing.
W.L. In @John 20: 20 it says, "Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the Lord".
J.T. He had not yet ascended. We have the formal statement that Jesus was not yet glorified, that means His glory was in mind, not only His resurrection, but His glory. But when they saw the Lord, it was simply the condition He was in as risen. I would not attempt to say that there is any great difference, but we have the word, "his body of glory". We must pay attention to that: but what they saw in @John 20 was before He ascended. "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend"; that is, He is going to ascend "to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". He was going to do that, but He was here forty days before He did it, but then He caused gladness to the apostles, to the disciples; it was at the very sight of Him. So John said to Peter, "It is the Lord". Jesus said to Mary, "Go to my brethren and say to them,
{92}
I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God", but He had not done that yet, not until the forty days were over.
J.E.M. Does it help us at the Lord's supper, as He is spiritually apprehended coming into the midst, if we have in mind that He has a body of glory? it would add to our joy.
J.T. I think that is right. Paul would be the full witness to that. He asks, "Have I not seen Jesus our Lord?" @1 Corinthians 9: 1. He meant just what we are talking about. He meant Jesus as He is in glory.
C.M.M. Would that link on with announcing the Lord's death until He come?
J.T. It would, because He will come as He is, you know, not as He was.
S.P.S. Did you have any more in mind regarding @John 14? You raised an inquiry as to whether it would be a spiritual matter or should we discern His body of glory.
J.T. That is a very good question, an important one for the brethren to think over. We have not much time to discuss it now, but it certainly is worthy of attention. Whether, according to His word "I am coming to you", He comes only in the spiritual sense. Of course, we can well understand that He can do that, because the Holy Spirit is here and here permanently until the Lord comes. We can well understand that the Lord would come in the spiritual sense as impersonated by the Spirit, if I am right in using that word. The identification of the divine Persons is inscrutable, we cannot always distinguish them. We cannot speak of them as if we knew exactly, because divine Persons are inscrutable, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. The Father could be impersonated by the Spirit, too, and the Holy Spirit, of course, is Himself, the Spirit. There is a divine Person here, actually here, today on the earth, not representatively, but actually, and
{93}
that Person is the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of Jesus Christ too. The Spirit Himself is spoken of as a divine Person speaking and acting, according to @Acts 13. The Spirit of God acts and speaks of Himself. The Spirit said, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them"; He was actually speaking Himself. Well, now, that Person is here and He has been here all these years, all these centuries. It is the wonderful fact that we should take in. He watches us here today; maybe He is operating here now amongst us.
J.C. Would you say that until we receive the Spirit we cannot apprehend Christ in His glorified state?
J.T. That is important to note because until we get the Holy Spirit, we are incapable of taking in these things. A person may be born again, but there is a distinction between being born again and having the Holy Spirit. You will remember that in Ephesus, Paul said to certain twelve men, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?", @Acts 19: 2. Well, they were converted, undoubtedly, and they were so regarded, but they had not yet received the Holy Spirit. I believe they were defective. They said, indeed, that they had not heard that the Holy Spirit had come. They had not taken in what they could have taken in, because John the baptist had spoken about the Holy Spirit too, and they professed to be John's disciples.
R.J.D. I have a difficulty in linking up these appearings with what we have today. Paul says, "last of all ... he appeared to *me* also". I had always thought that that closed the matter as far as that side of the appearings was concerned.
J.T. I think, I agree with you, that it does close the matter, but we cannot limit divine Persons. We cannot just say that the Lord cannot come as He came before, for He is a divine Person. He can do
{94}
as He pleases. The Spirit would have us to leave it there, and say the thing is inscrutable. We cannot compass divine Persons as we can compass each other, and speak of each other; divine Persons are inscrutable.
F.J.F. How would this be balanced by the thought that we are in the dispensation that is in faith?
J.T. It is the time of faith now; "Faith having come". Paul says in Galatians. We are now in the time of faith, and it is the principle on which we are moving in this dispensation.
W.O.S. Would these appearings have to do with what was inaugurated? The apostolic side is stressed in these verses.
J.T. That is good. The five hundred are not apostolic, but what you say is important, that the apostolic side should be stressed, and the first one that is appeared to is Cephas. Undoubtedly the name Cephas indicates assembly material. The Lord had in His mind assembly material when He appeared to Cephas, and then in the twelve He had in His mind, I would say, administrative authority; it was not the eleven, but the twelve, therefore it was after Matthias was appointed to the apostleship. Then He appeared to above five hundred brethren at once. This would mean the general thought of the brethren, the Lord had them all in mind. What a glorious thing it was to Him to have so many, and then Paul adds to that, that some of them have gone to be with Him! He says, "most remain until now, but some also have fallen asleep". Then He appeared to James, that is to say, to one man, as if the Lord would take up some man for some purpose; He is able to do that at any time, and James would represent that. James is regarded in that light after Paul came in; Paul went to Jerusalem and had to do with James. Then it says "to all the apostles".
{95}
The Spirit of God says "to the twelve" and then later to "all the apostles". The word 'apostles' is evidently used to convey authority. They were twelve men who had a certain character of their own, knowing the Father and the Son. The Lord would appear to them in that capacity, in the capacity of apostles, and then Paul says further, "last of all, as to an abortion, he appeared to *me* also", possibly alluding to what would happen to the Jews in the future; Paul as representing the nation being taken up prematurely, but anyway, he is one of the apostles here. He says, "He appeared to *me* also. For *I* am the least of the apostles, whom am not fit to be called apostle, because I have persecuted the assembly of God". Paul is emphasising himself in this way, that he is an odd sort of man, not just one of a crowd, and yet he is the greatest of all of them, and his work is greater than that of all of them.
W.S.S. So that the thought of these appearings is fundamental to the dispensation.
J.T. Quite so. I do not think it will have application to the Jewish remnant in the future, or even to the great multitudes that are spoken of in the book of Revelation from among the gentiles. I do not think there will be any such distinction put on these. The apostle is here bringing out distinctions that belong to us in the assembly.
F.J.F. Do you think that his being caught up to the third heaven was also a time when he saw the Lord?
J.T. Possibly he did, but that is not brought out in the account that he gives of his experience. He said that he heard unutterable things, things that were not lawful for man to utter, and the Lord sent him a thorn for the flesh, that he might not be exalted above measure. He said that he did not know whether he was in the body or out of it, so
{96}
that the matter must be left there. It was an inscrutable matter to Paul, and it is a good thing to recognise that which is inscrutable.
W.S.S. Mr. Darby says somewhere that all Scripture has in it the germ of what is infinite. It is a great help, I feel myself, to remind ourselves continually in having to do with divine things, that we are in the presence of the inscrutable.
{97}
READINGS ON 1 CORINTHIANS (4) PART 2
@1 Corinthians 16: 1 - 24
J.T. Certain features of truth have been stressed amongst the saints during the last year or two; if not here, elsewhere, but I believe here too, and one is this matter of the collection, to use the language of @1 Corinthians 16, the collections for the saints. The brethren in this country are apparently acting on the same principles as elsewhere; but not perhaps in certain details, and I thought it would be wise to call attention to this. It may be remarked that the thought came before us in the expression in first Timothy, "Let not the assembly be charged" (@1 Timothy 5: 16); that is to say, certain charges, though rightly called for in meeting obligations amongst us, are not to be charged against the assembly; they are not to be provided for and met by way of our collections in connection with the Lord's supper. Our collections otherwise are not in question; the matter stands relative to the Lord's supper and what is connected with it as to the assembly. It has been suggested that charges incurred in relation to certain meetings that are held, generally of a large size, for the special purpose of disseminating the truth in a constructive way, should be provided for in our collections at the Lord's supper. What is in mind in these special meetings has reference to the truth as to the assembly rendered in testimony. It has been thought therefore that it is quite in order that the assembly should be chargeable for these three-day meetings for inquiry and instruction in the truth, such as have been held recently in Glasgow and London and are later to be held, if the Lord will, in Sydney, because the testimony, that is to say the ministry, is particularly in mind, not exactly the
{98}
opportunities for fellowship or meeting the spiritual needs of the saints in a general way, but the ministry. Such occasions may be regarded as meetings for which expenses should be rightly debited to the assembly in our collections at the Lord's supper.
F.J.F. Would this gathering here during the last few days come in that same category?
J.T. That is what I think, and I believe the brethren here do, too, because these meetings are expressly for the ministry of the truth relative to the assembly. The assembly is said by the apostle Paul, speaking in the power of the Spirit, to be "the pillar and base of the truth". The assembly is that, and therefore gatherings that take that character are rightly provided for from the collection at the Lord's supper.
J.R.v.N. And now as to food, where there is temporal need among the saints, where do you fit that in?
J.T. That is a question for the brethren who have to deal with that matter to decide; what does the meeting of *need* mean. It is not in Scripture regarded as the supplementing of what is already provided. The word *need* ought to be understood according to Scripture. In James and John's first epistle, it is in mind, and in these epistles to Corinth. The word in John's epistle is, "whoso ... seeth his brother have need", @1 John 3: 17; that is the expression.
R.J.D. Our attention has been drawn to @2 Corinthians 8: 14, "But on the principle of equality; in the present time your abundance for their lack, that their abundance may be for your lack, so that there should be equality". The word 'lack' has been referred to in this way as over against 'need'.
J.T. Well I think the word 'lack' in the scripture is to be understood as implying need, because the collection in mind was for Jerusalem, for the *poor*
{99}
saints at Jerusalem, and it is mentioned several times. The word used is from the same root as 'want' and 'penury' in @Mark 12: 44 and @Luke 21: 4. The New Translation reads 'destitution' and 'need'. It is used in this sense elsewhere by Paul in @2 Corinthians 11: 9; @Philippians 4: 12; @Hebrews 11: 37.
F.J.F. Assemblies in other parts would be quite free to send help to the saints in the cities where such meetings as we are now having are being held.
J.T. Yes. Such meetings as have been held, as remarked, in London and Glasgow and are intended to be held in Sydney; they are general meetings specifically for the development of the truth in a ministerial sense.
P.L. They are exceedingly needful universally for investigating assembly-wise the truth, as sitting together over a more extended period than a Saturday afternoon would afford.
J.T. Quite so. The thought is the importance of the truth, the ministry, and the time needed for it. It is considered that three days is a period well authenticated in Scripture. The idea of 'three' is well established in Scripture.
R.L. In the meetings to which you refer, would it be in order to have a collection such as has been arranged here to meet the charge of these meetings?
J.T. Yes. They have in mind the testimony and the ministry supporting it. Paul uses the word ministry, saying "that the ministry be not blamed" (@2 Corinthians 6:3); the word 'ministry' is understood in that sense.
S.P.S. You make a distinction between what we generally speak of as fellowship meetings and three-day meetings?
J.T. What are called fellowship meetings are usually week-end meetings; it may be two meetings on a Saturday afternoon. Such are much used and very useful too, and the Lord is blessing them, but
{100}
they have in mind rather the spiritual needs of *those present*. It has been a practice sometimes for these week-end meetings for the fares of children and families, including perhaps unconverted people, to be paid, and all that has been made a charge on the assembly. All this bears on what we are saying now, "Let not the assembly be charged" as spoken of in @1 Timothy 5, and the brethren would be wise if they were to look carefully at the facts of that chapter, seeing how the assembly is carefully guarded against unnecessary charges. It is not that the money is not plentiful in order to pay anything of that kind, but the apostle's word is to bring out the dignity of the assembly. The assembly is not an ordinary human society, it is an exceptional thing, the greatest family in the universe really, and it is so treated in Scripture, a family of firstborn ones, so that its dignity should be maintained in all these matters.
P.L. The local occasions you allude to would furnish opportunity for the expenses to be defrayed by a collection on the spot.
J.T. That is customary now and I think is recognised generally as right.
R.J.D. What is concerning us now is the question of defraying the expense of food for Great Britain and Germany.
J.T. Well I see that, but what is to be said firstly is. Great Britain is not starved, as we speak; it is not like Germany; the rations are enough to keep people alive, so that it is not really a question of need in the full scriptural sense in Great Britain. The actual facts would show that. If brethren are free to send parcels to Great Britain, good and well, to supplement what they already have, to increase their food, but the point now in question is whether there is real *need* and so whether the cost of such parcels is *chargeable to the assembly*. Then as regards Germany and other nations in Europe, the question
{101}
is, To whom are we sending the food? Are they real christians, are they walking in the truth? You cannot always be sure, because we do not know all the facts.
W.S.S. To refer to facts for a moment, the parcels are being sent from Great Britain to Germany, and are being distributed amongst the households of our brethren. These parcels are being paid for by brethren individually, although the letters which have been received in acknowledgment indicate considerable need.
J.T. In Germany I would say there is considerable need, and perhaps there is need in England, but I do not know of such need in the sense of which we are speaking. While there may be considerable need in Germany, the question arises whether the persons that get the food are all in the testimony as we might say. Of course, we are right individually in meeting need if we can, wherever it may exist, but are we right in using the collections in the assembly to meet general need? We are dealing now with a very remarkable truth and I believe it has been somewhat ignored. The phrase "Let not the assembly be charged" (@1 Timothy 5: 16) used by the apostle Paul has to be specially noticed. He speaks of "widows indeed" and then he says of them that if they have descendants, let their descendants look after them. They are real widows and they are in need, but the descendants are to look after them. That is what Scripture says, and then again there was evidently a *list* that should be used, and it is in regard to a widow. She was not to be less than sixty years of age. Well that is a remarkable thing. Why should that be? We have to stop and think. Does it agree with the assembly, the dignity of the assembly? This widow is to be so and so. She had to be marked by washing the saints¬ feet; she has had to be the wife of one man; and several
{102}
other items like that. Well, why should that be? It might be said by the ordinary mind, 'Well, that is nothing at all, not worth speaking of', but then heaven has a different mind, and that is the point, that we should be in accord with heaven.
A.M. Has not christendom become taken up a great deal with good works and public philanthropy, like Dorcas? Is not the assembly to be elevated above that in our minds?
J.T. Yes. The persons that were taken up with the work of Dorcas were greatly distressed when she died, but Peter put them all out. That is a very solemn thing, that people have to be put out, and it is the idea of elimination that matters. Although these widows were benefiting from Dorcas, they were put out by Peter. It was a matter of spirituality that led him to do that.
W.S.S. I have been struck with the words used in @1 Corinthians 16 and @2 Corinthians 9; the apostle says, "Now concerning the collection for the saints" in the first epistle, and "For concerning the ministration which is for the saints" in the second epistle. Is that the thought to be emphasised, "for the saints"?
J.T. That is just it. It is a question of the saints, and the word 'poor' is attached to them in @Romans 15.
A.W.P. Do you think it is happier to minister to the saints abroad individually and not through the box, even though there be need?
J.T. The persons who are doing the thing are the best judges as before God of what should be done. Of course, if it is a brother or a family that are known to have need, it would be right to use the box, because it is for that purpose; only let us be sure of having the intelligence needed to govern the matter.
{103}
A.W.P. We are not generally free to contribute through the box for the parcels to England; we do it individually. The contributions to Jerusalem were for the famine. Do you think that was an assembly matter and that, properly speaking, the collection should be through the box?
J.T. I can understand that you do not send to England from the box, because, as I have been remarking, that as far as I know, and I have been there recently, they are not in need as Scripture speaks of it.
F.J.F. Do you think then, that all giving from the assembly should carry the dignity of the assembly. We are not always thinking of the dignity of the assembly.
J.T. That is what I was thinking exactly. If we get that clearly before us and weigh it over the Lord will help. What has been said I think ought to be clear to all.
J.W. I think that some years ago you said that need ought to be met, indeed would have to be met. Now if there is no *need* in a scriptural sense among our brethren in England, then the bounty would be sent from individuals.
J.T. Well, that is right. When a person gives he gives what he pleases, so to speak. The Lord loves a cheerful giver, but then we are dealing with a specific thing, you know, that is, the assembly and the dignity that belongs to it. It is not a common thing at all, it is dignified. And the facts stated in @1 Timothy 5 will indicate that, if the brethren will look into it.
J.W. If there is a deficit in our collections, should that be made up? If so, how can that be done?
J.T. Well, the simple thought is, that if there is a deficit in the collection that is given in the assembly the distribution should not be limited to what is
{104}
actually given. The saints have more than what is given, and that more should be taxed; that is to say, the resources of the brethren should be taxed according to what is *needed*.
J.W. When there is a deficit, how can you make it up? Would you go to a brother and say we want to make this up, or would it be made up by brethren together?
J.T. Well, there is nothing to hinder that. It is still an obligation. John says, "whoso ... seeth his brother have need", but that does not meet that need. It is not simply what will be given at a collection, it is what is in our pockets or bank accounts that is to be taxed. That is all I would say.
J.W. Having stated a certain amount for a certain purpose, we may get more than what was asked for. How would you deal with that surplus?
J.T. If there is more given than is needed, the question is, Why not increase the giving?
J.W. You mean, increase the amounts asked for in view of the collection. We have come to the conclusion when we have more than enough that we should carry it forward to the next occasion.
J.T. Well, I would not say anything about that.
J.W. In providing again for the next month, we would say that we have a certain amount in hand. Would that be in order?
J.T. Quite so. I have heard of brethren designating a collection and saying, Whatever is left over give to Mr. So-and-So. *Whatever is left*. I do not think that right at all. The arrangements ought to be based on spiritual understanding, and if we have assembly ears, we can find out what is suitably called for in any district, or with any brother who is ministering.
C.M.M. If there were a surplus at a special collection, brothers in care would not increase the
{105}
amounts which had been named to the saints. The balance would be carried forward to the next special collection.
J.T. That is quite right. I would not have any difficulty about that.
{106}
GENERATION
@Matthew 15: 21 - 28; @1 Peter 2: 9
It is thought to speak about generation. We have to distinguish between generation, which refers to the family, and creation; both thoughts apply to christians, and men generally. It is assumed that those present now are christians, and with this belief one will have more liberty than if this were not so. The idea of generation is old, as old as man, if not older. It is applied to seen things, to physical things, but it is applied in general to persons. There are two words used in Scripture for speaking about generation, one of which refers to a circle, to an association of persons, who are near to us by natural or other relationship; the other word refers more to the origin of things. There are many families in the Old Testament referred to as generations, but not in the sense of what is now before me. There are generations in the New Testament too, especially in the gospel of Matthew. The first chapter deals with the matter very exhaustively; it mentions forty-two generations, as if God in working thus would call attention to the process by which He reaches His end; it is an end worked out through all these generations. All descended from one man, that is Abraham, not simply from God. There can be no doubt that God intended to work out through the process a perfect result, a perfect man, a perfect family. If that could have been effected without forty-two generations God would have done it, but God has elected to work out all by the Man by whom He could accomplish all things. God not only wished to distinguish Christ, for Jesus Christ is the first name in the book of Matthew, but the generations preceding Him, it is not that Christ is in the process, but Christ is reached as a result of the process in us.
{107}
Whatever we may think of the generations in detail, there was one thought in the mind of God and that was, that that family should be worked out from His point of view through these forty-two generations. Each generation has its own distinction, and every head has its own distinction.
I have elected to read from Matthew because it speaks of the very thing that I have before me. In chapter 15 he speaks about one who has no distinction at all as to generation, but is referred to by the Lord indirectly, or we might even say directly, as a dog. The word thus used in a spiritual sense, shows that the gentiles were in His mind according to their discreditable histories. It is not my purpose to enter into the negative side of the human race, but one might speak of the Asiatic race as peculiarly discreditable. Israel, it is true, was derived from an Asiatic, that is to say, from Abraham himself; but God took account of Abraham as of one who was creditable. He called him alone, as Isaiah tells us, "I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him", @Isaiah 51: 2. He never said that of any other. Later Jacob was blessed, Isaac was blessed, and the twelve tribes were blessed. The children of Israel were blessed, for God intended to work out His thoughts in the continuing generations through them, and to this end He called Abraham alone and blessed him. We have to take note of the nations of Asia when we think of Abraham being called alone.
In the passage that I read in Matthew we have a woman whose daughter was possessed by a demon, an unclean demon. The mother told the Lord about her daughter; she cried out to him about her daughter, saying that she had an unclean demon, but He said nothing to her, "he did not answer her a word". We have to learn everything from Christ and this is one of the things. He did not answer her a word. This is so, I might say, unendurable to the disciples,
{108}
that they would have dismissed her, but the Lord at length said, "It is not meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it to dogs", she answered "Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters¬ table". Her words show that she had some knowledge of the truth. One of the certain things I can say at this time is that there is great need of the knowledge of the truth. The importance of the knowledge of the truth cannot be overstated, and above all the truth about God, and following that the truth about ourselves severally, and then about the whole of us together; that is, all christians.
We should understand that we are a generation, "a chosen generation", a generation specially selected by God. One is not at all attempting to eulogise the brethren; one would not do it, because of being one of them; at the same time there are none like them; they are the brethren of Christ. The Lord Himself said, "One is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren", @Matthew 23: 8. That is a fine word and the Lord is, you might say, eulogising His own, assuring them of what they were to each other, even as we are here today, we are all brethren. Along with others I rejoice in it myself, for I am one of them too; I should say, one of you. It was said about Judas, "One of you shall betray me" (@John 13: 21), so that it is good to search our hearts, in view of the possibility of betrayal of the Lord Jesus. It is most touching, that in taking up the subject of the Lord's supper in the letter to the Corinthians, the apostle says "that the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took bread: and when he had given thanks, he brake it" @1 Corinthians 11: 23, 24. On the night in which He was betrayed. Betrayed by whom? He had said "one of you". I am not saying that such a one is here, for I have already intimated that I think the contrary, and I rejoice in it that we are really brethren and not
{109}
betrayers of Christ. The apostle Paul, however, in taking up the subject of the Lord's supper in the first letter to the Corinthians, says, "The Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread". The apostle said that deliberately, and with concern too, for among the Corinthians, alas, some were betrayers. They were not all real, some were without the knowledge of God. The apostle says further in writing to them that he was "in readiness to avenge all disobedience when your obedience shall have been fulfilled", @2 Corinthians 10:6. He was speaking to the Corinthians, for there were some of them who had done terrible things as will be seen by reference to later chapters of the second epistle. It is a most solemn thing that there should be among real christians anyone who betrays Christ.
I must refer again to the passage in @Matthew 15 and the woman who spoke to the Lord saying that her daughter had a demon, an unclean demon. He did not answer her at first, but allowed her to wait, when she begged of Him about her daughter. He did not answer a word, but after some delay said, "It is not meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it to dogs". The children's bread! What did the Lord have in mind? The children refers to a notable people, a family, not simply the human race, but to a family who love the Lord, a distinguished family. The Lord had that in mind, and, dear brethren, we all belong to that family. We are the children; the word refers to christians, a generation, but as a family. The Lord was not ready according to His words, He was not ready to take the children's bread and cast it to dogs. The word dogs would mean that according to human standards there was not anything of importance in those so designated; they are of little or no value. The Lord said it is not meet to give to such the children's bread. The children belong to a distinguished family. But then the
{110}
woman, while passing through this searching process, is not turned aside, and the Lord valued that. If there is anyone who is careless as to these things, the Lord is not valuing your attitude. The woman was equal to the testing and the Lord loved that. She replied, "Truth, Lord". She says, so to speak, 'You may think of me as a little dog, not to be thought of at all, only to belong outside', for "without are dogs". She would say, in her heart to the Lord, 'Whatever You might say about me and how little I am, I want to say this that even the dogs partake of the crumbs that fall from their masters¬ table'. She answered intelligently, so the Lord continues and says more. I mention that because of the importance of brethren not only speaking intelligently, but hearing intelligently, for whatever is said we should see to it that we know what is meant. We should not speak in riddles, but say what is intelligible and plainly to be understood. Mark tells us in chapter 12 of his gospel that when the Lord saw that a man answered intelligently He went on to say more to him. It is always very interesting to read the different incidents in which the Lord goes on to speak more because of certain things in the hearers. He is influenced, I speak reverently, by the hearers. As to what I am saying now, I hope the brethren are listening intelligently. So one said "Understandest thou what thou readest?" @Acts 8: 30. That was Philip's word to the eunuch, a chancellor under Queen Candace of the Ethiopians. He recognised that he could not understand unless somebody taught him; it shewed intelligence for him to say that.
I would say to you, dear brethren, that we have to be taught. You may say, Well, I know I have to learn; yes, but you have to be taught. Christianity is established and continued on the principle and basis of teaching. Therefore you have to get a teacher to be taught. You are to learn by teaching
{111}
and therefore I would urge the brethren to see to it that the teaching and what you are taking in by way of teaching is intelligible to you. See what is meant, "Understandest thou ... ?" as I have said before. So the woman said to the Lord, "The dogs eat of the crumbs". She recognised her own position in saying it. The Lord intended it thus. He would not use such words if He did not intend it. He used it designedly and she was to understand that she was to take that place and she did. She says, "Truth, Lord". She understood the truth, and the truth was being taught to her; the Lord was teaching her, and she was learning. As a result He says, "O woman, great is thy faith", @Matthew 15: 28. I should like to be spoken of in that way as one who has great faith; not as Peter was told, "O thou of little faith", @Matthew 14: 31. Christianity is based on faith and great faith. The Lord said to Thomas, "Blessed they who have not seen and have believed", @John 20: 29. It is a time of great opposition to the truth and we need to meet it with great faith, not great teachers or great preachers. I insist on this matter of faith, great faith. The Lord said it, because of what the woman said, and her child was healed.
Well now to come to the thought of generations. This woman was of the generation spoken of in Matthew. She was a distinguished woman. Joseph is distinguished in Matthew more than he is in Luke, and he is spoken of as a righteous man; he belongs to the generation which is in my mind at this time, and this woman too, she belonged to it. She was possessed of great faith. There are few described in that sense, but she was one of them, she belonged to that generation and I wish everybody here to try and take it in, in order to apprehend what a generation we christians belong to. It is a distinguished generation and we learn in her how we come into it. She came into it, because she said, "Truth, Lord:
{112}
yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters¬ table", @Matthew 15: 27. Even of the children's crumbs, The Lord had spoken of the children in the sense of a great people; that is to say, a distinguished family. She spake of the dogs, the little dogs, for she was acquiring the idea of smallness in herself and others. The Lord's dealings with her were bringing out what she was in His mind and she was becoming one of the personnel of the great generation recorded in the gospel of Matthew. The Lord had lifted her, elevated her, her own words enabling the Lord to do that. In recording it in Scripture the Lord means it for us. How many sermons have been preached from it and there will be more! I am doing my best now to commend it to you, this matter of generation and how we come into it. It is by taking the low place and apprehending the Lord's teaching.
We thus come into this distinguished family. The woman laid hold of what He meant, she knew what He meant and she said, "Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters¬ table". The generation I am speaking of is not simply Jewish, but a generation derived from among the gentiles, those who formerly had no generation of any dignity before God. The woman had no generation, she had no distinction, but now she has the greatest distinctions, and comes into the greatest family, a family elevated according to her own words, but by the words of Christ, "O woman, great is thy faith". The Lord leaves her with us, and we are glad to have her; you know what I mean, we are glad to have all these records left by the Lord for use in ministry, as the woman in @John 12, or the one in @Matthew 26 who is doubtless Mary of Bethany, whom He leaves with us. The Lord says that wherever this gospel is preached the woman of @Matthew 26 is to be mentioned, for "she hath done what
{113}
she could". We are glad to have her. She is distinguished and is of such use in the ministry. We can be assured as using these persons of the quality of the ministry and of variety in the subjects that we can bring forward. The Lord has put these into our hands to use to instruct His people.
I pass on now to speak of Peter for a little while. The chapter I read says that "ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light". The apostle Peter is speaking about the Jews at that time. He was assigned by the Lord to the circumcision; that is to say, the Jews. Taking up the gospel it was in mind that they should come into this family, this chosen generation, this royal priesthood, and Peter shows ability in using adjectives, he uses a fine vocabulary in order to express his thoughts, to express the truth. Right language is essential to the preaching, essential to the truth. I suppose it began with God. In the beginning of Genesis we read of God speaking. God said, "Let there be light". He said to Moses, "Who hath made man's mouth?" @Exodus 4: 11. God made it. The greatest masterpiece we might say in creation. God does not belong to creation. He is a Creator, Christ is a Creator, the Spirit of God had His part in the creation. I would say that man's mouth is the greatest item in the workmanship of God in the creation; the greatest creative act of God. As brought into God's marvellous light our mouths are to show forth the praises of Him who has called us out of darkness into His marvellous light. These praises are to come from man's mouth, so that it is a question for each one of keeping his mouth. God says to Moses, Who made man's mouth? Moses did not answer that, but he answered it in time in the inwards of his heart. He said to Jehovah, "Shew me
{114}
thy glory", @Exodus 33: 18. That is what he said to Jehovah, and God did show him His glory. Moses saw the glory in the face of Jesus, he saw the glory of God there. He saw it on the mount of transfiguration, I would say; that is what I wish to finish with. As belonging to this chosen generation, this royal priesthood, this holy nation, this peculiar people, we are to show forth the praises of Him who has called us from darkness into His marvellous light. Peter's vocabulary of adjectives in the expression of these things is worthy of our consideration; as we look into it we shall see what words he uses and how he leads on to God and His praises. It is for each of us to lay hold of the idea of faith and to have a great faith, because christianity is characterised by great faith. Those who are characteristically true christians are those who have not seen and yet have believed. That is great faith. I am endeavouring to speak so as to force into our minds in some sense the idea of great faith. It is a time of great opposition to the truth and what meets that is great faith, great understanding, and then great teaching; that is, the teaching of the great things of God. We need teachers, for it is a time of learning, and there is much to learn before the end.
{115}
PRAYER
@Mark 1: 35; @Judges 6: 36 - 40; @1 Chronicles 4: 9, 10
In reading these Scriptures, judging that three should be sufficient for such ministry, I have in mind to speak about prayer. It is a very wide subject, and therefore I do not intend to attempt to cover the ground indicated by the word, but rather to look at specific prayers, which I apprehend should mark us. We are apt to say prayers, formal prayers, and to limit ourselves to them. God does not grow weary of prayers, even although they be repeated; at the same time I apprehend that He looks for variety in our prayers, and that He looks for sympathy with Himself in our prayers. The exercises entering into prayer and the service of God are many and varied, so that fresh thoughts are in order in our prayers. I only need to recite Solomon's prayer to indicate how varied prayers may be. It was a very long prayer, but I do not at all advocate long prayers in public, audible prayers, but prefer brief ones covering what may be urgent at any given time, and as covering what is urgent our prayers should include current events in the whole world, current happenings in it.
Now I turn to Mark, although seeing it was the subject of prayer it might be thought that I should turn to Luke, because Luke is more priestly, if I may say so. He affords us more detailed instruction as to prayer than any of the evangelists; in fact he is the one, and the one only, who tells us of the disciples who asked the Lord to teach *them* to pray. We are told in @Luke 11 that the Lord was praying in a certain place. This is quite in keeping with general scriptural facts, that prayer should be at a certain place or certain places, and so it is that the brethren with whom we are walking together have on our
{116}
Monday evenings special prayers, and the Lord blesses these, for as I know, the brethren always leave the room refreshed. That is to be expected because God makes us joyful in His house of prayer. He makes us joyful at other times too, but He does so specially in His house of prayer. It is Luke who tells us that at Philippi there was a place where prayer was accustomed to be made; it was by a river.
I cite these matters, because they are actual examples, and it is always important in ministry to base what one says on Scripture. Every Scripture is inspired of God and is profitable, and now as I am speaking about prayer, Scripture certainly is profitable for our instruction as to prayer. So Philippi is noted in that sense, and we get a word by Luke again in the book of Acts, that a certain man of Macedonia was heard by Paul in a vision to say, "Come over into Macedonia, and help us", @Acts 16: 9. We cannot say what the 'us' covers, but it is what I would call a prophetic voice in prayer, and one to be examined and followed. If here in Durban there is need in any particular way, and it may be there is need of help in some matter that should be attended to, then I would urge the brethren to pray about that matter, and to say to someone who can help, and has perhaps helped before, 'Come over to Durban and help us'. You will get an answer, although you may have to wait for it. Paul did. The man in Macedonia did not appear right away to him, but he did appear, and appeared in most remarkable circumstances too, when Paul and Silas were in the deepest sufferings, their feet fast in stocks, put on by the jailor, and they were suffering, but they were praising God in their sufferings. You may be sure that God will have respect not only to our prayers, but to our praises, as He had respect to the praises of Paul and Silas. They were praising God in the
{117}
jail. The jail was turned into a temple at that time. God knows how to do those things too. God would show us how powerful He is, and what He *can* do, what His people can do too, even although the circumstances be unusual and perhaps not suitable. I suppose this hall in which we are gathered was never so good as it is tonight with the saints in it.
God can turn uncomfortable places into comfort. It would result from prayer for whatever may be needed, and consequent praise. So Paul was praying in the jail, but in praying he praised God; he knew how to turn from prayer to praise. It is a great matter, because praise is for God, prayer too. God has pleasure in our prayers, but praise is especially for God. The Lord Jesus Himself said, "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises", @Hebrews 2: 12, the very best place you could think of. I do not know of any other place so suitable for praise to God as His assembly. Everything in it is sympathetic normally; it is the place for prayer, too. There is plenty of sympathy in it for prayer, as we prove every Monday night, but there is also sympathy with God for praise, and that was what Paul and Silas yielded to Him, perhaps unexpectedly to themselves, but certainly it was yielded, for in their prayer they praised God, and the prisoners were *listening* to them. Some of us have been on board ship for about twenty-six days, and we have had prayer together almost every Monday night, we have had readings of the Scriptures, too. I must confess that sometimes we found the place not quite suitable, but last Monday night, especially, it was turned into a temple, a temple of prayer. We were joyous in it, too, but then Paul and Silas found the jail turned into a temple too. God found that there. One might perhaps venture to say that it would be difficult to find an incident more interesting to heaven than that incident was, of prayer *and* praises. The priests
{118}
were Paul *and* Silas, suffering brothers, their feet were fast in the stocks when all this went on. What a pleasure to God! I am sure, dear brethren, you will all sympathise with me when I say that God is looking for, and is entitled to look for from us at all times, sympathy with Himself. We may look to Him for sympathy. He is the God of *all* comfort; remember that. You cannot add to *all*, it is the completeness of the thought, and God is the God of that, He is the God of *all* comfort.
I come now to Mark. As I said, I passed by Luke, but I was compelled to refer to him two or three times. I want to speak now of the Lord praying, not only praying in a certain place, but praying at a certain time. Mark says, "And in the morning, rising up a great while before day". The Lord at such a time, we are told, "went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed", @Mark 1: 35. You can picture the position, dear brethren, and, of course, the heart is always alert normally in thinking of the Lord Jesus in any circumstance in which He was pleased to be, but especially so when He is pleased to be in prayer. The servant in @Luke 11 saw the Lord praying, I should judge. Luke says He was praying in a certain place. We are not told whether it was morning, evening or night, but that it was in a certain place. The idea of place has to be observed because it really enters into the local assembly, as stated in Paul's epistle to the Corinthians, "in every place", where believers "call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ"; that is where the local assembly is to be found, and calling on the Lord is characteristic of the local assembly. We have been praying together in the ship, as I have said, and reading the Scriptures, but we have not broken bread there, for I do not gather that a ship is exactly a place in the sense in which the Spirit of God speaks of those who "in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus
{119}
Christ". The character of a place is that it is a fixed position, even as the place where the prayer was carried on in Philippi; it was regular and it was a fixed position. It was a place where prayer was *wont* to be made, so I think that enters into the local position, but a ship does not cover the scriptural idea, hence I certainly would have no part in the breaking of bread on a ship. You may think it a small matter, but I am just seeking to illustrate what I am saying, so that we can have things right in our hearts, as to where things are to be done.
Now I am thinking of 'where', there is the idea of 'where' here; there is a desert place, and rising in the morning, long before day, the Lord went out and went away into a desert place. The word 'desert' there would signify that the place was devoid of anything that would be attractive to man naturally, not that the Lord could not enjoy things, in nature, in the creation. He never made much of it, but at the same time He was not dead to the excellencies of creation. The Lord said, "Consider the lilies ... how they grow". He knew more about the lilies than even Solomon did, for He created them, but He did not occupy Himself much with these things. Presently, as the Son of man He will put His right foot on the sea and His left foot on the land, and He will cry as a lion roars, meaning that He has power, has a right to exercise power in all the earth. "The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof". It is His, and He made it, but He is not occupied with it just now. He is occupied with the assembly, dear brethren, I might say exclusively.
You may say, He is occupied with the gospel. He is, but that is just a means to an end, to bring about the material for the assembly, and the Lord has the assembly in mind. He loves it. He is going on with it: "he is as a bridegroom going forth from his chamber", we are told in @Psalm 19, and "rejoiceth
{120}
as a strong man to run the race". If He goes forth "as a bridegroom", of what is He the Bridegroom? You may say, that may be Israel, but I think the Spirit of God would direct us to the assembly. The Israelitish bride will exist, of course, but I do not think it will be an eternal thought, but the assembly will be, and that is the thing for us to get a hold of, that we *belong* to what is eternal. We are not simply those who know about it, who read about it, but we *belong* to it. So the Lord going into the desert here would imply that He selected a place where He would not be diverted, not that He would be diverted in a wrong sense, of course, God forbid that I should have even a shade of a thought as to it, but at the same time there were things that the Lord would avoid at certain times, and we should learn to avoid them too; they may be right in themselves, but we should learn to avoid them at certain times especially. So when the Lord selected a desert place, early in the morning, to go out and pray, we want to see just what is meant in all that, and whether it has any application to ourselves in this matter of prayer. Another matter that comes up in relation to it is. Do we know anything about fasting? I quite freely say, dear brethren, that I am not very accustomed to it, but I do see that the Spirit of God would lay upon our hearts to learn how to fast.
The Lord says of a certain difficulty, "This kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting", @Matthew 17: 21. A special kind of power comes through fasting as allied to prayer too; and I think this is something which we should have laid on our hearts, dear brethren, this matter of fasting. Perhaps we shall get more answers to our prayers, realise more power in them, if we *do*. Of the Lord here, it is said, "In the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went out, and departed into a solitary place,
{121}
and there prayed". It is a special selection. You can see the Lord looking for the place, and He found it, and He went to it, and then He kneeled down. I verily believe all these things are true. The attitude of prayer would be seen too, for we are told that He kneeled. I do not say that we should always kneel, because we are told to *stand* praying sometimes, but I can visualise that the Lord of glory allowed Himself to be written about in this sense, that He went out early in the morning, got up from His bed wherever He slept. He was at Bethany, and in the morning there was a fig tree there and there were no figs on it, and He cursed it. It shows what circumstances would lead the Lord to do. Are we accustoming ourselves to get the manna before the sun is up? The Lord went out, according to Mark, and selected a certain time early in the morning to pray. We are not told how long He spent in prayer. In Luke we are told on one occasion that He prayed all night.
I want to go on to @Judges 6. I am singling out first the Lord Himself, then Gideon and then Jabez. Gideon's is specific prayer. I would urge the young people to pray specifically, not just going over your usual prayer. Our lives and circumstances change, and change comes of necessity into our prayers. Gideon was engaged in the Lord's work, which was most strenuous. I could say much about Gideon. I think the allusion in @2 Corinthians 4: 7 is to Gideon. The breaking of our earthen vessels, our bodies, which are liable to die, corresponds with Gideon's pitchers. Our earthen vessels are broken through discipline and death; perhaps through age or sickness or whatever it may be that weakens us, but the light shines. One would not simply suppose that his light shines merely because he is an old person. It is as the earthen vessel is broken, that the light will shine, and the point is to disallow all that pertains to
{122}
mere nature in the body, which hinders the light. Gideon is an example of this, and now he is in a strait, and in his strait he has a specific prayer, and it is this: "Gideon said to God, If thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as thou hast said, behold, I put a fleece of wool on the threshing-floor; if dew shall be on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the ground, then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as thou hast said", @Judges 6: 36, 37. God had said He would do this, and Gideon was moving on that principle, that God was helping him, and using him, and his prayer is just to implement what is going on. God was helping him in what he was doing, and he was doing a great work. *We* are engaged in a great work, and however small we may be in it, beloved, the work is great nevertheless; it is of God, of Christ, of the Spirit. As Solomon says, it concerns a great people, too, not that we should eulogise ourselves, save in the light of what I am saying, of what the saints are as the handiwork of God, they are a great people in that sense, and God so regards the saints.
So Gideon was in a strait, and he thought he would prove God. Apparently his faith was not just as strong as it might be, and who is ready to say that his faith is always as strong as it might be; we read of great faith. We have spoken of it elsewhere; one ought to covet that, and great faith at all times, but especially at specific times, and this is the point with Gideon; he had faith, but he wanted *great* faith. Gideon said unto God, very simply, "If thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as thou hast said, behold, I put a fleece of wool on the threshing-floor; if dew shall be on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the ground, then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as thou hast said". He had a good basis for his prayer, for God had said He would do it. In order that the testimony may go on
{123}
we may be sure that God will do what He has said. Gideon was concerned that he might be in the thing thoroughly, and not be fearful in it. He was a man of great courage, but he is relying on God and what He had said. "As thou hast said", is the ground he is on with God and he tells Jehovah what he would like to be done, that is to say, that there should be dew on the fleece only and it be dry on all the earth beside. "Then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as thou hast said. And it was so".
Now, dear brethren, I want you all to take that into your hearts, that *it was so*. Gideon simply asked God to do this, and it was so. The matter happened, and why should it not happen in my case; in any specific cases? One could mention specific cases in one's history, but I do not want to do that, for there is not one here who could not also mention specific matters in his history when God has answered. It is a question of what may be needed, and whether we get to God, so that the thing may happen. I want you to weigh that over. Get to God, as Gideon did; whatever it be that you are urgently in need about. Gideon is an example for us; he is set down as a man of faith, as the writer of the Hebrews says. "Time would fail me to tell of Gedeon" (chapter 11: 32); he had others also in mind, who, as Gideon, acted by faith. He was one of the men of faith, who did things for God. God acted to confirm his faith, so that, as he asked God for something, it was so. What he asked for, that there should be dew on the fleece only, would mean that the blessing was limited to Israel; that fact was seen in the history; for years and years, the blessing of God was on Israel. God had been with Israel and the nations were left out.
The woman in @Matthew 15 who cried to the Lord for her daughter was one of the nations, and the Lord did not listen to her. He did not answer a
{124}
word. Later in answer to her urgent appeal He says, "It is not well to take the bread of the children and cast it to the dogs". Now that was the position of Israel, and the nations. In Israel the blessing of God was known, and will be again too, presently; it is not there now, far otherwise. "I will hide my face from them", God said, and He is hiding His face from them, but presently God will unveil His face to them, and will cause His face to shine on Israel, but He is not doing it now. Gideon asked Jehovah to do this to the fleece, and God did so. But Gideon says. "Let not thine anger be hot against me, and I will speak but this once! Let me prove, I pray thee, but this once with the fleece; let it, I pray thee, be dry upon the fleece only, and upon all the ground let there be dew". This speaks of what has come to pass, the blessing of God has gone out to the gentiles, and it has departed from Israel, and things have gone on those lines ever since the rejection of Christ by Israel until now. It is a gospel text truly and rightly so used. The present is a time of blessing for the gentiles. Gideon's second prayer, which also happened, was that the fleece should be dry, and that the earth should be blessed. "Upon all the ground let there be dew", that is the present time, and it says: "God did so". These are specific cases, and it is for each of us to prove that. Firstly, "it was so", and secondly, "God did so that night".
The passage in @1 Chronicles 4 says that Jabez was more honourable than his brethren. If a brother today is more honourable it means that he is more devoted, and God will not fail to honour devotedness in a brother or a sister. "And Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou wouldest bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that thine hand might be with me, and that thou wouldest keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me!". In this case it is directed to the God of Israel. Today He
{125}
is the "God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" who raised Christ from the dead, and has chosen us in Him. That is the present time. Elijah said to Elisha, "Thou hast asked a hard thing, if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so to thee", @2 Kings 2: 10. He had asked for a great thing and he got it. So it is here. He says: "Oh that thou wouldest bless me indeed ... And God granted him that which he requested". He was specific, and he got his request that he should be blessed richly. He was not small in his thoughts. The Lord said to His own, "Ask, and ye shall receive". Let us learn to ask, especially in specific matters, because God will answer us. He knows the agony of soul and what you want to have, and He will give it to you.
I hope what I have said will bear fruit, for these services are nothing if they do not bear fruit. We are to be attentive while the ministry is going on, and if we lay it to our hearts, the blessings will come. Let specific prayer be in relation to the assembly, and what God and Christ and the Spirit are going on with. We can hope to get answers to all specific requests on those lines.
{126}
DIVINE TEACHING
@Hosea 11: 4: 5; @Ephesians 2: 10
The subject in mind is divine teaching as applied to the walk of a believer. There are many things taught of God, for God Himself teaches. He teaches through His servants, and indeed, He teaches the saints, through one another, but it is formally stated that God teaches, and that He teaches all His people. The word in mind, as it is in John's gospel, chapter 6, is, "They shall be all taught of God"; the 'they' of course, would be believers. It may indeed come out later as to Israel and as to men generally in the millennium, because the millennial period is to be a time of great light and knowledge. Indeed it is said that as the waters cover the sea, so the earth will be covered with the knowledge of the Lord -- a very great promise, a very encouraging promise, and one to be kept in our minds, especially when there is so much ignorance abroad. In the prophets it is said, "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge" (@Hosea 4: 6), which is a very humbling thing to be said of God's people. There is no reason why there should be a lack, because the knowledge of God is available. It is available in various ways. If people are ignorant, it is largely because they will be ignorant, as Paul says of one, "If any be ignorant, let him be ignorant". You may say, that is a very hard thing to say, but then there are people who are wilfully ignorant, and will not be instructed. So he has to say to the Corinthians, although he tenderly thinks of them and serves them, he has to say of some that they were "ignorant of God" -- a serious thing to be said that people are ignorant of God. That is not because God is not known, for He is; the Lord Jesus has made Him known, and yet it had to be said of some in Corinth, that they were ignorant of God,
{127}
and this ignorance showed itself in the denial of resurrection.
Well, as I said, John's gospel makes much of knowledge and teaching, and one of the greatest statements as to knowledge is that "they shall be all taught of God". If there is anyone here who is ignorant of God, or ignorant of these things, then the word is to search the Scriptures; they are available; Bibles are cheap, and if any be devoid of knowledge, then get a Bible and read it. We are told that a certain man called the eunuch of the queen of Ethiopia was reading the Bible on his way from Jerusalem down to his own country in the south. Philip, a servant of the Lord, was directed to join the chariot of this man -- He had been up to Jerusalem where there ought to have been plenty of knowledge as to God and Christ, and as to the Lord, but he was returning from Jerusalem untaught, but reading the Bible. Philip as he joined the chariot said to him, "Understandest thou what thou readest?" It is not enough simply to have a Bible and read it, but there is need for understanding what you read. As I was saying, the prophet says, "They shall be all taught of God". I would say the persons alluded to are believers, nominally so any way, but they *shall* be, not that they ought to be, but "they shall be all taught of God". If it be not so today, it will be so, that the earth will be full of the knowledge of the Lord. Wonderful thought! But then presently there is a peculiar time of knowledge, and knowledge of the highest order, of the choicest quality, and that is what is in mind in this meeting, that there might be increase of knowledge in the souls of the dear brethren who are here.
As I said, the teaching that is in mind is about walk. We are not to be content simply with our knowledge of the holy page or even of the ministry that is current amongst the people of God. We must
{128}
apply it to walk, meaning walk in the sense of one's ways and customs and relations and associations, and that means that each one has to be really a christian, and not simply a professed one; not simply that you can say you are a christian and not a Jew. Sometimes that is said. Advertisements are made for services or helpers or workers, and the addition very often put is 'Christian', which means he or she is not a Jew or a heathen -- I am not thinking of that kind of profession. I am dealing with the christian profession in the true sense of the word. Knowledge, divine teaching, is available to us as christians as regards our walk, so that we shall walk aright, and I have taken the passage in Hosea, because it tells us that Jehovah had taught Ephraim to walk. Ephraim was one of the sons of Joseph, but the mention of the name here refers to the ten tribes. What he really implies is Israel, and that God had taught Israel to walk. In the same chapter we are told that God had said, "Out of Egypt I called my son", @Hosea 11: 1. This refers not only to Ephraim then, but to Israel as a whole, and the passage is applied in @Matthew 2: 15 to our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God. He had been in Egypt.
Some of us lately, having a prayer meeting on the ship, were talking about Egypt, and how much God has had from time to time in that country. I should say, in this country, for we were speaking more of Africa at that time. God's Son, the blessed Lord Jesus Christ, had gone down into Egypt. God would take Him out of the way of Herod, the wicked Herod who would have destroyed Him. Another scripture is brought in there in the second chapter of Matthew to speak of Rachel, the weeping of Rachel. About what was she weeping? She was weeping about her children. She was not exactly weeping about Christ. The word to Joseph, the reputed father of Jesus, was to take the little child
{129}
and His mother and flee into the land of Egypt. Joseph was the reputed father, and Mary His mother, and the word to Joseph was, "Take to thee the little child and his mother, and flee into Egypt". You may say, Why take His mother with Him? She was the right person to take care of the Lord at that time, and He was taken care of. I refer to that, dear brethren, to indicate the way things are presented in Scripture. How the idea of the divine teaching is applied in Scripture and particularly to the walk of the believer; when I say the believer, I mean every believer. God has furnished instruction for every believer as to how he is to walk and please God. It is said, moreover, He teaches the believer how to love. We are taught of God, we are told, how to love one another, and if we are not loving one another then we have to consult God about that, because He teaches us how to love, but not only how to love, but how to love one another. It does not say just there that He teaches us how to love Himself, but no doubt He does, but it does say, "Ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another" (@1 Thessalonians 4: 9), and there is no part of the teaching more necessary, more needed, dear brethren. There is no greater need than to learn how we should love one another.
Now I am speaking, as I said, about walking, about how we can walk, and how God said that He taught Ephraim to walk. It was not that Ephraim was lame or halted like Jacob. Jacob halted on his thigh. God made him to halt, but He did not take away his power to walk. Jacob was able to walk, and he had instinct and discernment as to how to guide cattle, to know that cattle should not be overdriven, and if the thought is applied to believers, if believers are viewed to be the cattle, they should not be overdriven. That is to say, older brethren should not be severe on younger ones, because that is
{130}
what Jacob meant. He said the little ones must not be overdriven, and that is very important here, the children, the lambs of Christ, because that is what they are called. The Lord said to Peter, "Feed my lambs", "Shepherd my sheep", "Feed my sheep". They had to be carefully handled and attended to, for they might fall out of the way, they might be lost. We were reading this morning in the epistle to the Corinthians, how we are saved, and amongst the things mentioned is the gospel, the word of the gospel by which we are saved. Other things are needed too, for salvation, but the word of the truth of the gospel is needed, and needed to be followed too, if we are to be saved.
Well, now to come back to my scripture as to how Ephraim was taught to walk. I believe the allusion is to the book of Numbers. The book of Numbers, the order of it is Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, the fourth book of Moses. I have no doubt it was in this order that the books of Moses were written according to divine direction. The book of the Revelation was written by divine direction too. You remember how the Lord Jesus taught John, the writer of the book of Revelation, how to write the book, and if we are to understand the book we must study the order in which the book is written. The book was written by John, the writer of the gospel, and the Lord taught him how to write the book of Revelation. He signified to His servant, to His bondman John, not simply an apostle, but a bondman. You will all understand what that means, and it applies to every true christian. He is to be a bondman of Jesus, and His bondmanship is easy, it is not severe; His burden is easy and light. "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest ... for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light", @Matthew 11: 28 - 30. It is most attractive, and I would like everyone to come under that burden;
{131}
it is light. We are invited to come to Jesus, and as I said. John was taught by the Lord how to write the book. He is a remarkable writer, John the evangelist. He was one of the apostles, but he does not make a show of his apostleship. He puts Jesus in the front and he speaks of himself as the disciple whom Jesus loved, a more precious and beautiful title than that of an apostle. He styles himself the disciple whom Jesus loved. You may say, he was special. In a way, he was, but you can be special, and I can be special, and I have taken advantage of it too, for I know much about the love of Jesus, but I am not wishing to occupy you with myself, yet it would be a poor thing for me to be speaking as I am now unless I knew in reality the love of Jesus, and I urge upon every young man and woman here to get to know that love, "the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge". Get to know that love. John the evangelist knew it; he is "the disciple whom Jesus loved".
Well, the Lord taught John how to write the book of Revelation. If anyone becomes interested in the book of Revelation through what I am saying and has the desire to understand it, there is always a reward for one who reads that book. If you read the first chapter, you will see that there is a blessing for those who read that book. Jesus taught John how to write it, and the order of the instruction of it was "the things thou hast seen". That is the first thing, what he saw. Wonderful things were to be seen, and he saw them, then the things that are, then the things that relate to the coming terrible experiences that are threatened against this poor God-forsaken world. I said God-forsaken, because the whole world lies in the wicked one; that is what Scripture says. Terrible thought! Not that everyone in it lies in the wicked one, far otherwise, and I would say that the powers that be, the rulers of this country, and other countries, are not amongst them. They are not
{132}
regarded as lying in the wicked one. We here tonight are not lying in the wicked one, thank God. We are in accord with the mind of God. We are pleasing God in being here.
In the first chapter, as I said, the Lord did teach John how to write the book of Revelation, and the first thing is "what thou hast seen" and then "the things that are". We have to learn what these mean, and then, "the things that are about to be after these". There are three phases; "what thou hast seen", "the things that are", and "the things that are about to be after these". They are a fine matter of study for every young man and woman here, and for the old brethren too. The old ones, I believe, really are acquainted with the book of Revelation generally. The teaching needed to write the books of Scripture began as Jehovah taught Moses how to write the Pentateuch, and He taught David how to write psalms. I do not say he wrote them all, but he collected many, I would say, and made them publishable, made them usable for believers at all times, that they might be comforted by the book of Psalms. David had that task, but Moses had the task of writing the Pentateuch, and we are now dealing with the fourth book, and it refers to the walk of God's people. God taught His people how to walk in the wilderness. It was no easy matter to go through the wilderness, because there were no roads, and there were no motor cars I need not say; there were no signposts on the way. It was just what it is called, a wilderness, and I believe the original title of the book I am speaking of was just this, 'In the wilderness'. Israel was in the wilderness, and God taught them in the wilderness how to walk, and hence they found their way into Canaan. Israel found their way out of Egypt through the Red Sea and over the Jordan into Canaan. This is what happened, and
{133}
spiritually it applies to ourselves. It is a time of being taught how to walk.
In order to clarify what I have been saying, I refer to the first chapter of the book of Numbers. Israel are numbered; all the males from twenty years old and upwards, not all the women and children but all the males from twenty years old and upwards, are first and were to be taken account of according to their pedigree, another important word. That ought to have a searching effect on every one of us as to what it means spiritually, what a spiritual pedigree means. One has to show it if one is to be recognised by heaven, that I have a pedigree that is according to God. The numbering began in the second year after they had left Egypt, in the second month of it, in the first day of the month, and the numbering was by Moses and Aaron, but they were to have with them head men of every tribe in Israel. It was to be accurate, it was to be taken in the sight of heaven, as one might say, in the presence of the universe. These people whom God had brought out of Egypt are to be taught how to walk, but first they must be numbered, and numbered accurately by Moses and Aaron, and by one man out of each tribe of the children of Israel.
The pedigrees given are of the most remarkable company of people that ever appeared on the earth, but there in the wilderness, without any houses around them. Israel had cattle, of course, but it was a wilderness, and the numbering began there by Moses and Aaron and by one man, a named man, out of every tribe, and the numbering began according to the order of the tribes. They were all mentioned, Reuben and right down the line. They were all numbered. That is the first thing they have to learn, and in connection with that they have to learn the idea of a pedigree. Well, you say, what does it mean for me? Well, that is what I want you to think
{134}
of and ask too, when the time comes for it. You must have a pedigree. There must be some good ground for your claim to christianity. You cannot get the information at the City Hall. The City Hall does not keep any such records. It does keep records, I know, of children, of men and women and children, but this record is to be of the males only and from twenty years old and upwards, six hundred thousand men from twenty years old and upwards. They were not rationed, and there were no clothes made for them, but God preserved their clothes, and gave them bread from heaven. That is the idea. Wonderful! But more wonderful when we apply it to ourselves, for we are the very persons that are in mind. I would say to you everyone here, learn your pedigree, learn the reality of your conversion, that you are born again, and then born of God; that you know redemption, and you have real faith, faith in the Lord Jesus. Then that you have the Holy Spirit, the greatest gift given to men. He is to be yours, as a believer. I do not say, yours simply automatically, but you should desire it because it is part of the gospel, it is part of the truth, and you should know the truth. The Lord says, "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall set you free" (@John 8:32), and what I am talking about is just the truth. We have got to learn our pedigree, and that idea includes all that I said; it includes the knowledge of redemption and especially the gift of the Holy Spirit on the ground of believing in the Lord Jesus Christ.
The next thing is the learning how to walk. Many walk a good deal when holiday-making in the summer time, and summer time is coming on in this part of the world, and there will be a good deal of walking, going to the seaside, and such like, but what I am dealing with, beloved, is how to walk, not at the seaside, not for holidays. Pardon me, I am not going to put you under any bondage in that sense.
{135}
It is all very well to get fresh air, but there is often too much time spent in such pursuits. We want to know how to walk even as God taught Ephraim how to walk. He took him by the arms; very beautiful expression indeed. I will read it again in @Hosea 11: "I it was that taught Ephraim to walk -- He took them upon his arms". That is what Jehovah did. He took them upon His arms; what a beautiful thought, showing the interest that God had in His people, taking them upon His arms as a parent would a child, so as to teach them how to walk. Then it adds, "They knew not that I healed them". That is to say, they were defective in that sense, but then it goes on to say in the fourth verse, "I drew them with bands of a man, with cords of love". Think of that.
Following up the thought of pedigree, let us think of what is said here as to being taught how to walk, and the tenderness of Jehovah in taking you by your arms, and it is further said drawn by bands of a man. That is how He did it. You may be in the burning sun of the desert and the heat and other things like that. God took pains to take the Israelites by their arms and to draw them by the bands of a man. I have no doubt that the man was Moses and Aaron. Moses and Aaron would represent all these things, the tenderness with which they took care of the people of God in the wilderness, and the antitypical teaching, dear brethren, is for every one of us tonight, so that we may be taught how to walk. God Himself would teach you how to walk along with the brethren. First of all to take the ground of being a christian, and then as confessing the Lord, get the Spirit, and further as confessing the Lord, come into fellowship, that is to say, let yourself become attached, not unattached, to the Lord's people. Link up with them vitally, recognising the Holy Spirit, and walk with them. Walk with the
{136}
brethren, do not walk with others. It is a question of associations, and of those that you can walk with. Let us walk with the brethren, seek them out, and find them, and when you find them, walk with them.
Well, the next thing that I would say as regards the teaching of how to walk in the wilderness is in the second chapter of Numbers. I will be brief, at least, as brief as possible, so as to get through, so that we will not be over the usual time. The second chapter of Numbers has in mind the military position. In fact in the first thought of pedigree the numbering of each family is also military. The military idea is in the age of twenty. It is just the beginning of the first age, not the dying age, but they are beginning to live, as I might say, by the Holy Spirit, because antitypically that is what twenty years of age would mean; that the believer has the Holy Spirit, and as having the Holy Spirit that he is part of the military. He has part in the defence of the truth, not only of the walk that is suitable to it, but the defence of the truth. He is not to get out of step in the ranks. He is to learn how to walk, and to keep rank, as it says in Scripture. There were one hundred and twenty thousand who came to David who knew how to keep rank, how to walk together and not have diverse principles or methods. As Paul says, "Thus I ordain in all the assemblies", that is to say, all the assemblies are to be governed by the same principles, and it is a question of walk, how we walk together. If one gets out of step with the brethren he is in danger; *God* would say to such, You are in danger if you get out of step with the brethren in the wilderness. You may be lost in the wilderness, you may fall in it, and there are many such. With many of them God was not well pleased; they were strewn in the desert, a terrible thing. The bodies of nearly six hundred thousand of them were strewn in the desert. How awful that is, but
{137}
how awful is lawlessness in a christian, or in a nominal believer, so what I am saying is a most serious warning to every one of us.
In @Numbers 2, "the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, Every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard". That is a military thought. He is to learn his place in relation to the tribe he is associated with, and to pitch by his own standard, take a place by his own standard. There are many deviations at the present time, people saying they are this and that, and there are so many denominations, perhaps a hundred different kinds of denominations in professed christianity. A very humbling thing to think of, but there is really only one assembly. The word church in Scripture is generally the word assembly, and the word assembly means persons who are called out of the world and linked up with the saints, those who are saints by divine calling, linked up in the fellowship of God's Son, and so it is here that each Israelite was to pitch by his own standard. On the march he would not get out of step, or he would become lost in the wilderness. He would know how to keep rank and walk with the brethren. Where are you, may I ask? Where are you morally, where is your fellowship, where do you walk, with whom do you walk? Are you walking in the light of God? Only as in the light is fellowship according to God possible. If you are not walking in the light, the word comes to you, "What fellowship of light with darkness?" The apostle Paul says, "What part for a believer along with an unbeliever?" @2 Corinthians 6: 14, 15. These are questions to be answered by every one of us. The answer is, that there is no fellowship between believers and unbelievers, there is no fellowship between light and darkness. So it is a question of walking in the light. We are to be taught how to walk in the light as God is in the light, and when we do, we have fellowship one with
{138}
another. That is the idea in chapter 2, the standard by which we are walking.
Well, brethren, I only want to add something about @Ephesians 2. The verse read says, "We (meaning christians) are his workmanship [that is, God's workmanship], created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them". They are not modern things, modern methods, they are things before ordained of God. "We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them". They are not novelties, beloved, they are not things that anybody could take on and engage in as he pleases. He cannot do as he pleases on these lines. God has created beforehand certain things for the believer, certain methods and ways in which he is to walk now. Why? We are not told how old they are, but they are what God has before ordained, that we should walk in them. Well, you can see the character of the things that God has ordained for us as to our walk. We have to consider what anyone may call us into, or ask us to do. Was it before ordained for me to walk in? It cannot be if it is a worldly thing. Let me give it up therefore; renounce it. You will walk with power if you renounce it. You are brought on to the highest possible level as to walk; in fact, you are walking with God. The first man specially commended in the Bible in this sense was Enoch; he "walked with God". Of course, Abel did, too, but he was slain. He died for his testimony, but Enoch was not slain, he went to heaven without dying. Did you ever think of that; a man going to heaven without dying; he is there yet. We must think of these things; Enoch is there with Elijah too. Elijah went to heaven without dying, and we may go to heaven without dying presently; all christians living when the Lord comes will. The Lord Himself
{139}
shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first, and then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up in the clouds to be with Jesus. You say, Is it not wonderful! It may happen tonight, or at any time. The Lord has not fixed the time. Heaven knows, God knows, Christ knows, the Spirit knows, but otherwise we have to leave it, but it is very imminent; that is the point, and our walk enters into the matter. We are to be taught how to walk with God and how to please God. That is what the first epistle to the Thessalonians speaks of, and the same epistle says that God teaches how to love one another; these two things we are to be taught, how to walk and please God, and how to love one another.
Ephesians would go higher than that and say God has prepared a walk for us, prepared it before time. God has prepared works, too, that we should walk in; that we should exercise ourselves in. He has created these works. He has created ways for believers to walk in, and it for us to walk in them, dear brethren. It is a time of reality, the very time when the imminence of the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ is kept before us by the Spirit. The word speaks to us of those who love Him, those who love His appearing, and I want everyone here to think of it, to come to really love His appearing, and at the same time to walk so as to please God, as it was with Enoch. He "walked with God; and he was not", meaning that he was translated. He was not, because God took him. Beautiful thought that one man should be taken by God in those days, and that before the flood, in antediluvian times. There was one man taken up into heaven without dying, and it was because he walked and pleased God, and he is an example for us to be that now. We are at the very end of the dispensation, and the point for each
{140}
one of us is to walk and please God, for soon we shall be translated, and the joy of pleasing God in this sense will cease. It says of Enoch, "Before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God", @Hebrews 11: 5. May it be so with each one of us, dear brethren.
{141}
Pages 141 to 536 -- "The Testimony of Grace and Judgment". Australia, 1947 (Volume 174)
THE TESTIMONY OF GRACE AND JUDGMENT (1)
@1 Thessalonians 1: 1 - 10
J.T. The suggestion of the epistles to the Thessalonians is made with a measure of consideration and thoughtfulness, and particularly because they speak so much of judgment. It is thought that perhaps brethren have not sufficiently weighed the situation that has arisen in the present conditions among the nations, and then the conditions among the saints too, that the idea of judgment has not been taken into account sufficiently, especially in the light of the book of Revelation which was written late, as it is said, "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to shew to his bondmen what must shortly take place". That book contains most awful judgments, and they are not imaginary; they are real; and the Lord would, I believe, stress the thought of judgment. This epistle and the second epistle are especially intended to stress this thought of judgment, especially the persons at whom the judgments are directed, giving distinction as they do to the whole course of history, for the whole course of God's government issues now in the present situation among the nations. It need hardly be said that we are thinking of the assembly, and its part in all this, and how much we are to be instructed as to it, and ready for it. Then there is the remarkable address by the apostle to this assembly, which is called the assembly of Thessalonians, as if to remind us that localities and nations and what is found in them cannot be ignored in our public services. And so the Thessalonians have a great place, but they are peculiarly addressed; that is, not the assembly at
{142}
Thessalonica, but "the assembly of Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ". So that the Father has a great place in the epistle, and the epistle itself shows what a great place the assembly of Thessalonians had in the heart of God, reflected in the apostle in the most endearing terms. Hence the thought of nations and cities cannot be ignored in our consideration of holy Scripture, because God has written Scripture in relation to history, and geography too. So that we are not to be indifferent to what the characteristics of Thessalonica were, and then, of course, what are the characteristics of the place in which we are today, and how much these characteristics have to be considered if we are looking into Scripture.
Rem. What you are stressing, if I gather it rightly, is that the peculiar conditions of countries or certain cities are to be taken account of in the ministry.
J.T. I think they are. And the best illustration of that would be: "Cretans are always liars", @Titus 1: 12. That was the characteristic that had to be contended with in the ministry. It is therefore a question of any nation represented here, or country, or the one in which we are gathered, what its characteristics are. So in chapter 4 of the book of Acts we have the thought of "this city", that is to say, Jerusalem, the one they were in, where the Lord Jesus had been crucified; so we have to take account of what the characteristics are in this sense, and be intelligent about them.
Rem. The apostle says in regard to the Cretans, "This testimony is true", and he takes the testimony of one of their own countrymen.
J.T. Quite so. An ordinary citizen of the place.
P.H.H. The cities of the nations coming up before God for judgment, and each one being treated
{143}
apparently differently, would be in line with your thought.
J.T. Very good. The cities of the nations fall, we are told. A very terrible thought, because so many gatherings of the saints now are in cities; in fact the growth of a city has assumed enormous proportions in our times as compared with what a city used to be, these proportions involve difficulties as to boundaries and other matters. So we do well to have all this in mind in our consideration of this scripture.
P.H.H. In connection with that, would the places which the Lord mentions, as for instance in @Matthew 11, with their differing characteristics be before us? He speaks, for instance, of Capernaum being raised up to heaven.
J.T. Especially those places where He had been Himself. He had resided in Capernaum. He came from Nazareth and went to Capernaum, and hence the mighty works that were done there. The same principle would apply to many of us here, where we reside, and what we are to contend with. The pronouncement of woe is really in line with what is in mind. "Woe to thee, Chorazin! woe to thee, Bethsaida! for if the works of power which have taken place in you, had taken place in Tyre and Sidon, they had long ago repented".
P.L. Are the Thessalonians prepared in relation to this matter of judgment, by Paul's first utterance among them in relation to supreme judgment, "Opening and laying down that the Christ must have suffered and risen up from among the dead", @Acts 17: 3?
J.T. And then this final word here, "Jesus, our deliverer from the coming wrath"; that is the final word in this chapter. Opening and laying down is a matter of great importance, because opening would mean the unfolding of things, even as it is said of
{144}
Moses, "began Moses to unfold this law", @Deuteronomy 1: 5. Opening would be the unfolding of the truth, and then the laying down would be the authoritative assertion as to it, that it was so, that it was authoritative, which is very important too.
A.J.G. Would this allusion in the last verse to our deliverer from the coming wrath imply that the fact that there was wrath to come, had a place in Paul's ministry at Thessalonica?
J.T. That is what I thought; it was in his mind, especially the Lord's coming as connected with it, which is referred to in every chapter.
A.J.D. Is the day of judgment brought to bear upon us now, in order to set us free in our spirits?
J.T. It certainly has a place in the testimony of the gospel of the word of God; and that raises a matter that one has thought of considerably; namely, that there is very little open-air preaching now, hardly any, and yet it is a good opportunity for asserting judgment. Indeed it is more convenient and suitable to assert the judgment of God publicly than to do it in the meeting rooms.
A.J.G. Paul said, "Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men", @2 Corinthians 5: 11.
J.T. There it is, terror; that comes in in connection with the judgment seat of Christ.
J.P-sn. In the beginning of the Acts, the apostle exhorted those who believed to save themselves from this untoward generation. Judgment was coming in upon the Jews. Should that have part in our gospel testimony to men today?
J.T. Quite so, and especially in view of what is said in the epistle to the Hebrews, and what is said as to the nations receiving the glad tidings at the end of the book of Acts. Paul reasoned with the Jews all day with but little result from it, which is indicative of the present situation among the Jews. There is really very little result from them in the gospel
{145}
testimony. They reasoned the whole day with the apostle, and he has to quote @Isaiah 6 to them, showing the terribleness of the judgment that awaits them. It seems as if that is what should be before us too, the matter of public testimony, and the convenient time for announcing the judgment of God publicly.
H.W. Would Noah, at the end of his dispensation, being a preacher of righteousness just prior to God's judgment coming in by the flood, and then the prophet Malachi speaking about God coming in in judgment. Jehovah coming suddenly to His temple in the way of judgment at the end, support what you are saying?
J.T. Just so, and the promise to send the prophet Elijah, in the latter book, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children. That shows that the terrible dislocation of family relations is in mind, and we cannot ignore it either, because of our own families. So that the idea of a prophetic testimony in regard of that is very important. And then Noah was a preacher of righteousness; you had that in mind?
H.W. Judgment was pending and you would expect that to enter into Noah's preaching.
J.T. Very important, because our dispensation began with public testimony in the open air, I would say, but there is not much of it now. In fact I have heard it reported recently, since I have been here, that the time for it is over, which I do not think is true.
D.J.M. Would @Proverbs 1 come in; Wisdom crying without, in the broadways, and then the thought of calamity?
J.T. Very good; crying without.
Rem. While Paul waited at Athens he announced repentance and judgment, even the day being set.
J.T. That is a very good reference, because we have already alluded to the same thought; that is, the question of what was at Athens, because
{146}
Thessalonica was comparatively near to Athens. The apostle said God has "appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained". @Acts 17: 31. The day is fixed; it is a very good testimony, a very good text too, to bring forward in public, in speaking to men. Paul spoke to men in the open air on Mars's Hill.
Ques. Was that the result of his spirit being painfully excited within him as he took account of conditions in that city?
J.T. Exactly, that is to say the idolatry that was there. And then what have *we* to contend with? What terrible conditions exist among men in all the countries, especially since the last war, even in England conditions have greatly degenerated.
L.P.M. Does this reference in the first chapter to the word of the Lord sounding out from you enter into the matter?
J.T. Well, it shows the kind of thing that was needed was there -- the sounding out of the word of the Lord.
G.A. Would Peter's word link on with what you were saying, that "the time of having the judgment begin from the house of God is come; but if first from us, what shall be the end of those who obey not the glad tidings of God?" @1 Peter 4: 17. Would assembly judgment really constitute the only evidence from God, here at the moment, of the fact that the judgment of which you have been speaking lies immediately ahead?
J.T. Quite so, and the Spirit being here, the equivalent to what is in heaven. A matter of the very greatest importance, that what is here is equivalent to what is in heaven. The announcement objectively has its answer here in the Spirit, and it is a question whether we are equal to such a testimony, and to the suffering and reproach attached to it.
{147}
P.H.H. Would the thought of intercession among the saints go alongside of this announcing of judgment? I am thinking of Abraham going to conduct Jehovah in the way and speaking to Him in intercession about Sodom.
J.T. Quite so. God recognised and felt the sympathy that He would have in Abraham, "Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do ... ?". And "that he will command his children and his household after him". He is a worthy man, a person who has a house and a family. God would honour him in proclaiming the testimony in connection with that, both in regard to Abraham and in regard to Lot.
H.J.M. As well as the testimony itself, there is the manner of men that Paul, Silas and Timothy were among them.
J.T. That leads us up to something very definite in our chapter, the phrase in verse 9; their *entering in*. "For they themselves relate concerning us what entering in we had to you". That phrase reminds us, besides the one you quote, of the kind of man Paul was, and his entering in. Not that he was invited or sent for, as he was in other cases, but he entered in. There was the call to him earlier from Macedonia: "Come over into Macedonia, and help us". But there is nothing of that kind here. It is our "entering in", it is mentioned twice in our book, in this and the next chapter. "Ye know yourselves, brethren, our entering in which we had to you, and that it has not been in vain"; that is to say, there was no pretension to religious distinction, or any other distinction. The apostle was in keeping with his testimony, and all that followed in Thessalonica showed what a real man he was, a real man getting down to the conditions of people.
P.L. And as thus he was very attractive; some of them believed in @Acts 17, and joined themselves to Paul and Silas.
{148}
J.T. Very good. Our entering in would mean our manner in the house which we visit, and whether we promote encouragement in them, and are in accord with the conditions of the houses and add to them. Paul would be thoroughly in that as to the saints wherever he went; he would be ready to be anything to promote their comfort and blessing, so he would gather sticks.
A.E.D. Would that add to the importance of the word, "*Ye* became our imitators"?
J.T. Well, that goes with all we have said. "*Ye*", on which there is emphasis, "*Ye* became our imitators, and of the Lord". It is remarkable that the apostle puts himself before the Lord, as if the servant is to reflect the Lord, to make a way for Him. Indeed we read in @Luke 10 that He sent certain ones before Him in His ministry, so that a way is made for the Lord in our methods and conduct in the houses.
Rem. Paul goes twice into the house of Lydia in @Acts 16, finding the brethren at the end of the chapter in the house of Lydia, and stimulating them in regard to the work of God and the message that had gone forth in the prison.
J.T. Yes, she did not make it any matter of compliment that she gave them hospitality, but said, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house", @Acts 16: 15. They had come to the door you might say, but they were invited in. But here it is "our entering in"; that is, the general character of the entering of the servant to the place and the person he visits.
R.R.T. Would we have this matter in contrast in Abraham and Lot? There was an entering in with regard to Abraham, but quite a contrast in regard to Lot. There was not liberty in Lot's household for the entering in, was there?
{149}
J.T. Well, he was in the position of a politician and yet Peter calls him a righteous man, which is a remarkable thing, and would somewhat modify anything we may have thought about Lot, because he was a real man at bottom, although his face was towards Sodom. On the other hand Abraham was honoured in the sense that even Lot comes under divine consideration because of the influence of Abraham; "God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow", @Genesis 19: 29. And hence we have to learn to provide our Abrahams; not indeed to provide our Lots, because they come under discipline, yet Peter says he was a righteous man; a righteous man may have to come under discipline, and Lot was under discipline; he was not honoured as Abraham was. We cannot claim advantage because of any past history, in regard of our present circumstances; it is what is going on now, what we are now, that counts.
E.B.McC. Would verse 5 help us in that way? "For our glad tidings were not with you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Spirit, and in much assurance".
J.T. Much assurance. The apostle delineates just what was there in him, and so we shall find in the next chapter that they received what he had testified, as the word of God; and that they were affected by it, in that they became imitators of the assemblies of God in Judaea, which is another matter to be in our minds, that we must be universal. Any attempt to localise gift is simply to deny the universality of the truth, for gift is universal. These christians in Thessalonica imitated the churches in Judaea, far away from them; they were not purely local, they were universal in their outlook.
Rem. The gift is not the product of the place but of the Lord's own actions.
{150}
J.T. Quite so. You mean Paul was not a product of the place.
E.T. I wanted to enquire in relation to the preaching in the open air. Would the basis for it be gift? You were referring earlier to the lack of open-air preaching, but if it is taken up, it is necessarily taken up on the principle of gift.
J.T. I would think so. "How shall they preach unless they have been sent?". That is to say, it is a question of being sent. Of course there is such a thing as one offering himself, but volunteering is not a principle in the service of God. It is what God takes on.
Ques. "Woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel!", @1 Corinthians 9: 16. Is that a man in the sense of being sent, and in the feelings that were proper to the situation?
J.T. I would think so.
P.H.H. May I ask in relation to that if we hold the balance between being invited as you were saying, or sent, and then our entering in? Are they the two sides of the visit?
J.T. Well, being sent, of course, is wholly from God, it is God's sovereignty in taking up a servant and sending him. I should think this phrase, "our entering in", would fix itself on the spirit of the apostle.
P.H.H. I was wondering that. Would you say another word about being sent. Do I understand it is wholly the divine side?
J.T. I think it is. "How shall they preach unless they have been sent?" @Romans 10: 15. That is plain enough. Of course, invitations may be modified, they may not really mean the full thought. They may just mean that the door is open for you at any time, and not the full thought of being sent, but going by invitation. I think the way to get at the truth is to get the scripture, according to what it
{151}
says, wherever it speaks unqualifiedly. The word we have quoted is, "How shall they preach unless they have been sent?". That is unqualified.
Ques. Is there the thought too, "Here am I", on the line of availability? "Send me" for effectiveness?
J.T. Yes, that is from @Isaiah 6.
Ques. Do you think from the servant's own point of view, that however urgent the invitation, he could not go unless he had a sense in his own soul of being sent?
J.T. Yes. We have to take account of the context of Scripture. If it does not afford the full literal thought, it is a question of what we may think, but we ought to be instructed as to the spirit of things, and very often we get quotations of Scripture in the spirit of things, in the spirit of Scripture, rather than the letter; but at the same time we cannot ignore the letter, and when it comes to a test or a crisis in a critical matter, then we have to recognise the letter, therefore "By thy words thou shalt be justified", @Matthew 12: 37. That is the word as to the actual literal thing, and you are either justified by it or not.
G.A. Would what you are remarking appear in Jonah? We would wonder if he had the spirit of the direction from Jehovah, but he certainly had the letter. Would that in any way connect with your thought?
J.T. Just so, he did not have the spirit of it. He had the letter. The fact of the matter is that Jonah was never in the spirit of things until he wrote his book. I do not believe he was ever right until he wrote his book. Then he condemns himself in his book, so that it is well if we write. Some do not publish anything that has been published before, or written before, or spoken before, they put it in the waste basket, but it is well to have printed anything that is worth printing. If it is condemnatory of
{152}
yourself, well let it be, or if it justifies God, God must be justified. "Let God be true, and every man false", @Romans 3: 4.
H.H. The word *sent* is used many times in the gospel of John in relation to the Lord Jesus.
J.T. You might say it is the governing thought.
H.B. Would you say that John Baptist illustrates this principle? "There was a man sent from God, his name John", and his ministry was effective.
J.T. Quite so; that just confirms what we are saying, a man sent from God.
P.H.H. Would the Levites in the Old Testament, particularly in the book of Numbers, illustrate what you are saying about the doubtful character of volunteering? God chose the Levites and gave them their service.
J.T. Yes, and giving them no salary except what came from God; God's portion was theirs (@Numbers 18: 21 - 24). They are honoured really in that their recompense was so nearly from God, their place was so very near to Himself. There is another thing that it would be well to think of as to the word 'Levite', it is a typical word that is used antitypically, and rightly used antitypically. At the same time the New Testament affords abundance of testimony as to the words that should be used as to the Lord's service, and hence Paul in 1 Corinthians asserts what applied to him. He is to be regarded as a ministering servant (@1 Corinthians 3: 5).
P.L. "Jehovah, he is their inheritance, as he hath said unto them". @Deuteronomy 18: 2.
J.T. Quite so, and then they had other things as you know, especially the forty-eight cities, meaning that as ministers they are to be administrators, and if anyone goes out to minister or preach, he comes short unless he can administer. The forty-eight cities would mean that they were living in cities. Barnabas was one who, having land, sold it
{153}
and brought the money and laid it at the apostles¬ feet. He did not give it away, he just laid it at the apostles¬ feet; he placed it where it could be administered. So the idea of the forty-eight cities, I believe, would be that we all, and especially young men, should be instructed in administration. And so when Paul was converted the Lord said to him, "Go into the city". Why did not the Lord tell him everything outside? He did not, because it was a question of the city, it was a question of administrative power and authority. And so He says, "Go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do". So that he had to learn what he should do from a man lower in the service than he was, or would be. That is to say, in service we have to learn to be submissive, and to learn from anyone that God may use, and whatever administrative work may be allotted to us, to do it, and not to be in any way looking for others to do it for us, but to do the thing ourselves.
H.J.M. Is it not also important that the servant should be in the current of God's feelings? Jonah was not in the current of God's feelings. The beloved apostle was very much in the current of God's feelings and he could express them.
J.T. Quite so. So that we are under God, as well as under Christ, and under the Spirit too; the Spirit is guiding us, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are operative in this great matter of administration, and sending, so the Spirit in the book of Acts asserts this. It is not asserted so much elsewhere, but it is asserted there as a matter of the dispensation; it is the dispensation of the Spirit in that sense. So that He says, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them" (@Acts 13: 2); and being sent forth by the Holy Spirit they did certain things. Surely it is a great principle of the dispensation that the Spirit is the Sender too.
{154}
W.S.S. Do the Lord's words, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you", enter into what you have been saying?
J.T. I think so. It is the character of John's gospel as we remarked. And so in @John 20 we read, "He breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit" not take it. He is available, but "Receive the Holy Spirit", and then He says, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them", not they will be, but they *are* remitted unto them; and "whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained", so that the position is left in our hands. It is a most remarkable thing, and it is particularly in John's gospel that the administration is left in our own hands. Many things are left in our own hands, and the Lord would empower us by the breathing of the Spirit in us. Hence the wonderful character of the dispensation, which is to be borne in mind all the time. It is a question of what was at the outset, and what is now, because the dispensation is not abrogated, it still stands.
L.P.M. Are service and administration put close together in the verse just quoted, sending them and giving them the administrative competency to proceed?
J.T. Just so. It is a most remarkable chapter; chapter 20 is really, you might say, one of the most characteristic chapters of John's gospel.
Ques. In the next chapter, is their failure to recognise that, in that Peter says, "I go to fish", but not being sent, there was no prosperity in that undertaking?
J.T. Just so. "I go to fish". He was not waiting at all for any time to elapse; he says, "I go to fish", meaning that he was determined to do it, but then the wonderful thing is that the Lord does not reprove him. That is another matter that we have to take
{155}
account of in John's writings. He says, "Children, have ye any meat?"
Ques. In what you have referred to in @John 20, is that the assembly, or is it the persons?
J.T. I would say the persons, but persons who form the assembly. John does not use the word *assembly* really. It is a question of the persons who form it, and their dignity, so that the personnel of the servants is most striking in John's gospel, such as Mary Magdalene.
Ques. Do you think the sense of the severity of the coming wrath would only enhance to us the present value of the grace of the dispensation?
J.T. Quite so. And that the writer of John's gospel and epistles is the writer of the book of Revelation; the Lord told him exactly what to write, when to write it, and the order of the book. You do not get that anywhere else, really, save in the book of Revelation, that the Lord Himself gives him the order in which the book is to be written. And then he is a bondman; he is not John the beloved, he is a bondman.
E.C.T. And near the end you get, "whosoever will"; would that be in keeping with the dispensation? "Let him take the water of life freely".
J.T. Quite so, that spreads out from a beautiful passage, beginning, "*I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come ... he that will, let him take the water of life freely". It is as if that grand passage which is quoted there, spreads out after it is uttered, that is to say, it gives liberty to anyone, whosoever, to take the water of life freely. On the other hand, immediately after that we have, "*I* testify to every one who hears the words of the prophecy of this book, If any one shall add to these things. God shall add to him the plagues which are written in this book. And if any one take from the
{156}
words of the book of this prophecy. God shall take away his part from the tree of life and out of the holy city, which are written in this book", @Revelation 22: 18, 19. And then another verse earlier says, "Let him that does unrighteously do unrighteously still; and let the filthy make himself filthy still; and let him that is righteous practise righteousness still; and he that is holy, let him be sanctified still". That, I think, is a very solemn thing, that as to the present unrighteousness, the terrible conditions of christendom, which have been going on for a long time, especially during these recent wars. God is saying, 'Let them go on'. God is saying, 'I will let them go on'. But at the same time, whoever is sanctified, let him remain sanctified. That is the point. Whoever is righteous, let him remain righteous. Let him not give it up because of conditions, but remain as he was, whereas on the other hand God is letting the wickedness proceed. He is not stopping it. This is awful, that the unrighteous conditions are to stand. God is not altering them. He is not going to reform the world at all. He is just going to let it go, and that is the idea of the present moment, the time of the end, that there is such a thing as those conditions present. Hence we need not look for very much from politics, or from statesmanship either. The condition, therefore, has to be looked into, and of course the reaction is towards ourselves as to what we can do in these things, and that is, if one is righteous, remain so; if one is sanctified, remain so, do not give it up.
P.H.H. That would give great encouragement to all the saints to go on outwardly and inwardly with all that God has given us in the assembly.
J.T. Well, that is beautiful, most cheering, that we can go on with our assembly meetings, for God is with us in it.
{157}
P.H.H. And the righteousness would bear upon the public testimony in the midst of a good deal that is dark and unclean, even in high places?
J.T. Indeed it does. Those of us who travel know it too, how testimony, however small, bears on what is current.
Ques. Nabal went on with his unrighteousness and unholiness, and Abigail in close contact with it went on with her exercises, would you say?
J.T. Very good. She was commended so highly and rewarded, too, in becoming the wife of David.
Rem. It is noticeable in the beginning of Luke how he outlines to Theophilus the political situation in such detail, and yet John is in the wilderness outside of it all, and the word of God comes to him and things proceed in relation to the incoming of Christ. Is that our hope, what God is doing? It says in the third chapter, "Now in the fifteenth year of the government of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judaea, and Herod tetrarch of Galilee, and Philip his brother tetrarch of Ituraea and the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene, in the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came upon John, the son of Zacharias, in the wilderness". I thought it was a little remarkable that so much should be made of the then politics of the day, and of a man who was outside of it all.
J.T. Quite so. It is said of him that he dwelt in the deserts, so that he had no comforts.
J.P-sn. In the second epistle to the Thessalonians, Paul writes of those who have found pleasure in unrighteousness, but he says, "We ought to give thanks to God always for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, that God has chosen you from the beginning to salvation in sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth". Is that what we see now coming to light in the Thessalonians?
{158}
J.T. "God has chosen". Quite so.
A.J.G. Do you think that the sixth verse of this first chapter helps in view of the conditions in the world to which you are referring? It says, "Having accepted the word in much tribulation with joy of the Holy Spirit". Is not joy of the Holy Spirit an important feature in sustaining faith in view of conditions around?
J.T. Yes, that is so. One of the greatest exercises that one has is the question of joy, joy in the Holy Spirit, so that one is superior to whatever happens. Another thing to note here is the fact that hope is much stressed in verse 3; the apostle says, "Remembering unceasingly your work of faith, and labour of love, and enduring constancy of hope, of our Lord Jesus Christ, before our God and Father; knowing, brethren beloved by God, your election. For our glad tidings were not with you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Spirit, and in much assurance". The idea of hope is greatly stressed, although it is not found in the address in the next epistle, which is a distressing thought, really, but it is greatly stressed in this chapter; the enduring constancy of hope, because it is the thing which will sustain us in the pressure that is current all round; the hope of the coming of the Lord, really, or whatever else it may be, what God's thoughts are as to us. That is one of the thoughts that was in mind in proposing this epistle; that is, it is the epistle of hope, the enduring constancy of hope, as well as love.
J.S. Would you say that the Thessalonians would learn quickly? I was thinking that the ministry of late has been that we should learn quickly, and I thought it was touching on our times. Three weeks put them on a high level, did it not?
J.T. That is good. I think we were speaking of that somewhere, where you were present. This question of hope is so important, because it enlivens us,
{159}
it keeps us going brightly when things are oppressive outwardly.
G.A. Why does the apostle in the second epistle refer to it as everlasting consolation and *good* hope through grace? "But our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and our God and Father, who has loved us, and given us eternal consolation and good hope by grace, encourage your hearts, and establish you in every good work and word". Why would the apostle in that way intensify the quality of hope?
J.T. Well, that was his prayer for them, it was what they were lacking in. It really takes the form of a prayer for them, whereas in the first epistle the thing is there, the enduring constancy of it. I suppose he was concerned that there was a lapse when he wrote the second letter, and so he introduces much in the way of vengeance in it. And that they should rest with him when it should come; that, of course, would enter into the prayer that they should be kept in hope of the coming glories.
C.F.I. The thought of election enters into this, "Knowing, brethren beloved by God, your election". I thought the purpose of God would come in, in relation to that, and be in the minds of the saints.
J.T. Quite so. It was there. They were in the good of the testimony that Paul rendered, the elect of God; it is a comforting and most precious thought for us that we belong to the elect. Much depends on the elect as to current happenings and happenings in the future. If it were not for the elect, no one would be saved, showing how great a place the idea of election has; it is for us to lay hold of it.
E.B.McC. Should it be noted that they became imitators of the apostle and of the Lord, and that the word sounded out from them?
J.T. It is beautiful what he could say of them, "The word of the Lord sounded out from you, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place";
{160}
notice the idea of place; "in every place your faith which is towards God has gone abroad, so that we have no need to say anything; for they themselves relate concerning us what entering in we had to you, and how ye turned to God from idols to serve a living and true God, and to await his Son from the heavens, whom he raised from among the dead, Jesus, our deliverer from the coming wrath".
E.L.G. In some small meetings the gospel is not preached, the brethren feeling there is no gift. Other small meetings have taken it up in extreme weakness with no sense of gift, but desiring to testify to the preciousness of Christ Jesus, and it has been stressed that the saints have no sense probably of having gift. Would that be right?
J.T. That is a question for investigation. You are suggesting a case of the kind, but then the next thing would be to investigate the matter because we cannot be sure without investigating. It is a great matter with God that we should investigate. Is it really so, that there is no gift? The word in Ephesians is "Unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ", @Ephesians 4: 7. Well, what does that mean? Does it not mean that every one of us could say something in the way of testimony? The specific gifts, of course, are added to that, but every one of us has gift in some sense. If he has the Holy Spirit there is something, and so with a woman like Anna, she spoke of Him to all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. Even a sister could do that.
F.W. Doing the work of an evangelist, even though not having the gift of one?
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. I was wondering whether the principle "if the readiness be there, a man is accepted according to what he may have", might apply in such a case.
{161}
J.T. It does indeed.
A.E.D. And the word, "Be urgent in season and out of season"?
J.T. There is another one that fits in. How many evidences we have of sisters and others who cannot be said to have gift in this specific case, but yet they have been used in blessing to others. I know of many.
D.J.M. The little maid is an example.
J.T. Very good. She was moved, she was impressed, she was feeling the thing, which would be the point. "Oh, would that my lord were before the prophet that is in Samaria!". The exclamation shows that she is feeling about the thing.
W.S.S. There is hardly a suggestion of gift in this first chapter, and yet it says, "The word of the Lord sounded out from you".
J.T. That is what I was thinking. The idea of sounding out is not exactly preaching.
A.C.S.P. Is your thought that as current local conditions are dealt with in ourselves, and amongst the saints, it would make for power in testimony to men?
J.T. Undoubtedly. The neighbours will notice it, because things begin locally. Whatever begins with God begins locally somewhere. It is a question of what the labourers are, what is there. And so it is a question therefore of the brothers and sisters in the place, and even the children are often a testimony; those going to school are often a testimony.
P.H.H. Would serving the living and true God include the service of the glad tidings in a general way? I was thinking of Paul's remark in Romans, God, "whom I serve in my spirit in the glad tidings of his Son".
J.T. He served in his spirit; very good.
P.H.H. So that the words, "How ye turned to God from idols to serve a living and true God, and
{162}
to await his Son from the heavens", would give a complete picture of the results in that place.
J.T. Very good, I would say, specially the thought of a man serving in his spirit; there is, for instance, Paul in the ship, and his extraordinary experience on the voyage to Malta, what he said, not his preaching, but what he said, what he was. He became the master of the ship, you might say. He acquired such influence. What an influence he asserted! It was a question of the government of God, but the position in the government of God becomes an occasion of testimony.
E.T. You drew attention to the word 'place' in verse 8. Would you say something additional in relation to that, bearing upon this city with its many meetings.
J.T. Well, the address to the Corinthians reads, "With all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours", showing that it is a local idea. Things begin locally. God's interventions begin somewhere, and it is a question of the place being affected, and then its yield in what is of God. Therefore the idea of place is of extreme importance, and you have to go over a country like this to understand what is in a place, the little meetings here and there; some of them are very small, I know, as indeed in every country. Well, what are the facts? In order to gather up the enrichment that God has, we have to take account of whatever there may be, what there is in any given place.
Ques. It says of the Lord that He prayed in a certain place (@Luke 11: 1). That place would have been blessed in relation to His prayer, would you say?
J.T. Quite so. Undoubtedly He had in mind what preceded it and that is what Martha was, in chapter 10. She was a difficult woman at the time. She complained about the Lord Himself and no doubt that
{163}
ought to be considered as entering into this matter of the Lord praying in a certain place. No doubt He would say, 'I ought to pray where Martha is'. But then John would say that there is some result, because he makes more of Martha than Luke does, which is remarkable.
W.S.S. The faith of the Thessalonians had gone abroad to other places. Does that suggest the importance of the local position at any place as affecting other places? The way we are moving in our own locality has a bearing upon other localities.
J.T. Quite so. You have gone afield now yourself, and others of us have; it is a question of what we are doing where we have come from, and what we can do now where we are.
W.S.S. I was thinking of the Thessalonians as being helped at the beginning to understand that their position was not merely local, but had a bearing on what was universal.
J.T. Very good. So that our testimony locally is to be known, and then as we go abroad, it is a question of doing something there.
{164}
THE TESTIMONY OF GRACE AND JUDGMENT (2)
@1 Thessalonians 2: 1 - 20
J.T. It is thought that we might well devote our time to this chapter in view of the remarkable affection shown by the apostle for the Thessalonians which it discloses. We have already alluded to the high level of the first chapter: "Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus to the assembly of Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ". There can be no doubt that the apostle intended to set a standard for us, for all the saints, in all times, as to the seemly relations between those ministered to and those who minister. Then there are the allusions to his own sufferings in Philippi and the effect of those sufferings on himself. "Having suffered before and been insulted, even as ye know, in Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak unto you the glad tidings of God with much earnest striving". That is a word not to be overlooked, *earnest striving* in the apostle's soul as speaking to them.
P.L. Did he, like Jacob as prevailing with God, now prevail with the saints?
J.T. In the section alluded to, Jacob said to Esau that the young cattle would die if they were overdriven one day, which is a tender allusion to youthful affections and weakness, so that we are to be patient with the saints and not strain them.
A.J.G. Does the allusion to "the assembly of Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ" imply that they had a special place in the tender affections of the Father and of the Lord?
J.T. I thought that. The word in @Revelation 22: 17 that we have already alluded to says, "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". What a level was reached in the work of the Spirit in the saints viewed
{165}
as the bride! the nearness with which she could speak, the nearness to divine Persons. The Spirit and the bride, the Spirit speaking with the bride and the bride speaking with the Spirit show the level to which the work of God brings the assembly; that is to such nearness to divine Persons.
A.J.G. Do you mean that Paul was near to divine Persons here in his affections for the saints and that in his ministry he would bring that about in the saints?
J.T. That is just what I thought. It is a question of tenderness of feeling, and affection in the ministers, as to those to whom they minister.
P.L. "I drew them with bands of a man, with cords of love; and I was to them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and I gently caused them to eat", @Hosea 11: 4.
J.T. And He said in that chapter in Hosea, "And I it was that taught Ephraim to walk". There is an allusion to a little child being led along by his parent or parents into boyhood or manhood. No doubt the wider allusion would be to the order of the tribes, the order of march of the tribes, and the tenderness of Jehovah in leading them forward in the wilderness.
D.J.M. Did the tribulations of the Thessalonians, the manner in which they suffered, endear them to divine Persons (@1 Thessalonians 1: 6)?
J.T. I am sure that is the truth and shows how the Father and the Son and the Spirit enter into *our* sufferings, however small or great.
P.H.H. Would the ark going before them according to @Numbers 10, taking the brunt of the opposition, illustrate this?
J.T. Yes. That was much better than the proposal of Moses to make Hobab their guide in the wilderness. That was not to be compared with the ark going before them in the three days¬ journey,
{166}
which suggested the tenderness of Jehovah in leading them through the wilderness, not only teaching them to walk, and the feelings that were in keeping with it.
Ques. Do you see those feelings also in that God did not take them by a short way lest they should see war early and be discouraged?
J.T. That is in exact keeping with what we have been saying; it was lest they should be discouraged by seeing war.
Ques. Would the authority suggested in the reference to Christ's apostles be balanced by what Paul says, "But have been gentle in the midst of you, as a nurse would cherish her own children. Thus, yearning over you"? Does that suggest the affection that was in evidence in his service?
J.T. That was one of the thoughts that were in one's mind; "a nurse ... her own children", and then there is a further allusion in the chapter to a father his own children. "As ye know how, as a father his own children, we used to exhort each one of you, and comfort and testify, that ye should walk worthy of God, who calls you to his own kingdom and glory" (verse 11). One was struck with each one being spoken of as the object of the apostle's care, not simply as a flock, but each one, which would be in entire keeping with Jacob's suggesting to Esau that the young cattle should not be unduly strained in taking the journey that he proposed.
H.W. Are these divine feelings coming out in the ministry with the intention of securing subjective results in the way of formation?
J.T. That is what I was thinking, that the minister is to take the pattern that the apostle furnishes, because he is the leader really; the Lord intended him to be the minister of the assembly, bringing the saints on to the level of heavenly relations -- what they will be, what will be expressed in the assembly unitedly in the coming day. It is the training time
{167}
now, the nursing time, during which we are being brought up in the tender affections flowing from divine Persons.
H.W. Is this part of the processing that you have spoken of in another place, having in view the formation of bridal features and feminine affections?
J.T. Just so.
P.H.H. Jehovah said to Moses about the people, "Carry them in thy bosom, as the nursing-father beareth the suckling, unto the land which thou didst swear unto their fathers", @Numbers 11: 12. Would that combine these two thoughts of the tender care in service, and then the high level of the objective in the land?
J.T. Which would fit in with the peculiar allusion to espying the land as it were unexpectedly, and deciding that it would be fit for Israel. Jehovah said He espied it for them and designed that they should have it (@Ezekiel 20: 5, 6). So that the state of things in Canaan has to be kept in mind, what God has in mind for us, "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him". But then they are revealed, "even the depths of God", so that the saints are thoroughly with God, the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, in all this, and in view of our eternal abode.
Ques. Is it remarkable that the quotation made from @Numbers 11 arose through the murmurings that were present? Do you think the tests of the way are to bring out the reserves that God has in affection in the ministers?
J.T. Quite so. It is like Paul's allusion, in the remarkable account of his labours, in @2 Corinthians 11. "Who is stumbled, and I burn not?", he says, showing how, as reflecting the heart of God in regard to the saints, he observed what might happen to them, and was affected by it. All is to bring out
{168}
this great thought of pattern for us in those who serve.
L.P.M. Is this all the unfolding of that which you spoke of this morning as "our entering in"?
J.T. It includes that. That is just what we get at the very beginning of the chapter, "For ye know yourselves, brethren, our entering in which we had to you, that it has not been in vain".
L.P.M. Is that in view of their final going out in the rapture, the apostle entering in in this manner to secure a perfect outgoing?
J.T. I think it is one of the great features of the finish, because there must be a finish to the dispensation. There must be a finish, and the finish of the work is undoubtedly going on, and no doubt this epistle being couched in such tender language is intended to form us, so that in the fourth chapter we have the actual coming of the Lord *for* us, not *to* us, as today when we are in assembly, but *for* us. "The Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven". It is not without significance that this epistle is designed to prepare the saints for this great fact.
P.L. So that in Deuteronomy, on the eve of entering Canaan, so to speak, there is great tenderness of spirit with Moses, his doctrine distilling as the dew: "Thou shalt not boil a kid in its mother's milk", the care of a bird's nest, and so on, all to verse the saints in tender feelings in view of Canaan.
J.T. I think so. It is in keeping with the great characteristic of Deuteronomy, that it is Moses. It is Moses himself. It is not, "Thus saith the Lord", as in Numbers and Leviticus, but Moses himself. That is the character of the book of Deuteronomy, to direct us to the feelings and expressions of Moses himself. So that it is said in chapter 1 that he began to unfold the law. "These are the words which
{169}
Moses spoke", not what he was told to speak, but which Moses spoke. It was himself, the man that had been with them all the time, and would have gone in with them too; he was full of the affections suited to the place. In fact he is allowed to see the land, and to see it as the tribes would inhabit it, as the tribes would be seen in it. So "these are the words which Moses spoke to all Israel on this side the Jordan, in the wilderness, in the plain, opposite to Suph, between Paran and Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth and Dizahab. There are eleven days¬ journey from Horeb by the way of mount Seir to Kadesh-barnea". @Deuteronomy 1: 1, 2. Showing that everything is measured, measured you might say, by a father.
Ques. Does that account for the fact that he was so readily accorded a place of kingship at the end? "He was king in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were gathered together".
J.T. Quite so. It is a question of righteousness, I suppose. For an upright people, it was suitable to have a king like Moses. He had proved his kingly qualities in all that way.
A.E.D. Does that find expression in Paul? "I myself, Paul, entreat you by the meekness and gentleness of the Christ", and very soon after, he refers to a man in Christ.
J.T. "I myself". In speaking of the man in Christ he is lowly enough to say that he did not know whether he was in the body or out of it. We have to think of the mystery entering into that word, but then there are the affections of Paul. You get it, you might say, constantly, especially in the epistle to Philemon. What feelings are expressed there!
Ques. You referred to "each one". Does Paul, when he calls over to him the elders of Ephesus, not only outline the course of things to them but all his feelings as entering into it, as he says, "Wherefore
{170}
watch, remembering that for three years, night and day, I ceased not admonishing each one of you with tears".
J.T. That is good. Especially because that chapter, @Acts 20, begins with love, begins with Paul's embrace, and ends with their embrace of him. And then there is the raising of Eutychus in the middle of the chapter. In fact it is a great love chapter, the very centre or heart of the book of Acts. Hence the suitableness of the embrace, the feelings between himself and the elders, as he departs from them.
Ques. In the list of gifts given by Christ as described in @Ephesians 4, the gifts of shepherds and teachers appear to be combined. Is that exemplified in the apostle in the matter to which you refer?
J.T. Just so, it is one gift. So that the shepherding is undoubtedly the feature of it. Shepherds and teachers. Shepherding is undoubtedly the initial idea, and then the teaching is a stronger thought, but an essential thought, because children, after all, however you shepherd them, have to be taught. Even if it be a school of Tyrannus they have to go, but at the same time shepherding secures everything, and hence the Lord says to Peter, "Shepherd my sheep". There is the feeding, but there is also the shepherding.
H.H. Does all this mean we are being loved into these things?
J.T. Quite so. We are loved into it, but then there is the element of love in us, or it would be very ineffective. The principle of love, I mean to say the basic thought in a person, is the new birth. All that we are speaking of follows that, but the new birth must be there, or there is nothing at all of God. You would say that?
H.H. Yes. The affections of Paul, as of old the affections of Moses to the people of God, all result in response.
{171}
J.T. Therefore the work of God has to be taken account of in its initial idea, in its initial thoughts, and the Old Testament of course helps us in that, because of the place the Spirit has in the new birth. The Lord calls the attention of Nicodemus to the new birth. Apparently he did not develop in it himself, which is often the case, but it was there, it was in him and @John 3 is to bring out the depths of things; that is to say, the love of God; that "God so loved the world". The basis in man is the new birth, and there is a response in the person born again. It is really *born anew*, or entirely afresh, and the whole person is affected. Perhaps that is where the great defect is in the development of the saints, the want of the knowledge of the new birth and of how much God in His Spirit enters into it Himself. It is a question of the Spirit of God.
H.H. It was in that way a very great matter that the Lord took up with Nicodemus, a master of Israel, and yet everything had to be started all over again on a new line.
J.T. "Thou art the teacher of Israel and knowest not these things!". *Knowest not*; and yet undoubtedly the thing was there in himself.
C.F.I. What is involved in the glad tidings of God?
J.T. That would be expressed in the word of God. "Thus, yearning over you, we had found our delight in having imparted to you not only the glad tidings of God, but our own lives also". A remarkable thing, as if the glad tidings of God required such a statement, that Paul's own life was bound up with the Thessalonians. Well, you might say, God Himself is bound up with the Thessalonians, because they are "in God the Father".
C.F.I. They turned to God from idols. Does God become the object thus?
{172}
J.T. Just so. That is what we had this morning: "To serve a living and true God, and to await his Son from the heavens, whom he raised from among the dead, Jesus, our deliverer from the coming wrath". So the Godhead is much stressed in that, as involving our deliverance from the coming wrath.
Ques. Is it noteworthy that whilst Paul pursues such a positive line, he mentions several things that did not mark him. He says, "For our exhortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in guile", and later, "For we have not any time been among you with flattering discourse". Are they, so to speak, landmarks so that we may avoid dangers?
J.T. Yes. I would say negatives involving positives. They involve positives, every one of them.
Ques. In verse 4 he says, "Even as we have been approved of God to have the glad tidings entrusted to us". Does that apply in principle now?
J.T. Well, what is a man, if he has not something entrusted to him? Paul had this greatest thing, you might say, entrusted to him. He speaks in his second letter to Timothy of this trust, that he had committed to the Lord, "to keep for that day the deposit I have entrusted to him".
Rem. He also says, "According to the glad tidings of the glory of the blessed God, with which *I* have been entrusted", @1 Timothy 1: 11.
J.T. We shall never find much in anyone who has not a sense of having a trust, something worth holding. The apostle said he had committed it to the Lord. So that it was in safe keeping, but the responsibility for it was with him.
Rem. I was thinking of God in that way jealously guarding the glad tidings. They are so precious in His sight that the persons to whom they are entrusted must come under His approval.
J.T. Quite so. Trustworthiness would, I suppose, enter into all confidences.
{173}
J.P-sn. Is the work of God seen in evidence in the servant? He spoke of himself, in writing to Timothy, as having been an insolent and overbearing man, but here he is commending the glad tidings in all its fullness in the way he has presented himself to the saints at Thessalonica.
J.T. Just so. He was worthy of the trust; hence he can speak in Colossians also of what was committed to him, and how he completed the word of God. He finished the thing in keeping with the Lord's own way of finishing, and probably part of the weakness of our position is the want of finish, as is suggested in @Psalm 133, "the hem of his garments". There is no doubt we have come to the finish, and all these things that we are seeking to go over together are to lead us into the idea of finishing; God has come to the time of finishing and chapter 4 of this epistle is to show that the Lord Himself is about to come down too. He is coming *Himself* and He is not going to catch up an unfinished assembly. He is going to have a *finished* one, and therefore we have to make up our minds for quick work before the end.
P.H.H. Would the repetition of the glad tidings of God here in this chapter mean that the whole mind of God is really to be before us in the gospel?
J.T. Quite so, and I observed the brethren have a notice outside this hall that the word is preached on Lord's day evenings. The word is, "Proclaim the word", as the apostle said, and it is a most penetrating thought. It is to bring out the depth of the thing, and so Paul said, "Proclaim the word".
R.H.G. With reference to your suggestion as to trustworthiness, have you in mind that it is as we are developed in feelings according to God that we become trustworthy to God?
J.T. Just so. John's gospel I believe is the great part of Scripture that stresses the idea of trustworthiness.
{174}
In chapter 2 it is said, "Jesus himself did not trust himself to them". Though they believed in His signs He did not trust them, because what could be trusted was the new birth, not any mere knowledge, but the new birth. Therefore the word "cannot" is attached to it, "Except any one be born anew he cannot see the kingdom of God". And then he *cannot enter* into it. So it is the new birth and all that follows on it by the Spirit that warrants trustworthiness.
Rem. You mean it is wholly and solely the result of the work of God and our becoming identified with it.
J.T. It is new. It says "born anew". It is throughout. It is a question really of the thoroughness of it, the reliability of it.
H.H. How does eternal life in @John 3 stand in relation to new birth? The Lord goes on to that.
J.T. He goes on to it because of the thoroughness of the basis. It is a question of what is basic and what is reliable. He can speak freely and fully according to His own point of view, "God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal".
Ques. Do you see trustworthiness in a sister in Mary Magdalene who received a communication to take to the disciples? She said that she had seen the Lord, and that He had said these things to her. She does not take the place of teaching. Would you say she is most trustworthy and comely as a vessel?
J.T. I would say that, because she had already indicated her trustworthiness in the way she referred to Him as "Rabboni". One who could speak of Him to Himself from that point of view is trustworthy; that is to say, she has taken on the right Teacher. We not only need right teaching, but we need a right
{175}
*teacher*, we must have a right teacher; it is not a creed, which may be well in itself, but it is the person who teaches that we have to think of. Mary had in her mind that *He* would be *her* teacher, my Teacher. Nicodemus was the teacher of Israel, but what could be based on his teaching? He did not know even the elements of divine teaching.
Ques. Did the Lord express all the tenderness of our chapter when He came to her and said, "Mary"?
J.T. He called her by name. I suppose at first the Lord intended it to touch the depth of her being, so that He called her by name. He had called her, 'Woman', but when He said, 'Mary', that was the word that conveyed what she was really. I believe in the root of that word there is the idea of bitterness, what has been gone through in learning the truth, and coming into contact with Christ.
L.P.M. Would the sufferings of the Thessalonians alluded to in verse 14 of our chapter have some parallel? "For *ye*, brethren, have become imitators of the assemblies of God which are in Judaea in Christ Jesus, for *ye* also have suffered the same things of your own countrymen as also *they* of the Jews".
J.T. It is remarkable, the use of the word "countrymen", and then the terrible result in the Jews, wrath has come upon them to the uttermost. It shows how little can be relied on in the idea of country, according to this world. "Your own countrymen". Their relation is characterised by sufferings, it was causing sufferings, so that national feeling is of little worth, as any one who relies on it will find, even natural as well as national feeling is unreliable.
A.E.D. Would this element of trustworthiness in the Thessalonians work out in scope for the word of God as including whatever may be current at the moment? The previous verse refers to "even as it
{176}
is truly, God's word, which also works in you who believe".
J.T. I think we do well to examine that a little, because it works out in the universal constitution that had been wrought in them. We spoke of it this morning, that they imitated the assemblies in Judaea; they went far afield, showing they were becoming universal in their outlook; the word of God would effect that. It is "God's word, which also works in you who believe. For *ye*, brethren, have become imitators of the assemblies of God which are in Judaea in Christ Jesus; for *ye* also have suffered". This matter of the assemblies being imitated shows that we can imitate what is of God in a distant country; we should not be national in any outlook that we have, thinking that what we have ourselves is all right, whereas it may not be. There may be some distant work that is more right, more useful, and more according to God, so that we do well to examine into the general work of God as to what it may be.
H.W. Does this feature of suffering found amongst the saints provide an attractive feature for the Lord Himself? I was wondering whether we could link it up with the @Song of Songs 5: 1, "I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse; I have gathered my myrrh with my spice". Is there something for the Lord's heart seen in the saints suffering locally for the testimony as suggested in the word myrrh? He gathers His myrrh with His spice.
J.T. No doubt the woman in @Luke 7 would represent that in the way she anointed the Lord with myrrh.
H.J.M. What bearing has the truth of divine judgment on all this? Has it a sanctifying effect?
J.T. I am glad you bring that up, because it was one of the main thoughts in introducing this epistle. What an awful thing divine judgment is! The word
{177}
"wrath" here is used first as to the general feature of it, "Our deliverer from the coming wrath", but now it is applied to the Jews, God's ancient people; for it is said here, in verse 16, that "wrath has come upon them to the uttermost". How terrible it is, that in spite of all that had been shown to them, as we have been speaking of it in Deuteronomy, that God's wrath has been expressed towards them! We see it all around us in all that is happening in Palestine and in Europe generally, how the government of God has pursued them. There is that which can be called wrath in its treatment of them. And yet all Israel shall be saved, so that there is something to work out in our souls as to the word "wrath" in regard to the Jews. No other family on earth is treated this way. God pursues them in His wrath, and yet He pursues them also according to His counsels that all Israel will be saved. It is another feature for us to think of, but the general thought of judgment in this epistle is very striking. And the general thought is attached to the Lord's coming too, because the idea will synchronise in His coming, as we shall see in the second epistle, in verse 5 of chapter 1: "a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, to the end that ye should be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for the sake of which ye also suffer; if at least it is a righteous thing with God to render tribulation to those that trouble you, and to you that are troubled repose with us, at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven, with the angels of his power, in flaming fire taking vengeance on those who know not God, and those who do not obey the glad tidings of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall pay the penalty of everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his might, when he shall have come to be glorified in his saints, and wondered at in all that have believed".
{178}
We can see, I think, a distinction between wrath as applied to the Jews in this chapter, having come upon them to the uttermost, and wrath as applied to christendom. There is no mitigation at all as to the application to christendom, because the book of Revelation shows the totality of the judgment of God coming upon christendom; that is to say, those who have had the glad tidings sent to them; whereas I suppose the wrath that is spoken of here as following the Jew will not be final. All Israel will be saved, for God is true to His counsels, to the promises made to the fathers.
P.L. So that the angel "cried with a strong voice, saying, Great Babylon has fallen, has fallen", @Revelation 18: 2. That is irrevocable.
J.T. "And her smoke goes up to the ages of ages". @Revelation 19: 3. There is no mitigation of it at all. That is the terribleness of the judgment that is to come upon all around us, and so the need of preaching the gospel to men that they might be saved, at least that some might be saved.
P.H.H. Even the judgment as depicted in the book of Revelation in the hands of the Lord, belongs to Him as "The Word of God". I am referring to the name the Lord has in @Revelation 19: "And his name is called The Word of God". Does that mean that we are receiving the revealed mind of God about it?
J.T. I thought so. His name is called "The Word of God". He comes out as the King of kings and Lord of lords, but the Word of God is a most penetrating thought.
P.H.H. Is it your mind that the title of the gospel here, "the glad tidings of God", several times repeated, would cover a good deal of scope so that we have considerable liberty in going over God's thoughts in the gospel? I am enquiring whether in the gospel we should open up the great things of
{179}
God, corresponding to the land, and on the other hand we should open up the judgment of God according to what you have referred to in the Revelation?
J.T. Yes, because judgment is the alternative to the blessing.
H.H. In @Romans 11 it says that all Israel will be saved, but would you say a word as to the apostate side? That does not come into salvation does it?
J.T. Oh, no, it does not. It is a question of what the Jews are as exposed to that judgment. When it says "all Israel" it means the number of the tribes; "our whole twelve tribes serving incessantly day and night", as Paul says. We have to understand that. It is a question of God's purpose, that what He has committed Himself to He will fulfil, but the judgment against the unrepentant Jew will be terrible.
Ques. Do you see the penetrating effect of the word of God the first time it is mentioned in @Genesis 15? "After these things the word of Jehovah came to Abram in a vision". All that follows in that chapter is of very real heart-searching character, and God says the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.
J.T. God is reserving judgment there, holding His hand, as it were. He is holding His hand, because the iniquity of the Amorite was not yet full. I suppose the iniquity of the Amorite will be seen in the apostate Jews.
Rem. It was a very searching time for Abraham when he was spoken to in this way, and he seems to answer with divine instinct, to the searching character of the word.
J.T. Quite so. So that he had to go through a horror, a great darkness. It is a remarkable thing that Abraham the great progenitor of Israel, of the Jews, should have to go through that, and then that the time is given during which it all should happen, four hundred years. Scripture has to be
{180}
carefully compared to make this period to agree. What is stated in @Genesis 15, is, of course, the truth as to the actual years they had to spend in the judgment of God in Egypt. To link with what we have just been saying Abraham himself would be buried in a good old age, he would go to his fathers. The Lord says, "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad". So that we have to see how the working of God according to His counsels works out in Abraham in that chapter. The wickedness of the Amorite had to be fulfilled, but that God would be patient enough to wait for that time, to express what He is in relation to the evil, is remarkable.
Ques. Does Paul in @Romans 9, verses 6, 7, state the truth very concisely with reference to Israel. "Not however as though the word of God had failed; for not all are Israel which are of Israel; nor because they are seed of Abraham are all children". Does that clear up the difficulty that may exist in some minds in regard of all Israel being saved?
J.T. I think it should, because it is a question of actual truth that the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. What He has committed Himself to in regard of Israel, the promises made to the fathers, stands. What may happen to some who are of Israel is another matter, but there is great discrimination in regard to God's dealings with Israel, discrimination that is not found in regard of the gentiles.
R.R.T. As to this matter of wrath, it says in @Romans 1: 18, "There is revealed wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety, and unrighteousness of men ..." How does that stand in relation to what we are speaking of now as to wrath?
J.T. It shows that God is God, and morally what answers to His nature, as we may say, must go through in regard of everybody. The lake of fire is
{181}
the great finality of the whole matter, as to judgment. It is a lake, a limited place, and whosoever is not found written in the book of life is cast into it. The first to be there are the beast and the false prophet, showing that the terrible judgment of God is not to be stayed. He may be patient, and is patient, but when these two appear according to the second epistle, their doom will be the full expression of God's wrath against human wickedness; with the devil they form a trinity of wickedness against God and Christ.
L.P.M. Is that the bearing of the expression, 'the uttermost'? That the thing is thoroughly done: "Wrath is come upon them to the uttermost".
J.T. Well, "the uttermost" in that quotation refers to the severity of God's present dealings with the Jews, but then the Jews of counsel, those that are in the mind of God to be saved, will be saved. All Israel will be saved, and we must remember that.
Rem. As regards the judgment on Babylon, it says, "God has judged your judgment upon her", but there is the final judgment, the great white throne; the Lord there carries out the judgment of God.
J.T. John says, "I saw ... him that sat on it"; it is a position deliberately taken up. I think the character of the wickedness that is dealt with is in mind too. The worst wickedness, I suppose, from the time of Adam down, will be in Babylon, because her smoke rises up for ever and ever. But then that same wickedness is seen in the man of sin, and in the false prophet; they are cast alive into the lake of fire.
H.H. Do they come before the great white throne for judgment? It is supposed to be final when a man gets there.
J.T. I do not think there will be any judgment needed to be rendered in the case of the beast and
{182}
the false prophet, any more than with Satan, because the evil is manifest. Satan's wickedness is manifest too. Of course there will be, you might say, a judgment, but the actual execution is already there when they are mentioned.
H.H. Might I submit what might possibly be the difference between the judgment of Babylon and the judgment of the great white throne. Is not the fall of Babylon the bringing down of a system of things, but the great white throne is the judgment of individuals.
J.T. That is a just remark. Babylon is a system, wickedness has more scope in a system than in an individual.
A.M. Could we draw a distinction between summary judgment, and what might be called delayed judgment?
J.T. Quite so, it is a question of what God may do. Take for instance the judgment of Korah, Dathan and Abiram. It was instantaneous; the earth swallowed them up. Whereas other judgments are delayed, for instance the mystery of iniquity. That has been working since the apostle wrote his epistle, you might say for eighteen hundred years or more, but yet God is patiently waiting for the full result; and so He waited the iniquity of the Amorites being filled. God waits for that, because He has some peculiar satisfaction, to speak reverently, in the execution of penalty on such wickedness, on the full development of the wickedness we have been speaking of. We are in the midst now of certain things, systematic things, that involve the worst kind of wickedness. God is just delaying the execution of judgment on them until His time comes, because He has a certain satisfaction in dealing with sin, and Satan.
A.E.D. Would not the Pauline light as to the judgment that is to fall upon christendom enter
{183}
into how we regard the movements of persons back to the religious systems, such having been with us, and leaving us? Would it not give us a more sober judgment as to that kind of action?
J.T. Yes, you are going back to that which is apostate, and of course that is what the book of Revelation contemplates.
G.A. Did you not make reference some years ago to the fact that before the first shot, so to speak, is fired in the final battle, the beast and the false prophet would be cast alive into the lake of fire? Does not that delineate the matter for us?
J.T. Well, I think it does, because they are judged by themselves, because of the wickedness that is there. The second epistle shows the character of the wickedness, and how Satan is behind it; it is a trinity of wickedness, answering to and opposed to the divine Trinity. It is Satan's work that God abominates, and He will wait His time to execute judgment against it. When the beast and false prophet come out fully as against Christ, because that is how they are seen -- they lead their armies against Christ, they are taken alive and cast into the lake of fire at once, whereas the others are slain. There are grades of wickedness, and I think God abominates systematic wickedness more than anything else, more than any individual wickedness. These two men, the beast and the false prophet stand related to a system, and the system has the mark of what is current around us, that is to say, the unfair disallowance of a man earning his living because of this system. It is utter unfairness.
G.R.D. In the epistle of Jude, verse 15, reference is made to executing judgment and also convicting. Is it important that conviction should go with it? "The Lord has come amidst his holy myriads to execute judgment against all; and to convict all the ungodly".
{184}
J.T. To execute judgment and to convict, that is a good point. Jude and 2 Peter help greatly in all this as well as this second epistle to the Thessalonians. All these thoughts are developed in those three books, and I believe that the Lord would help us in the matter of judgment, because it is the only alternative to the full blessing of christianity involving the gospel.
Ques. May I ask why in such a chapter as this Paul should mention Satan hindering him?
J.T. Well, that is another thing that comes into this chapter, that there is such a thing as that, as a servant being hindered directly by Satan himself. It is all very well, of course, to say that God allows it, but then Satan does it, and that is a very solemn thing, because he is against God in what he is doing and the servant is to be watchful so that he should not expose himself to the devil's work in that sense. "Satan hindered us", Paul says.
P.L. Was not another servant hindered according to @Daniel 10: 13? "But the prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me one-and-twenty days; and behold, Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me; and I remained there with the kings of Persia".
J.T. That opens up much as to prophetic announcements, especially in Daniel and as to his lot.
A.J.G. Do you mean that Satan's hindering may take the form of governmental restrictions or anything of that sort, which, in Satan's mind, have in view the hindering of the testimony?
J.T. Well I do. Anything that would tend to interfere with any work that the brethren had in mind, things such as happened through the last war, which hindered the special meetings in New Zealand, for instance. There was a great deal of hindering that undoubtedly the war was intended for, and of course, it was a question for those of us who were
{185}
engaged in the Lord's work to be with God about it, so that these hindering things should not happen.
L.P.M. Was the effort to keep Paul from the saints at Thessalonica? Is the effort today to keep the saints from Paul's ministry? Is Satan in that betimes?
J.T. Satan would be in anything like that, but the question is how you can work out that he is against Paul's ministry, as no doubt he is especially, but then we would not have in mind, I am sure, to say that he was not against John's ministry or Peter's ministry, because he is against all. Paul's has a peculiar place, and as the great servant said, 'Let not John's ministry be forgotten in insisting on Paul's', hence we should cleave to Paul, and work it out too, as to its application to us at the present time; that is to say, the assembly being developed fully, the full thought of the assembly, and surely nothing would be more in Satan's mind than to defeat that, but there should be the working out of the assembly according to Paul in the ministry.
A.J.G. So that in Colossians Paul says, "Praying at the same time for us also, that God may open to us a door of the word to speak the mystery of Christ".
J.T. Very good. You can count on God doing that, you mean?
A.J.G. I thought it gave scope to the prayers of the saints, in regard of conditions in the world, that God would open the door for whatever was needed in the way of ministry.
J.T. And I think He is doing it too. Meetings that are being held such as this are indicative that God is doing it for us, because these meetings, and the way the saints are brought together, that is to say, those in whom God has wrought more particularly and who are able to take things in and work them out themselves, and the ministry too, and that they are set free and get help at these meetings, all
{186}
I believe, are a peculiar evidence of God helping us against the devil.
G.A. Would the element of invulnerability appear in that direction, in the Lord's movements in the wilderness, in Matthew's gospel, so that it would be demonstrated that this principle would be here? Satan did hinder Paul; but he did not hinder the Lord, and would that be characteristic that he will not in the will of God hinder the assembly? The gates of hades do not prevail, the invulnerability of the Lord in that way is demonstrated.
J.T. Very good, I would say that. The assembly has peculiar means vested in her of overcoming the devil, and I believe that Babylon is just the answer to that in wickedness; that is to say; the woman in the early part of Revelation and then Babylon itself seen later. The awful wickedness there is over against the truth of the assembly, and God is helping the brethren, I am certain, in these meetings that are being held, to work out the truth of the assembly, so that the Lord would have in mind that it might be finished, because there must be a finish to it.
Ques. Do you see in the spirit of Python and the experiences at Philippi in the jail, two efforts of the enemy to prevent the truth coming into Europe and hence to Australia, that there was nothing in the servants that the enemy could lay hold of, and so the work not only goes on but prospers in those very circumstances?
J.T. Very good. The passage in @Acts 16 is a very fine statement of the position, that in praying, they were praising God with singing, a great triumph, and then they were able to evangelise the jailer.
A.M. Do you think that Satan will not be so concerned about us if we keep to ourselves, but if we come out into the light, we may expect perhaps more definite attacks on the testimony?
{187}
J.T. In trade unions there is a widespread means of attack at any time, but there is resistance to it, and there may be governmental resistance. It is a remarkable thing that the United States has legislated against it quite recently, whereas in Great Britain the opposite is in view. All these things are to be taken notice of, and I believe in this country the thing is all laid ready for the attack, and so there is a great need of the brethren being faithful to the truth, and carrying on, as we are carrying on now. What happened seven or eight years ago before this war was a proposal for a meeting of this kind in New Zealand, but that never took place. Well, that was the enemy undoubtedly, but still the way is open yet for this, and is all to the end that the truth of the assembly might proceed and go through.
Ques. In @Acts 16, verse 6, the apostle and Silas "having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia ... attempted to go to Bithynia, and the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them". How would the apostle know that it was the Holy Spirit or the Spirit of Jesus that was hindering his movements into Asia and Bithynia, and that it was Satan that was hindering his movements into Thessalonica?
J.T. That would be a question of spiritual discernment. A man who was walking in the Spirit, as he was, was almost a personal antagonist of Satan. Paul acted in that way, and if Satan hindered him or the Spirit of God hindered him from going to such and such a place, it would be that he would go to some other place, and that other place was Europe, that is to say Macedonia, leading the way to Europe generally.
P.L. Paul was known in hell as a redoubtable warrior. He was singled out as is evident in @Acts 19: 15: "Paul I am acquainted with".
{188}
THE TESTIMONY OF GRACE AND JUDGMENT (3)
@1 Thessalonians 3: 1 - 13; @1 Thessalonians 4: 1 - 18
J.T. The third chapter continues the record of the apostle's tenderness of affection toward the Thessalonians, and then in chapter four we have the great subject in mind of the Lord's coming for us. Evidently the first epistle has in view our preparation and fitness for our translation, although it may be, and is, a question of comforting the saints as to those who have fallen asleep. Yet now, in view of all that is past, we can see that the coming of the Lord for us and our readiness for it are in the apostle's mind, hence the need of those affections being developed that are so evident in this epistle. There can be no doubt, as we observe what is current generally amongst the saints, that love among the saints is increasing with the corresponding disallowance of all that is contrary to it, all that tends to disunion, because it is obvious that the translation of the assembly must involve its completion in every respect; thus, much must be done and, of course, God can do it, because He can work, according to Scripture, rapidly. Much must be done in view of completion.
Ques. In this thought of completion, how do you view the divided state that exists amongst believers today? Is that to be altered?
J.T. I do not think it will be in a general way, but still things can happen toward the end rapidly; in fact as to judgment itself, according to chapter 5 and the next epistle and other scriptures, the work will be rapid. The protraction of certain events is one thing, and the contraction of them is another, contraction involving what is done rapidly, that is to say, in three and a half years or at the most seven
{189}
years; we are bound to pay attention to the literality of prophecy in that sense, because it is a question of actual time. Regarding the positive side, the question is what can be done, what God can do quickly, especially in view of @1 Corinthians 15: 52, "in the twinkling of an eye". Paul speaks of it as a mystery; he says, "Behold, I tell you a mystery"; that must enter into this short period; whereas in what we are engaged with now, extending over years, one hundred and fifty years maybe, of the revival there has been protraction, a great extension of things, and it is still going on, but still God can do things quickly, and will do them when He decides to act, to finish up, as it says, "Then the end". There is such a thing as that to have in our minds.
Ques. Would there be a distinction between the perfecting of His work with those that are in the testimony as we say, and the final touch that will make the assembly ready to answer to the shout?
J.T. Well, I think the protracted period will continue, therefore the responsibility of each of us to carry on the work, but then what may partake of miracle will come. I believe it is contemplated in this epistle that God will act miraculously. From what we know of Him and the history of the truth and the testimony it is not to be wondered at because the conditions require that there must be some speedy action. The same would be true as to the millennial period when it comes in, dealing with Asia; these chapters deal with Europe, that is to say, with the propagation of christianity and the effect of it, whereas Asia is still held in abeyance. What has been done in India is a small matter as compared with what has to be done, and God will act in a swift way; that is, by an angel flying in mid-heaven.
H.H. In that way the fourth living creature, the flying eagle, would come into line with these thoughts.
{190}
J.T. I would think so. Especially the fact that the eagle is one of the creatures, but it would be speedy work certainly.
A.J.G. Even as regards constructive ministry, is it not significant that with the Lord working mightily through Paul at Ephesus, it only took three years to bring about an assembly which was in the full gain of all the counsel of God?
J.T. That is a good remark, illuminating too. It shows how things can be done even in the protracted period; that is to say, the present period.
Ques. Have we a simple illustration of it in Gideon who was told to take his stand as regards idolatry in his father's house? He took that stand at night, and found God had worked with his father overnight; his father was with him and not against him in the morning.
J.T. Quite so, and then he asked for a miracle; that is to say for the action on the fleece, "And Gideon said to God, If thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as thou hast said, behold, I put a fleece of wool on the threshing-floor; if dew shall be on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the ground, then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as thou hast said. And it was so. And when he rose up early on the morrow, he pressed the fleece together, and wrung dew out of the fleece, a bowl-full of water", @Judges 6: 36 - 38. A *bowl* full. Very small, of course, but it was enough for a sign. Now verses 39, 40, "And Gideon said to God, Let not thine anger be hot against me, and I will speak but this once! Let me prove, I pray thee, but this once with the fleece; let it, I pray thee, be dry upon the fleece only, and upon all the ground let there be dew. And God did so that night, and it was dry upon the fleece only, but on all the ground there was dew". So that in what you are saying, I think it is well to take account of this, what we may call a
{191}
miracle. That is to say, God answering Gideon's prayers so that he might be assured. It is not, indeed, that any one of us would hope for a miracle, or anything in the sense of a vision so that we might be able to tell when the Lord is coming, but at the same time there is enough to indicate that He is coming very soon. This sign is notable as assuring faith as to what will happen.
A.J.G. Perhaps you would say what is the import of this double sign?
J.T. I would think it alludes to Israel and the nations. For the first part of the sign he put a fleece of wool on the threshing-floor and said, "If dew shall be on the fleece only", I would think that the fleece there and the dew on it only, would be a type of God's dealings with Israel throughout. And then, the second sign would be what is universal. That is to say, "Let me prove, I pray thee, but this once with the fleece; let it, I pray thee, be dry upon the fleece only, and upon all the ground let there be dew", "All the ground" would be a universal thought, as compared with the special dealings of God with Israel. We had it yesterday, "All Israel shall be saved", but then it is not going on now. The dew is general, that is, it is universal, but especially on Europe and its outgoings westward, including the British Empire.
Ques. Does it emphasise, too, the sovereignty of God, in that He works where He will at one time and at another place at another time, and that faith lays hold of that?
J.T. Just so. We are tested as to whether we can lay hold of the thoughts of God as indicated in the three sons of Noah. Their names are given and what their names mean, too, are given to us; clearly Japheth is in mind for the assembly, that is, that sphere of the earth out of which the assembly is drawn.
{192}
E.E.S.L. Would these two signs include also a reference to the Lord in humanity, on whom alone the dew rested, and to His death, in order that the dew might be on all around?
J.T. Well, I think that would be good; I would go with that; only the thought of the dew being on the fleece might easily be expanded from Christ Himself to Israel.
P.H.H. Would this thought of the rapid touch of God at the end explain perhaps why some believers seem to pass all their lives without the Spirit, but I suppose, it would be hardly right to say that they are taken away without the Spirit?
J.T. I do not think it would be right to say it, because, whatever we may say, God can do things quickly, and it is the day of the Spirit. We read in @John 7: 39 that "The Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified". That is to say, the effect of Christ's redemption would be worked out in the presence of the Spirit, and that presence is continuous, and so the results are continuing.
D.N.D. I would like to refer to @Philippians 1: 9: "And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in full knowledge and all intelligence, that ye may judge of and approve the things that are more excellent in order that ye may be pure and without offence for Christ's day, being complete as regards the fruit of righteousness".
J.T. Your thought is that that has application to what we have been saying? Being complete as regards the fruit of righteousness. That is, the apostle has the thought of completeness in his ministry amongst the Philippians, and we all know, perhaps, that this statement was very significant that they had had fellowship with him from the first day and had not faltered at all. So that they can be regarded as indicating the work of Paul, how effective it was, how resultful it was, and how he had
{193}
in mind in his prayer for them that they should be complete.
H.J.M. Does the miracle of the dew and the fleece find its answer in the tenth and eleventh chapters of Romans? The apostle exclaims, "O depth of riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable his judgments, and untraceable his ways!"
J.T. That is one of the rich doxologies of Romans and very significantly comes in at the close of the eleventh chapter. The ninth, tenth and eleventh chapters are a great parenthesis in the teaching, to link up the first part of the book dealing with the ministry among the nations, with God's ways as to Israel, and the promises to the fathers, because they were beloved on account of the fathers. It is a question of God's love, and hence the enlargement of the prophetic truth as to Israel, and therefore, as we had it yesterday, "All Israel shall be saved". It is very significant that there is such a doxology as that, that such feelings come out of the heart of God as in that doxology, because it is a question of His love. We cannot say that the nations are loved at all, but it does say the world was loved, "God so loved the world", but that is the world as a system of order, which indicates what God has done in creation. So that it has not just the same personal value as the end of the parenthesis that I am alluding to, because it is a question of the fathers¬ sakes; He loved them for the fathers¬ sakes. "So that all Israel shall be saved"; and then we see the terribleness of the gentile position, because they will be cut off. There will be no remedy at all for the gentiles for there is nothing promised to them afterwards, whereas there *is* something promised to Israel.
H.J.M. But for the moment, the world's reconciliation is the dew on the ground. Is that right?
J.T. Just so, that is the idea.
{194}
L.P.M. Does the reference to Timothy twice in the third chapter provide some link with the present moment amongst the saints, and the finishing touches that Timothy would secure as representing the apostle?
J.T. And he is remaining too. So that what is said of him as to the teaching, runs on to the third generation.
L.P.M. You are referring to the passage which alludes to "the things thou hast heard of me in the presence of many witnesses, these entrust to faithful men, such as shall be competent to instruct others also", @2 Timothy 2: 2?
J.T. Exactly. So that if you take account of what is said, there are clearly three generations, and the ministry is to go on through Timothy's mediatorship. I think the brethren will have all known that, and I think it is well to bring it in here, as to the teaching of Paul, and how it continued and could be handed on to another; the reference to Timothy in this chapter, of course, enters into that.
E.B. So the second epistle to Timothy has come into great prominence just before the close of the present dispensation, @2 Timothy 2 having become a watchword of saints in the revival.
J.T. It has been, you might say, the great text on which we base our position. 2 Timothy has helped us in recent times as to the ground of gathering, and how the work of God is to continue. Instead of assuming that we are in Pentecostal days in the administration of discipline, we can resort to 2 Timothy. The earlier thought had been based on @1 Corinthians 5, that discipline should take the form of putting away, whereas the more recent adjustment implied that we withdraw from iniquity, and that is what we are doing now, and God is helping us, so that the teaching is continuing.
{195}
E.B. Does that bear on the two thoughts of protraction and contraction, that God had made provision in the epistle to Timothy for the extension of the assembly's history for so long, so that now in days of contraction, we still find that God had made adequate provision, even during Paul's day, in his letter to Timothy?
J.T. So that we can withdraw, even if it is only one person, as, for instance, in Estonia, where there was only one brother in the meeting and the others were sisters, and he sinned, and they withdrew from him, so that the ground is clear; and it is clear, however few or many, we can withdraw.
E.G.J. Do the three generations that you mentioned suggest to us God's intervention for us in the present day, Timothy, faithful men, and others also?
J.T. Yes, others also, you are stressing that, and of course, we can take our place among the "others also". We are not pretending much in that, certainly, because there are a good many of us. However able any one of us may be, he takes his place with the others, because there are *many* others that have been taught and are able themselves to teach too.
E.E.S.L. Timothy himself was of the third generation.
J.T. And a young man, too, so that there is good hope for the young men amongst us, and that is, I believe, what the Lord is stressing, as to what He has under His hand.
P.H.H. Along with taking the ground of being among the "others also" are we to be exercised as faithful men? I am thinking, for instance, of meetings like these where the Lord is giving us some truth; should we be exercised to pass it on by way of instruction -- "such as shall be competent to instruct others also"?
J.T. To instruct. The greatest need I know of is teaching, because the brethren are not very well
{196}
taught. I am not criticising anybody, but it is lamentable how poor the teaching is among the brethren here and there.
Ques. Does that agree with the end of Matthew, where the Lord says that His support with His people and His presence will be contingent upon their teaching all the things which He commanded them?
J.T. Just so. The Lord guarantees things for us too in Matthew, and it arises from discipline, from a person who is trespassing against another person and fails to judge himself. It arises from that and the Lord says, "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them", @Matthew 18: 20. He says before that, "If two of you", meaning that He is stressing the assembly. The verse reads, "Again I say to you, that if two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens", so that we can count on the Father's support in that sense in prayer, two of us, and then two or three of us gathered together.
J.S. Is there not great encouragement in view of what you were saying yesterday as to reduction, that an answer is assured to two agreeing.
J.T. Well, it is significant that it is linked up with Matthew, for Matthew, next to 2 Timothy, I think, has been the great standby for the brethren during all these years of the revival. Matthew is the assembly gospel, and as the Lord is not referred to in it as having ascended, it means that He is here with us, so we can confidently carry on, however few, because He is here with us always. It is in view of teaching, so that the teaching has gone on, not only the oral ministry as we have just now at these meetings but the written ministry, and of course, these meetings have taken on this character through note
{197}
taking so that they are written too, but it is primarily a question of oral ministry by a person who is able to serve the saints. The written ministry has assumed, however, very large proportions, especially in the Collected Writings of J. N. Darby, which have circulated throughout the whole christian profession, and have been widely read. God has thus rendered a great testimony in the written ministry, and it is so, in our own case, whether it be spoken or written, spoken first and then written afterwards, which perhaps makes it more valuable as permanently recorded. Those who minister thereby know the actual facts of the situation and how the truth came out, and minister accordingly.
A.J.D. Does the word to Timothy, "Enjoin and teach these things", link on with what you are saying?
J.T. Quite so; enjoin and teach.
Ques. You have often spoken of the urgent need for teaching, and of the lack that you have observed. How do you account for that condition? Could you put your finger on anything?
J.T. Well, I would say, to be simple, and not critical, that I believe the *sisters* are not instructed, and that perhaps the husbands forget that their wives need instruction, and that the sisters leave the teaching side to their husbands, whereas in the beginning women were more instructed, especially as there was prophetic power amongst them. There is not any now that I know of, and I believe the Lord would speak to the husbands, all of us, as to our wives and see to it that they become instructed in the truth, because if they are not instructed the children will not be instructed.
H.W. Do you think the failure might be in a lack of headship?
J.T. That is good, and hence the Lord's supper has acquired such a place amongst us, and effectively
{198}
too, and the thought of headship comes in first. It stands between the general thought of the Lord's supper in the sense of fellowship in chapter 10 and the actual thought of the celebration of it in chapter 11. That is, headship comes in between those two things, and the sisters perhaps are allowed to proceed without the thought of headship being insisted on.
G.A. Do you think in the matter of teaching, that we may have neglected to some extent the distinctive features of the first epistle to Timothy, which so repeatedly alludes to the matter of teaching, the Spirit of God using the words 'teaching' and 'teacher' repeatedly, as though it would prepare us for the second epistle?
J.T. Well, there is great stress laid on sisters in the first epistle, and even on the age at which they should be contributed to financially, that is to say, not below sixty years. Well, these are all matters of great importance which the Spirit of God has written down, and we are to look into them and inquire as to whether our sisters, our wives, and our daughters are kept in our minds for instruction.
A.E.D. Sisters are emphasised in the word in the second epistle, "In thy grandmother Lois, and in thy mother Eunice, and I am persuaded that in thee also".
J.T. Yes; there it is.
E.C.T. Even Apollos, a servant, is helped by Aquila and Priscilla, @Acts 18: 26.
J.T. They are equally mentioned, showing that sisters are capable of advancing, as their husbands are, in some things.
P.H.H. As to what is practical in the way of teaching, would it be diverting you to say a word about the three-day meetings? They are in our minds a good deal, though not so prominently in this part, nor in England as they are in America.
{199}
Would they provide a suitable opportunity to pursue teaching?
J.T. Yes, I think for a course of instruction. Week-end fellowship meetings, that is afternoon and evening, hardly afford a course of instruction, I believe what is said to Timothy, "Instruct others also", involves instruction in a course, and what enters into that is the departmental system inaugurated by David, that things are continued in a course, so that they are fully developed, and I believe the matter of three days is important because it affords time for a course of instruction. You can take up a subject and go through it as we are doing now. "Three days" is a spiritual reference.
G.A. There has been a little reservation of thought in our minds as to whether a three-day occasion embracing the Lord's day constitutes a gathering of such a character properly in the mind of the Lord.
J.T. Well, of course, the first day of the week ought to be made prominent in any matter that we are dealing with, that is the Lord's day. At the same time I think the practice in Great Britain in these larger meetings is right; that is, they usually begin on the Tuesday and end on the Thursday. That is to say, they allow time for prayer, and what we have seen often is significant, that the stress on Paul and Silas in Philippi brings out that prayer precedes praise. I mean the idea of preparation, that prayer is provided for on the Monday, whereas if we begin on Monday, as we have done this time, then we miss the prayers and the exercise that follows on the Lord's day preceding the special meetings. I believe we would do well to go by experience in these matters and what has been inaugurated in Great Britain has stood the test well.
Ques. Would the addition of one day to the normal fellowship meeting be an expression of what
{200}
you have in mind as to the three-day meetings? In some place, I believe in Australia, the brethren may add one day to their normal fellowship meetings and may think of that as corresponding to what we have spoken of as three-day meetings.
J.T. That is to say the Lord's day is included. I would agree to that too; in fact in America we are bound to include the Lord's day in these occasions, because the travelling is so great and the first day of the week of course, coming in after the beginning, affords another day.
Ques. Does not that fit in rather happily, in view of the fact that the sisters and children are present?
J.T. I would think so. But at the same time I would not like to see the abandonment of meetings such as these we are now having in Sydney to which brothers are invited, because we get quality. We get more ability in those who are present, who are, you might say, selected; they are here by choice, which is right enough; it is scriptural, for the idea is conveyed in @Nehemiah 8: 13, as we have often noticed. There was the general thought of all the brethren first, and then on the second day the chief fathers, the priests and the Levites gathered to Ezra to get instruction from the Scriptures.
Rem. It would be well for that distinction to be preserved, in view of the exercise as to three-day meetings becoming more general, that perhaps they would not be quite on the level of occasions such as this.
J.T. Even if they are not on the level of it, it is well for us to understand that there is such an occasion as this, and it might be very special, and we can count on God to make it such, because He is ready to answer us.
Rem. You have distinguished, I think, between the one-day fellowship meeting for which a collection
{201}
is taken up to pay for the food, and the three-day meetings, at which sisters and children are present, which are on a higher level sufficient to warrant assembly giving.
J.T. Well, they are, I understand, on a higher level because in the main the arrangement of these three-day meetings, even although they may include the week-end, is a question of the truth, and the assembly is the pillar and base of the truth. The brethren who arrange for these three-day meetings have in mind the truth in a general and a full way; that is to say, they take it up in a systematic and a general way and God blesses it, whereas that cannot be done at week-end meetings which become more a matter of fellowship and a way of getting together.
R.R.T. As you know, we have been free in America to invite a brother from a longer distance for three-day meetings, than we would for a fellowship meeting. Is that right?
J.T. Well, I know it is a fact at San Francisco and Los Angeles and Vancouver, but if you have a brother nearby to take the meetings there is no reason why he should not take them, because distance does not add to a brother's ability.
E.C.T. Do the three-day meetings give more the thought of dwelling together for that time and in the same place?
J.T. Well, they do, but the main thing that we are leading to now is a question of the truth, and as is stated in Timothy, the teaching.
E.C.T. The truth being developed in that kind of atmosphere, I had in mind.
J.T. The truth is the point, I think, that we should all keep before us, the question of the truth, and Paul says to Timothy that the "assembly is the pillar and base of the truth". No week-end can give
{202}
time enough for a development of any subject such as we are engaged in now. We would want to go through the thing in a systematic and orderly way, and in our houses, of course, we have opportunity to look into it systematically and get the truth in its general bearing. I think all that is of profound importance.
L.P.M. You made a reference some little time ago to the matter of teaching, and I suppose it requires competency on the part of those who serve, to instruct others also; do you feel that the brethren need to pay more attention to the ministry and take it on, so as to disseminate it better?
J.T. Those who are leading or are given the place of leadership should be able to instruct, and I believe they are able, and we should thank God that there are so many of them. At the same time there may be special occasions and I think the Scripture warrants that. What I have referred to in @Nehemiah 8: 13, is an evidence of it.
P.L. In regard to @Nehemiah 8, verse 18 says, "Also day by day, from the first day to the last day, he read in the book of the law of God". Does that fit in with the extended period to which you have referred?
J.T. Especially the thought of the law of God, a very strong expression covering any dispensation, but especially the present one and the one attached to Israel. These are the two main dispensations, though there are others besides, but the law of God would at least cover these two dispensations, because the first dispensation that we have had to do with is Israel, and to them were committed the oracles of God, and what we have in christianity is, the outcome of that; it is a question of the oracles of God. They are now fixed, that is to say each Scripture is divinely inspired and profitable. The
{203}
text is fixed and the brethren know it, and therefore the whole matter comes up when we have sufficient time, such as three days, to look into it.
P.L. Let him speak "as oracles of God", @1 Peter 4: 11.
J.T. Quite so.
J.P. Does the completeness that you referred to require not only the teaching but the recognition on the part of all who are being instructed, of the necessity for hearing and taking in the truth? That is, that it is not optional?
J.T. What we are now dealing with is a great matter, a dispensational matter, and the idea of dispensation in the main is applicable to Israel and christianity, and Israel had the oracles at the beginning -- "to them were entrusted the oracles of God", @Romans 3: 2, and God worked accordingly. Then Christ came in and He was Himself the truth. He said, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life", @John 14: 6. The Spirit of God is also said to be the truth, so that we are now in the second great dispensation and it is really the greatest of all, and the ministry has in mind the oracles of God, and so 1 Corinthians provides for the oracles of God; we have already referred to Romans, that the oracles of God were committed to the Jews, but then that has all come into christianity and hence the oracles of God are vested in the temple of God. It is not a temple built by hands, but a spiritual temple, "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?". That is the principle of these extended meetings; that is to say, it is not a question of fellowship only, but it is the truth, the truth of God, and the assembly is the pillar and base of it, so that the assembly must be in mind in some sense for any three-day meetings that are arranged for us.
{204}
J.P. Does @1 Chronicles 12: 38 - 40 bear that out, the men of war came to make David king, but all Israel were of the same mind, confirming it?
J.T. The mighties too, the mighties were men who could do things, and we are told what they could do. It was not a question of a large number of them, but one or two or three.
A.J.G. Are you stressing that in this matter of teaching it is not only a question of gift, but also of temple light as the saints are together in the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. Only, that gift is important in view of the need of authority, because authority goes with gift.
A.J.G. Hence Timothy was enjoined, "Strive diligently to present thyself approved to God, a workman that has not to be ashamed, cutting in a straight line the word of truth". Is that necessary in view of sound teaching?
J.T. Very good. Another thing that ought to be said is that Timothy had a peculiar place, and so did Titus, perhaps others, but they were the apostle's delegates, and so they could do what none of us can do because they represented apostolic authority. There is no such thing as that now, but it existed then, and that makes a great difference between the early days and the present days; so no individual can administer a rebuke, for instance. It requires the assembly to administer a rebuke now, whereas Paul could tell Timothy that those who sinned should be rebuked before all.
D.J.M. Can the care meeting administer a rebuke?
J.T. No, I do not think so. The care meeting is only a tentative thing, it is not the assembly, it has no authority really, except moral authority, but the assembly has actual authority as committed to her by Christ.
{205}
J.W.H. In view of failure in this matter of actions in care meetings in times past, how do matters stand as regards the present? Is it necessary for matters to be reviewed in the light of this or are they to be left in view of our ignorance in the past?
J.T. As far as I know, what we call the care meeting was not a part of the system of truth or procedure in the apostles¬ time, because there was no need for it, because the apostles were there and their delegates were there, and the assembly too was there. As far as I know the phrase 'care meeting' is modern; but God has honoured it, because it is simply expressing the word care, and that care is taken on by certain brothers. It might be taken on by others, but that is all it is, but God has honoured it, because the brethren are working in the light of His mind and seeking to apply His mind as to facts, but the administration or ultimate action on the facts must be taken by the assembly.
J.W.H. I understand that, but I ask as to past actions in which those gathered together in care have exercised discipline and certain persons have been told not to break bread, and that has never been reviewed by us.
J.T. What scripture was the action based on?
J.W.H. It was on the principle of withdrawal, but it was done by the care meeting instead of by the assembly.
J.T. Well there is an error there. That is all you can say about that.
J.E. The difficulty is as to what means might be taken to rectify these matters? Can any action be taken now to put matters right?
J.T. Well, there is such a thing as @Leviticus 4; if a priest errs, or the assembly errs, it can be rectified, or judged in the sense of it being recalled and pronounced as wrong, if it is shown to be wrong.
{206}
D.J.M. Could you help as to this matter of convening the saints in assembly character for the administration of a rebuke other than according to @1 Corinthians 5. A case may be before us where brethren do not feel we should go as far as withdrawal, but the gravity of the thing should be brought home to the conscience of all.
J.T. Then why should it not be dealt with by the assembly? If it be some error, what was the error that was to be dealt with?
L.P.M. Is there any rebuke that the assembly can administer short of withdrawal in the light of the teaching of @1 Corinthians 5?
J.T. "Whatsoever ye" in @Matthew 18 refers to the assembly. The Lord leaves it with us. @John 20 has to be taken account of in discipline as well as @1 Corinthians 5 and @Matthew 18. @John 20 is the gracious side of the truth, and the Lord before He announced what He had in mind, breathed into the disciples so as to qualify them for anything they might do, and then He leaves things to them to do. He does not tell them what to do. He says, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them", as much as to say heaven endorses what they do; really the Lord had full confidence in what they would do. Well now the question is, whether the case referred to can be dealt with under that head.
A.E.D. Must we not take up each case in its own individual setting and not lay down any rules exactly? Would not the ministry we have had as to priesthood have in mind that there should be ability to discern just where the person is?
J.T. But we are now dealing with procedure, whether a few of the many brethren, the care meeting as it is called, whether there is attached to their action that which the Lord speaks of, "Whose soever sins ye remit". Who are the "ye"?
L.P.M. Would that require the assembly?
{207}
J.T. It does. That is as John presents it. That is the assembly, or those who form it. Mary Magdalene was included in that in a certain sense, because she had to do with the message that the Lord sent to the disciples.
Ques. Is there any suggestion in @John 20 of a midway course between remission and retention?
J.T. I do not think so. The Lord is giving them a blank cheque. "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them". Then the "ye" is the point. Who are they? And that raises the whole question as to what John means, and where the assembly is to be found in John, and it is in the persons who form it, but the idea is there; the Lord is not committing himself to anything less than that idea.
Rem. I think it would be perfectly clear to all that the "ye" involves the assembly, but I think the question would arise in some minds as to whether rebuke was a kind of midway course between those two, between remission and retention.
J.T. The midway course is not the right course.
J.P. You have said that @John 20 has the persons who form the assembly in view; must the assembly be convened for them to act in the way of remitting or retaining?
J.T. I think so. The "ye" would mean that, because we have to read scripture with scripture, and Paul is the great architect of the assembly. He is the great architect, the Lord has constituted him that, and therefore when we come to matters of this kind that John deals with, we cannot ignore what Paul says. If Paul has formally dealt with anything, then we must go by what he says as well as what John says; in fact, let Paul's word have prominence.
J.P. If the course is to be remission, might that be accompanied by a rebuke?
J.T. By whom?
{208}
J.P. By the assembly. It might be that one who would voice the judgment of the assembly might feel that it was the assembly's mind that a rebuke should be administered.
J.T. Well, where is the scripture you are dealing with?
J.P. I am just asking the question, in view of what has been said as to the assembly rebuking.
J.T. Who is the person who administers rebuke?
J.P. Someone must speak on behalf of the saints as convened in conveying a judgment. I was contemplating a case where it was felt that the mind of the assembly was that a rebuke should be administered by the person who voices the judgment of the assembly.
J.T. Well, but is the *assembly* there? The Lord is speaking of the "ye", and the authority He is committing to *them*.
L.P.M. If we remit, it is an unconditional matter, is it not?
J.T. Yes. There could be no remission in such a case except by the assembly, as far as I see. If he does not hear the assembly, that is the point Matthew makes. Matthew is authoritative clearly, but then John has the same teaching in his mind too, and Paul pre-eminently has the same teaching, and the assembly must be in mind; if you are dealing with anything you must not leave it out.
L.P.M. The assembly having come together, it would remit or it would retain, and there is nothing between those two thoughts?
J.T. Nothing between, nothing at all. It is one or the other.
C.F.I. Does true repentance towards God meet the whole position?
J.T. Well, just so. Why should not the whole position be there? It is a question of the dispensation and God has linked Himself up with that. He is
{209}
the Author of it, and He is in it in the Spirit being here, being sent down here, and here all these centuries. So that we are to have reference to Him, what He is doing. Therefore the Lord breathes into them before He told them what to do as to remission and retention.
H.W. Would you say that the Lord Himself in @John 21 gives us a beautiful example of how the action might be done, in His dealing with the seven erring brothers? There was no rebuke on His part whatever as to their action.
J.T. Quite. That is a very beautiful passage, but at the same time the thing is there and the Lord probed Peter, and He recognised what Peter said, that what he was saying was to be relied on; the Lord acknowledged that. So I think the whole matter implies what we are saying now. The Lord did not pass the offence by, but He had His own way of dealing with it. On the other hand *He* was doing that, but now we are dealing with persons delegated by Him to do it; that is to say, the assembly.
Rem. I would like to get clearer the thought in your mind. I gather you are not suggesting that every matter that comes before the care meeting must of necessity go to the assembly. There are matters, I suppose, that come up and are considered as sufficiently clear without further action being taken.
J.T. Quite so. I believe the Lord is in the way things are being done now. What the brethren decide on as before God because of facts, and you are dealing with facts, is *in principle* brought to the assembly, because the announcements are made in the assembly, on the Lord's day.
J.E. Can forgiveness be administered in any sense short of the assembly? Providing repentance is evident to the brothers as in care, might forgiveness be administered there?
{210}
J.T. Well. @Matthew 18 provides for forgiveness of the trespass; that is, the person who is trespassed against forgives. That is, of course, manifest.
H.J.M. Where does the scripture, "Rebuke before all" fit in with this passage?
J.T. That was said to an apostolic delegate directing what should be done in any particular meeting. Suppose Timothy was at Ephesus, or Titus in Greece or at Crete, it would be a question of the assembly, of course, but he would direct what to do.
A.J.G. The scripture reads, "Those that sin convict before all, that the rest also may have fear", @1 Timothy 5: 20. I was wondering whether the point in the passage was not so much giving direction as to a mode of procedure, but rather the moral effect by the way things are done on the conscience of the person concerned, and on all the rest.
J.T. Well, just so. But still there is the idea of convicting. Maybe it is a solemn word but that idea is in it. What we are saying, I am sure, is right, because anything put on the care meeting or on a brother, that belongs to the assembly, should be condemned.
Ques. In regard to your earlier reference to @Leviticus 4, does that come now within the administration as given to us by the apostles?
J.T. Well, there it is. Even the assembly can judge itself for a wrong action as well as a priest.
Ques. My inquiry relates to how far we can bring the assembly in, in that regard, or would it be persons responsible as in the assembly?
J.T. It should be the assembly. The word "assembly" is there. "And if the whole assembly of Israel sin inadvertently, and the thing be hid from the eyes of the congregation, and they do somewhat against any of all the commandments of Jehovah in things which should not be done, and
{211}
are guilty", @Leviticus 4: 13. There it is, what need we say about it? It is a question of the assembly.
Ques. Does that not suggest some overt action, some transgression of what was laid down?
J.T. Well, it might be overt, but it says "inadvertently". The sin is there anyway.
Rem. I was thinking, on reflection, that we may look back over the years and see certain things that indicated a low state or perhaps ignorance of assembly principles without perhaps its amounting to anything quite so definite as an inadvertent sin.
J.T. Well, why do we make these qualifications? I always go by the Scriptures. Whatever it is, certain things have to be done in accordance with that chapter.
Ques. If there is anything to be reviewed it must be something specific, must it not?
J.T. Yes, quite so, but a specific thing is there; it is spoken of in @Leviticus 4.
G.A. Would this scripture provide for the review by a local assembly of a past history in which specific things were done which are recognised now to have been against the Lord and the truth? If it has been, in an individual sense, judged, how is the local company to be cleared entirely of the matter?
J.T. Well, has it been taken up and judged in any sense?
G.A. The teaching was judged and the teacher refused, but the party conditions were not really recognised for a long period; that is now dawning upon the brethren. What is the outlet? Is there any?
J.T. Well, if there is any particular assembly you are alluding to, or meeting which has had part in it in an active way, I would say they were responsible to express their judgment of it, but, is the person in the midst of that assembly?
{212}
G.A. No. He is outside.
J.T. Therefore, it is not a direct responsibility, except in a personal way, that if you had had part in it you would have to judge the thing in your own soul. Of course, you are saying now that the assembly has had part in it too, which is peculiar, but the question now is whether the whole thing has been dealt with anywhere where the person *is*.
A.J.G. If every individual who has had part in it has judged himself would not that clear the assembly?
J.T. I would think so, if the thing is fastened on to him, but then what we are speaking of now as to the ways of God raises a very wide and important question, because the Reformation brought to an end the whole Catholic system, judged it in a certain sense, in Germany or in England, we might say, but there was no attempt to deal with the thing judicially, except in separating, and that is what happened later in the great revival in which we have part, the matter of separation. That is the only way in which the brethren could have got clear of it at that time, and so that goes on now; the only way we can get clear of what may arise amongst us is to separate, unless we can pronounce a judgment before God in a collective sense, and that can be done too.
Rem. I think our brother had in his mind that there may be concern as to the fact that leaven may still be working in the company.
J.T. Well, that is a question of each finding out. It is very hard to say much on that because the person is not there, unless you single out persons that have been specially involved in the matter.
W.S.S. Would the reference in @2 Corinthians 7: 11 be a help in the matter? The apostle says, "Ye have proved yourselves to be pure in the matter".
{213}
J.T. Just so, he uses the word vengeance. At the same time, we have to allow for another thing, that the apostle was tenderly dealing with the Corinthians, but there was a danger of much more pending if he were dealing with the real offenders. He says, "Having in readiness to avenge all disobedience when your obedience shall have been fulfilled", @2 Corinthians 10: 6. That is, at that time the apostle carefully and graciously waited on the Corinthians until their obedience was fulfilled. And that is the point now, whether it is in Sydney or any other place, what the general state of the meeting may be, but he had in readiness to avenge all disobedience. It has to be avenged in the apostolic sense. We have no apostles but we have the assembly. The Spirit of God is with us, and we can do it in the assembly by refusing certain persons.
F.W. Does the action in @2 Thessalonians 3: 6 require the convening of the assembly?
J.T. It is not a question of withdrawal, but of shrinking from him, not regarding him as unfit for fellowship, but regarding him as a brother.
F.W. I refer to it, because the question of rebuking a person may link on with such a position, as has been referred to earlier.
J.T. The question is, *who* does it?
F.W. But that is what we want to be clear about and get an understanding of.
J.T. Well, what I am saying implies that *I question the whole matter of rebuking save in an assembly sense*. Whatever comes up as a critical matter, must make allowance for the assembly; the assembly has some part in it, however remote it may be; we *must* recognise the assembly.
E.L.G. Would you say that in a case of true repentance there is nothing to present to the assembly?
{214}
J.T. Well, if the fire has done its work, what is there to present?
F.W. Have you not emphasised the need for priestly discernment as to whether professed repentance is real before God?
J.T. Quite so.
{215}
THE TESTIMONY OF GRACE AND JUDGMENT (4)
@1 Thessalonians 5: 1 - 28
J.T. This phrase "for the rest", which appears at the beginning of chapter 4 is found elsewhere in the apostle's letters. It would indicate that he had finished, so far, what was in his mind; but his mind was always open to the Spirit, and hence we have the fourth and fifth chapters after this phrase in this epistle, and undoubtedly the thought of the Lord's coming entered into it. It not only entered into this chapter, but was in the apostle's mind from the outset. He says, "For this we say to you in the word of the Lord, that we, the living, who remain to the coming of the Lord, are in no way to anticipate those who have fallen asleep". That is to say, he brings in that section expressly as the word of the Lord, and hence it has that character. Then at the end of chapter 4, "So encourage one another with these words"; and then in chapter 5 he tells us something else; that is to say, what related to the judgment involved in the coming of the Lord. He says, "For ye know perfectly well yourselves, that the day of the Lord so comes as a thief by night". Evidently they had heard something about the judgment, but the Lord's coming for us would seem to be in his mind, and he waited for the word of the Lord as to it, the full confirmatory thought as to it. There is no doubt that he would encourage us as to the idea of a word from the Lord, but we are dealing now with the Scriptures, with inspiration. The apostle makes a difference in @1 Corinthians 7 between what he might say himself and what he received directly by inspiration, so that he has clearly in mind that we should be impressed by what he says here in chapter 4 as to the Lord's coming for us, and all that enters into it as preparatory to that great event.
{216}
E.B.McC. Would you say that verses 12 and 13 of chapter 3 would have that in mind? You have spoken of completion and here we have, "In order to the confirming of your hearts unblamable in holiness before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints".
J.T. It is one of the references to the Lord's coming, a subject which is found prominently in each chapter of this epistle. To confirm that, we have in chapter 1, verse 10, "To await his Son from the heavens, whom he raised from among the dead, Jesus, our deliverer from the coming wrath"; and then in chapter 2, verse 19, "For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of boasting? are not *ye* also before our Lord Jesus at his coming?". That is the complete thought as to their being ready; "for ye are our glory and joy"; and then in the end of chapter 3, verses 12 and 13, "But you, may the Lord make to exceed and abound in love toward one another, and toward all, even as we also towards you, in order to the confirming of your hearts unblamable in holiness before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints". The same thought, that is, the Lord's coming, is in chapter 4 and we have it also in chapter 5 that He comes "as a thief by night". But as we were saying chapter 4 is perhaps the most important of Paul's references to the Lord's coming.
H.H. You would say that the rapture makes the appearing possible. I mean, the Lord necessarily comes for the saints before they can come out with Him.
J.T. He must come first, in order that we should come out with Him. That makes this passage in chapter 4 so important.
Ques. Would "an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God" suggest the irresistibility of divine power to accomplish things
{217}
quickly, so that at the end of the dispensation we are all together as they were at the beginning of the dispensation in the Acts?
J.T. Well, the Lord is aiming at that in the revival that we are in now. Undoubtedly He has in mind that it should go on to the end, hence the strong word to Philadelphia in @Revelation 3: 11, "I come quickly". That letter to Philadelphia has evidently in mind to touch the *assembly*. The words 'thee', and 'thou', and so forth, are to touch the assembly, the remnant as we sometimes say, as if it were the whole assembly, because it is so really in the Lord's mind. The passage referred to is @Revelation 3: 9 - 11: "Behold, I make them of the synagogue of Satan who say that they are Jews, and are not, but lie; behold, I will cause that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet, and shall know that *I* have loved thee. Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, *I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth". Then, "I come quickly, hold fast what thou hast, that no one take thy crown". Then all that follows that down to verse 13 is to emphasise the great features that will follow our translation. That is, "He that overcomes, him will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more at all out"; these are very comforting words for those who have to go out much; "and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven, from my God, and my new name". So that what we have in verses 9 to 11 must precede what we have in @1 Thessalonians 4, the coming of the Lord Himself, as Scripture says, "But we do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them that are fallen asleep, to the end that ye be not grieved even as also the rest who have no
{218}
hope. For if we believe that Jesus has died and has risen again, so also God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep through Jesus. (For this we say to you in the word of the Lord, that *we*, the living, who remain to the coming of the Lord, are in no way to anticipate those who have fallen asleep; for the Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then *we*, the living who remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and thus we shall be always with the Lord. So encourage one another with these words.)" There is no plainer statement as to the Lord's coming than that, and it should be a great comfort to the assembly throughout the dispensation.
J.E. Would you say that every divine intervention is accompanied by *the word of the Lord*, which seems to have a specific bearing upon a certain matter at any given time, in contrast to *the word of God* which seems more general?
J.T. That is something to be noted, I am sure. There is a word in @1 Corinthians 15: 51 which might bear on what we are saying. Paul says, "Behold I tell you a mystery"; he is alluding to the raising of the saints at the Lord's coming.
H.H. In that same chapter we have, "the firstfruits, Christ; then those that are the Christ's at his coming". Would you speak of that as the rapture?
J.T. I would think so. Then the passage in @2 Thessalonians 2: 1, may be compared with that, "Now we beg you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our gathering together to him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, nor troubled ... as that the day of the Lord is present". So that the two epistles speak of the Lord's coming in a very striking way, but this one particularly so.
{219}
P.H.H. Would you say a little more about the expression "in the word of the Lord". Does that refer to the necessity and rightness of the word at that particular time?
J.T. The title Lord would mean that He is here administratively all the time. It is a word that conveys the authority He can apply at any time, but this would be the supreme thought of His action; that is to say, *He* is coming for *His* people.
A.J.G. Would it be right to think that all who have died in faith are raised at this moment of which we have read, yet this epistle presents it particularly from an assembly viewpoint; that is, it is the Lord Himself claiming His assembly for Himself.
J.T. Quite so. It says, "an assembling shout", showing that it is an immediate thought.
Ques. Is there a certain designed tenderness in the use of the name Jesus in verse 14? It is not Lord there.
J.T. I am sure that is right, because it is an affectionate term, the way He is regarded in special affection by His own, 'Lord Jesus' is similar, carrying with it the authority which is spoken of, but 'Jesus' is an affectionate term and really personal. There is a certain tenderness in being put to sleep by Jesus. One has often thought that Stephen would illustrate it. He said, "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit", and having said that, he fell asleep.
Rem. At the time of his greatest affliction he saw Jesus in heaven.
J.T. Quite so.
A.E.D. Would you say a word as to that expression, "Asleep through Jesus", as in contrast to "the dead in Christ"?
J.T. "The dead in Christ shall rise first"; that is a question of the order of things in the government of God, but entering into the administration of the
{220}
Lord Jesus as to His own. It is a more official expression than "asleep through Jesus".
Ques. Are not similar distinctions made in @Romans 8: 11? "But if the Spirit of him that has raised up Jesus from among the dead dwell in you, he that has raised up Christ from among the dead shall quicken your mortal bodies also on account of his Spirit which dwells in you". Does not the thought of the Christ extend towards the saints?
J.T. It does, and as I was saying, the expression there, and here, has reference to what we might call the official side of this great matter of the raising of the dead, that God has everything in order, and it is not simply Jesus, but Christ and the dead.
C.F.I. Who would be covered by the expression "the dead in Christ"?
J.T. I suppose all the sleeping saints; "the firstfruits, Christ; then those that are Christ's at his coming", @1 Corinthians 15: 23.
C.F.I. Would it cover those who died in the Old Testament period back to Adam, those who died in faith?
J.T. I think it would include them all. The dead in Christ, I think, would include all who are His: "Those that are Christ's at his coming". There would have to be a segregation of course, as to them, because there are some who do not form the assembly, and I suppose this is what you had in mind. The Lord will segregate, to use that word conveniently; there will be a segregation of them, but then the Lord will know what to do on that point, even as to those who were lost as spoken of in @Matthew 18: 10, 11; that is, little children; they are all secured. He has given Himself for those who are lost. He came to save that which was lost; that includes, I should think, such as children. That has to be regarded by us, for God in His infinite wisdom and care ensures that all are secured, and the Lord, of
{221}
course, will be the administrator of everything. @John 3: 35 says, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand". So the segregation of all these will be in His hands and they will be taken care of. Those that are mentioned as having died in faith become a peculiar class, and they would begin with Abel, I would think; that is to say those who are spoken of in @Hebrews 11.
F.W. Would there be a distinction between "they that are Christ's", and those who have died in Christ? Does not the latter involve possession of the Spirit?
J.T. I am not prepared to say much as to any distinction between "they that are Christ's" and "the dead in Christ". It was in the mind of God, to place everything in the hands of the Son, and Abraham saw His day. There must be some way in which he acquired a knowledge of Christ, because from the outset faith began to act, before it is mentioned. The Spirit of God mentions it in Hebrews so that we might have it in mind that it was known.
P.L. So that He was the Spirit vitally of all that preceded Him actually. I was thinking of Noah (@1 Peter 3: 18 - 20).
J.T. Quite so, "The Spirit of Christ which was in them", @1 Peter 1: 11.
W.S.S. "And these all, having obtained witness through faith, did not receive the promise, God having foreseen some better thing for us, that they should not be made perfect without us". @Hebrews 11: 39, 40. Does that help?
J.T. It does, because we must allow that Christ was in the mind of God, to become incarnate; "In the roll of the book it is written of me", He said to God. It was in the mind of God, and nothing was done without Him, "by whom also he made the worlds", I think we do well to recognise that the whole matter is in His hand. Then as to the administration
{222}
of these things, the segregation of the different families, all will be in His hands too. It is said that every family is named of the Father, and Christ must come into the administrative position to name things and carry out the thought of God as to them.
R.H.G. Is that why it is said in verse 17, "And thus we shall be always with the Lord". That is Jehovah there, is it not, the "the" is in brackets?
J.T. It would have to be a question of understanding; it may be Jehovah sometimes, but only seldom, but "the Lord" is what is official. God has made Jesus Lord and Christ. That is what He is officially, and refers to administrative authority.
G.R.D. Is it not a matter of His power here, the power of the Lord?
J.T. It is, but then it is more than that, because it is a question of the assembly, and that is the thing that is before us now and should be, too, "For if we believe that Jesus has died and has risen again, so also God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep through Jesus". That is saying that God does it, and it is to bring out God in His supremacy, yet not setting aside the fact that the administration of everything is in the hand of the Lord. @John 3: 35, says, "The Father loves the Son and has given all things to be in his hand", so here it says *God* will bring those with Him. All this would instruct the saints at Thessalonica, that it is a matter of God, that He would bring them with Jesus.
J.E. You have stressed the thought elsewhere that no other family is being formed in this dispensation. Would you include the infants that are taken before reaching the age of responsibility in the formation of the assembly?
J.T. Well, the word *God* has to be provided for in all this. He is the Ruler of the universe, which goes far beyond anything that we know, and so as I said before, Christ came to save that which was lost,
{223}
such as children. He came to seek too as @Luke 19: 10 points out, but when the word 'save' is used and not the word 'seek' as in @Matthew 18: 11, I would say that those who are children are included. We have to leave that with God, and we can well afford to, because God is sovereign, and so much has to be done by Him; that is what is meant, I think, here, "For if we believe that Jesus has died and has risen again, so also God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep through Jesus". They are not to be overlooked, but it is not necessary to speak of others. They are not going to be overlooked. It is a question of God. His supremacy is in mind.
J.E. But you would guard against the thought of another family, would you?
J.T. Yes, at the present time and in the sense of faith. But what I am speaking of now is not a question of faith, but what "the lost" are, and what the rights of God are in His creation; and that will involve what has been existent in the East, for instance in Asia. There has been little or nothing in Asia, but there must be something in a secret way as to God in the myriads there. We can only leave it with God, because "Will not the Judge of all the earth do right?" (@Genesis 18: 25), and in @Hebrews 12, we have come to "God, the judge of all". He is in that system of the things to which we have come.
J.S. Would you make it clear why it says that God will bring with Him? Is 'God' an official title?
J.T. The word 'God' is official. It is a question of what He is in the universe, outside of what we know, because we do not know everything. We do not know much about angels; we do not know much about the age of the earth, or about the time mentioned in the first of Genesis; "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". God did that.
{224}
W.S.S. "The hidden things belong to Jehovah our God; but the revealed ones are ours and our children's for ever", @Deuteronomy 29: 29.
J.T. Yes, that is so.
A.E.D. Is the expression, twice repeated, "*We* the living", intended to focus our minds on what is immediately before the apostle, so that we should not be diverted by matters that are too great for us?
J.T. That is so. It is very wise, too, not to be diverted into things too great for us, and there *are* things too great for us. We are to be concerned only with what is revealed, hence what can we say about the governing of the world? There is much that we know nothing of, but *God* knows; as Paul says, "Whether in the body or out of the body I know not, God knows", @2 Corinthians 12: 3. It is the supremacy of God in knowledge as in all else.
P.L. "He that sitteth upon the circle of the earth", @Isaiah 40: 22.
J.T. Yes, just so.
Ques. Would the expression, "trump of God" suggest the assertion of all the rights of God in Christ?
J.T. I suppose so. The word 'trump' there would be an allusion to movement, as of a camp. It is spoken of in @1 Corinthians 15: 52 as the last trumpet, a well known military allusion. The trump of God would therefore be a question of some great movement; the movement of those who form the assembly, I would say.
P.H.H. There is nothing said here about the living being changed. That is mentioned in Corinthians, but not here.
J.T. If it is mentioned in Corinthians it fits into this, does it not?
P.H.H. I was wondering if you would say a little about it. It says in @1 Corinthians 15: 51, "I tell you a mystery: We shall not all fall asleep, but we shall
{225}
all be changed". Is there a reason why the word, 'changed' is not mentioned here?
J.T. I think it is probably more comprehensive there than what we have here. The word 'change' implies what will be necessary, for in Christ "there is no male and female", @Galatians 3: 28. That must be taken account of, the sovereign action of God to exclude male and female in the resurrection, so "that world and the resurrection" is a great matter in the divine counsels and secrets, and we have to make allowance for the things we do not understand. So @1 Corinthians 15: 50 says that "flesh and blood cannot inherit God's kingdom", and we have to understand that, how that will come about. Much must happen, so that it is no longer a question of flesh and blood in the kingdom of God; there is to be a change, and the change would exclude many things, and bring in just what God has in mind to stand forever.
Rem. The scripture goes on to say, "For this corruptible must needs put on incorruptibility, and this mortal put on immortality".
J.T. Yes. *Must needs*.
L.P.M. Does this confirm what you have already spoken of as to the matter of divine intervention? This is what God does here, and Christ is coming for us. Is that in accord with what you had in mind?
J.T. Yes; it is an intervention. The first word used for God in Scripture is plural.
J.P-sn. Does the matter of hope that you referred to yesterday bear on all this?
J.T. Well, it is found in the second epistle, but it is not found as it is in the first epistle, In the second epistle we have in chapter 2: 16, "But our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and our God and Father, who has loved us, and given us eternal consolation and good hope by grace, encourage your hearts, and establish you in every good work and word". The
{226}
word *hope* there is linked up with the great general thought of God, that hope belongs to the intervention of God for us. He has given us everlasting consolation and good hope by grace. It is a question of what God has done in the gospel, but then that is a question of the general thought of God, as is evident also in the first nine verses of 1 Corinthians. These thoughts have to be worked out, because they were far from being true of the Corinthians in their then state. That is, they were divided amongst themselves and so on, so that we are to learn to read things in the abstract, and where we get them in that sense, they have to be worked out. So here, the idea of hope has to be worked out, because it is a great general thought as brought out in the gospel, but in the first chapter it is there. It reads, "We give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you at our prayers, remembering unceasingly your work of faith, and labour of love, and enduring constancy of hope, of our Lord Jesus Christ, before our God and Father". That is *there* subjectively worked out in actual fact.
Ques. Is there a particular emphasis on the hope of the rapture? Paul has said "that ye be not grieved even as also the rest who have no hope", and he goes on to speak of the Lord's coming for us. Would that be a particular feature of the hope?
J.T. Well, I think it would be, as it says in @1 Timothy 1: 1, "Christ Jesus our hope".
Ques. You were going to say something about the first mention of the name of God, were you not?
J.T. Yes, it is a plural word, and it bears out what we are saying as to the supremacy of God in all these matters. The word in @Genesis 1 is Elohim, the plural of Eloah, 'the Supreme'. It is Deity, God in the absolute, but Elohim is plural. It is a question of power, but power in One who is supreme, and therefore as all these things are mentioned, what
{227}
do we know about them? For instance, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. And the earth was waste and empty". All that is more or less beyond us, only that the word 'empty' is touched on later in the Scriptures. We know little or nothing of the vastness of it and the real condition of what we call the earth during all that long space of time. We have just to say we do not know, but *God* knows. God knows everything.
P.H.H. Do you mean that this word for God being mentioned from the outset, provides in us a worshipful approach to all these matters, including the bringing of the saints with Christ?
J.T. Well, I thought that. God is God, you know, and "God is love". We must remember that all these things that we have mentioned as under His hand are attributable to the fact that He is love, even the lake of fire is attributable to that. God must have things that way; how could it be otherwise? how could wickedness be let loose? A lake suggests restriction, the idea of judgment is restricted.
H.J.M. As to the coming of the Lord being a divine intervention, is it instructive to see that in @1 Corinthians 15 and in the passage we are reading, it is a military intervention and the trumpet is mentioned? Is that to establish our souls in the divine supremacy and the divine triumphs in the face of all the hosts of the enemy?
J.T. Yes, and if there is movement, nothing can interfere with us. When the trumpet is blown it is a question of movement; the last trump is a final one and we shall all be caught up to be with Christ. It is a question of movement and God is over it; it is the trump of God.
J.N.G. In the expression used of the saints being caught up together, is there any reference to the way in which the Lord Jesus went up?
{228}
J.T. The word "caught up" is to be noted here; "together" too is a word that belongs to christianity peculiarly.
E.E.S.L. The man child was caught up (@Revelation 12: 5).
J.T. Quite so, "Caught up to God and to his throne". That is to say, He is under God's hand, and we might say, Where is He? Well, He is with God, He is out of the way, and the devil cannot get near Him any more than he could get near Him when He was here, watched over by Joseph and Mary. He was protected, but now He is caught up to be where God is, so that He is under God's protection.
G.A. Why does the apostle use the word, "The Lord himself"? The word 'Himself' seems an almost characteristic word of the epistle appearing in the verse we are now dealing with, "The Lord himself", and then earlier we noted it, and also later in the second epistle. Would you help us as to that very touching feature?
J.T. The Lord Himself -- that is to bring out the personal side, I think. He could send the Spirit, of course, also the angels, but He comes Himself. It is to emphasise the tender feelings He has and His personal interest in us.
C.H.G. Would you say a word as to the archangel's voice?
J.T. The word 'arch' refers to the graded dignities that are in heaven, which God has a right to order. I suppose the word used is to distinguish certain angels. Gabriel and Michael are distinguished from others. Gabriel is a priestly angel, and Michael, I would say, is a military angel, but they are both distinguished; possibly Satan himself had high rank in the early ages of God's reign and doings. God is entitled to give these ranks.
{229}
H.H. You would say Jesus comes alone, nobody comes with Him.
J.T. The Lord Himself. Quite so; whereas in the next epistle, referring to His appearing, the Lord is said to come "with the angels of his power".
Rem. It says in Jude, verse 9, "But Michael the archangel, when disputing with the devil he reasoned about the body of Moses, did not dare to bring a railing judgment against him, but said, The Lord rebuke thee".
J.T. That would confirm what we are saying and that the devil may have a rank equal to those of Michael or Gabriel, and they recognise that. That is what I think would be meant.
E.B. Would you say a word as to the Father raising the Lord Jesus by His glory, doing that by Himself; and the great power that seems to be involved here. "Archangel's voice and with trump of God" show the great power that will be present.
J.T. We do well to meditate on the first day of the week, what it was to God, and why Christ should have been three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. What it must have been to God that His Son should be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth! What a time of waiting it was for Him, speaking reverently, for the moment to arrive when He should raise Him!
J.W. Is the assembling shout something unique in respect of the Lord?
J.T. The assembling shout would mean that He is thinking of the assembly, so we have to think of the assembly, for the word 'assembly' enters into the shout. We would not know it perhaps if we heard it, if we were not told, but we will hear it, and we will understand that *we* are involved, because we belong to the assembly and that is what is specially in mind here. Other families are involved too, but it is specially the assembly here.
{230}
Rem. So that this ministry would draw out our hearts to Christ personally, rather than our looking forward to the event, as a mere event.
J.T. That is what I should say. It is the Lord's own voice that we shall hear and the Lord's own face that we shall see.
J.P-sn. So that the "Lord himself" would link up with @Ephesians 5: 25 - 27, "... has delivered himself up ... that *he* might present the assembly to himself". It is what is personally for Himself in the assembly that He claims here.
J.T. He presents it to Himself a glorious assembly without spot or wrinkle or any such thing. It is presented to Himself, and is all for Him.
J.E. Does not the Lord in the Supper really acquaint us with the idea of being rallied to Himself? This assembling shout is something which we have become accustomed to in the principle of it.
J.T. Yes, because the word in @Acts 20, "We being assembled", is really the same sort of thing. The idea of assembling is in the Lord's supper, but it will also be in the coming of the Lord for us. It is still the saints and the same persons too.
A.J.G. This moment will be the first time that the whole assembly will be seen intact.
J.T. Very good. What a great thought it is!
R.R.T. Does this word 'assembling' involve the end of the dispensation which is characterised by the saints being scattered abroad, that now we are to be assembled to be always with the Lord.
J.T. Quite so; "He should also gather together into one the children of God who were scattered abroad", @John 11: 52.
W.H.F. In chapter 3 we are told that the apostle sent Timothy to encourage the saints. Is this feature in operation if we encourage one another as in the chapter before us?
{231}
J.T. "So encourage one another with these words". It is the same thought. There is a lot of encouragement in this present meeting, a great deal of encouragement, so it is a question of circulating this encouragement to the brethren elsewhere who have not been here, telling them what we have enjoyed together, and it will encourage them. God is said to be the God of all encouragement.
W.H.F. For what reason is the word "we" emphasised in verses 15 and 17?
J.T. That is very interesting. "That *we*, the living, who remain to the coming of the Lord, are in no way to anticipate those who have fallen asleep". Paul is including himself in what he is saying and of course he is to be included.
Ques. Would that show that it was not a distant hope for Paul?
J.T. Just so, he considered himself as having part in it.
R.H.H. Would you say a word about the transforming of our bodies of humiliation into conformity to His body of glory "according to the working of the power which he has even to subdue all things to himself", @Philippians 3: 21?
J.T. I thought of that when we were touching on @1 Corinthians 15; that is to say, "flesh and blood cannot inherit God's kingdom". We were touching on that just a moment ago, and @Philippians 3 comes into mind as to what is involved in the change; but @1 John 3: 2 says, "What we shall be has not yet been manifested; we know that if it is manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is". That I understand to convey that the Lord is not exactly in the same form and condition in which He was while here in the flesh for the forty days. John has in mind what He will be when He comes, when we shall see Him and shall be like Him, and of course that involves a change in us, that our body
{232}
of humiliation is to be transformed into conformity to Christ's body of glory. That implies that we shall be like Him as He is in His body of glory; there will be no discrepancy at all in that sense between ourselves and the Lord. As to what He was here below, in @Mark 16: 12 it says "he was manifested in another form". We have to see that that was not His body of glory, and yet see that there is mystery connected with the Lord's own form after He rose. But when the final thought comes in in @Philippians 3 we are to be changed by the same "power which he has even to subdue all things to himself". We shall be changed into conformity to His body of glory, which is a matter to stimulate us as to the greatness of the thoughts of God as to us.
F.W. Does all this matter of hope, as to which he says in verse 18, "So encourage one another", and then in verse 11 of chapter 5, "Wherefore encourage one another, and build up each one the other, even as also ye do", have in mind the perfecting of the saints while here before the rapture actually takes place? I am thinking of verse 23 of chapter 5.
J.T. I think that is good because our reading today, all our readings indeed, have in mind to show that the Lord is always thinking of preparation for our translation.
P.L. So that if the assembly's departure is in such a militant setting as this, the love that would finally assure this would support us at the present time in the church militant.
J.T. Quite so. But when we go up with Him, there is no militancy in that at all, although the military thought is there in the last trump undoubtedly. But then as to what we have already said as to the change, it must come; it says, "Must put on immortality" and so forth. Then the condition of the millennial earth will mean that men are in
{233}
flesh and blood here, and there must be change to bring all into accord with the thoughts of God.
Ques. I was going to ask whether when the assembly is translated, we enter upon what is eternal in its character, but there will still be on earth a period to be worked out when corruptibility is still extant; and does not that explain some of the references, in the millennial setting, to the Lord being pierced; "They shall look on me whom they pierced", for instance? (@Zechariah 12: 10).
J.T. Yes, there are statements of that kind in the prophets and elsewhere and they have to be understood accordingly; but as you said, there is much to be done from God's side; God has to do it. The millennial earth will be an earth of men and women in flesh and blood as we are, although there will be a certain change, but the Scripture says, that there will be old men there, and old women, sitting in the streets of Jerusalem, and there will be boys and girls playing in the streets (@Zechariah 8: 4, 5). Well, all that has to be understood, and what God will do. But why should God not have a right to that sort of thing being effected in spite of all the devil would do against Him, and to have that state of things for a thousand years? The period "a thousand years" is undoubtedly significant, it is a long enough time, longer than anybody lived even in antediluvian times.
D.J.M. Does the house which is from heaven correspond? "A house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens", @2 Corinthians 5: 1.
J.T. Well, it is not houses, you notice, it is just a house, it is one general thought. We are looking for that, for our house which is from heaven, that is our hope, although we are still in the flesh. We are liable to die too, for we are in mortal bodies, but even if we die we have this thought, that we have a house which is eternal in the heavens.
{234}
F.W. Why is it that in the midst of all these glorious thoughts Paul introduces this matter of, "When they may say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them"? Why is that terrible state of things brought in here?
J.T. I think it is for the professors of christianity that are not real. That is what is in mind here in the fifth chapter. I am just wondering whether we should not dwell a little longer on this great chapter, the fourth chapter. That is to say, what we have touched on, that it is a matter of change, because it involves the idea of sex, as it says in @Galatians 3: 28, "There is no male and female".
H.O. Is full correspondence with the thoughts of God concerning Christ the thought in this instruction, and our being ready when the Lord comes?
J.T. Just so, we are to be conformed to His body of glory, and that is full correspondence with the divine thought, because the body of glory of Christ is what He is to be eternally.
Ques. Do you think that might be why the Lord Jesus Christ is mentioned in @Philippians 3: 20? We read in the Scripture about being "present with the Lord" and "with Christ", and "asleep through Jesus"; but the apostle speaks of finality in relation to our Lord Jesus Christ, in the transformation of our body into conformity to His own body of glory.
J.T. It shows that He has that power and that we are the subjects of it in that immediate matter. It is the same power by which He subdues all things to Himself.
P.H.H. As to the change of the body, it is spoken of relative to the Lord, but in @2 Corinthians 5: 1, "We have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens". Does that fit in with your thought of God taking command of the whole thing?
{235}
J.T. Just so. It is 'house', the singular, not houses. It is a question of what God will do. He requires that we should have a building from God. Not that the building comes down as you might say, by itself; it is there, eternal in the heavens.
Ques. Does this change to which you have referred involve what is moral, or is it connected with our bodily condition?
J.T. I think it would mean, in the main our bodily condition. It is a physical matter because flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, so that the physical side must be taken up; and I would say that the number of years involved in the millennium, one thousand, are to display what God can do, because He has a certain satisfaction in defeating the devil in anything, but especially in the matter of man. What satisfaction the devil must have had in the terrible moral conditions of humanity, especially in the East, and now in the West! Well, God is showing that He can have a world, that world and the resurrection from among the dead, in which they neither marry nor are given in marriage, for they are equal to angels. That is something I think to be considered.
W.H.F. The Lord Jesus refers in that passage to God as the God of the living.
J.T. He brings that in as showing the stupidity of the Sadducees, that they erred not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God. It is a question of God in all these things, and His power can bring about anything that is needed for the establishment of His counsels. Therefore the Sadducees¬ idea, the question of whose wife she should be in the resurrection, showed they were ignorant of the truth of God, and indeed that word is brought in in @1 Corinthians 15: 34, "Some are ignorant of God", a remarkable phrase. It is an important thing to have it before us that we are not ignorant of God, because we know
{236}
God; but then there are things we do not know as to God. We have to leave those, but in @1 Corinthians 15 what we do know refers to the resurrection particularly.
A.E.D. The passage that has been referred to in @2 Corinthians 5, is followed by the word, "Now he that has wrought us for this very thing is God".
J.T. Just so.
A.J.D. Is it to show that the treasure is to be translated into an eternal setting, the building from God eternal in the heavens? While the treasure is in earthen vessels at the present time, it is going to be in an eternal setting.
J.T. The treasure is the testimony we have for God here, and it is a question of what we can carry on in and keep, in spite of the fact that we are in earthen vessels, meaning that we are fragile; we are in fragile breakable vessels, but still the treasure is kept by the power of God.
C.P.P. What is the thought of glory in connection with the body?
J.T. I suppose it would be in contrast to what Christ was down here. "His visage was so marred more than any man", @Isaiah 52: 14. The mind is directed to Christ and all He is coming into.
W.S.S. Would @John 14 be appropriate? "I am coming again and shall receive you to myself, that where I am ye also may be". You spoke earlier of the verse, "If we believe that Jesus has died and has risen again", and the suggestion was made that that would touch our affections. Jesus is speaking in @John 14, and says, "I am coming again and shall receive you unto myself".
J.T. It is a question of what has been demonstrated as His power. "If we believe that Jesus has died and has risen again", is a question of our faith as to *His power*; that that will go through, and when He comes we shall be raised and changed.
{237}
Rem. In our experience in assembly privilege, as knowing something of the presence of the Lord, we are introduced into what is an eternal setting, not a millennial one.
J.T. Just so. In the service of God you mean?
Rem. I was thinking that sometimes it appears that the acme of our enjoyment seems to stand in relation to the throne and the day of display, whereas the assembly's own peculiar portion with Christ lies in a setting that is beyond that, does it not, and the counsels of God as worked out in the assembly are touched in the power of the Spirit even now?
J.T. Just so, we were speaking about that on Lord's day, that the Lord is seen in the midst of the assemblies in the beginning of Revelation; that is, the assemblies as they are down here, as they are addressed by Him in that book, but in chapter 21 the assembly is seen coming down from God out of heaven prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. That is the great change and difference that we may come into, and it is a question of our being able to come into it and enjoy it in assembly; the Spirit of God would render us capable of that, giving us power to enjoy these great thoughts in the end of Revelation as to the assembly, because she is adorned as a bride, not a bride, but *as* a bride. Before that, in chapter 19, she is seen as the Lamb's wife, but she is clothed with suitable attire, and all these scriptures are to be understood anticipatively, for the Spirit can bring them into the present for our enjoyment.
D.J.M. Is that why it says in @2 Corinthians 5: 5, "Now he that has wrought us for this very thing is God, who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit"?
J.T. Quite so. That chapter is of supreme importance in regard of what we have been saying, especially as to the change, because brethren are
{238}
very vague as to how it will come about, how the millennial conditions shall disappear, that is to say those conditions that are described in the prophets. In connection with that the assembly will not be on the earth, but over it and ruling over it, because the ruling class is anticipated in the sun and the moon. The ruling class comes into the day indicated in @Genesis 1. Well, if we are to be the ruling class then, we are the ruling class morally now, and hence we have supremacy. We may be killed, but still we have supremacy, and the ruling class is to stand. And so, as regards the change anticipated in @1 Corinthians 15, that flesh and blood cannot inherit God's kingdom, some change has to take place. That change must be a matter of God's power, and it will involve that there will be no male and female; well, we have to understand that even already, that we rise to the thought of no male and female, no Greek and no Jew, no natural or national distinctions.
R.R.T. In regard to that matter of no male and female, when the thought was introduced at the beginning in Genesis, it says, "Male and female created he them". Then it is said that they were to multiply and fill the earth, these thoughts being connected with male and female. Does it indicate now that in the state which we are thinking of, such thoughts as filling the earth and multiplying do not have a place, that it will be a scene entirely filled, so that such thoughts as are connected with male and female can have no place?
J.T. That is what I am endeavouring to suggest to the brethren, that the great change is indicated in @1 Corinthians 15, and that a great deal has to be done, but God can do it. God can do things so quickly, in the twinkling of an eye indeed as, it says in that very chapter, so that we are to prepare ourselves for that and to anticipate the thought of
{239}
no male and female, because the new conditions will be Christ and the assembly.
G.W.T. Is the change in @1 Corinthians 15 seen in verse 44, "It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body", and the natural laws do not apply to the spiritual setting?
J.T. They do not. We shall be outside the realm of natural laws.
Ques. Does the expression, "in the twinkling of an eye", refer only to the change, or does it include the ascent?
J.T. I think it might include all that is involved requiring speed, and shows what God can do. We are to learn the thought of God and let it enter into our hearts as to what He is. It says, "God is a spirit", not God *was* a spirit, or *has* a spirit, but "God *is* a spirit"; well, what can we know and say about that? "A spirit has not flesh and bones", the Lord Jesus said, "as ye see me having", but then it says, "God is a spirit", and we have to make way for Him; it requires that we should if we are to enter into His service.
P.H.H. Would it be right to say that the term "female" or "feminine" will apply to the assembly only, as such, in eternity?
J.T. Well, it looks like that. It is a matter on which one would not say too much, but we have the plain statement in Scripture, that in Christ Jesus "there is no male and female". There are many other things said in the same chapter, @Galatians 3. The subject really begins, "But, faith having come, we are no longer under a tutor; for ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus. For ye, as many as have been baptised unto Christ, have put on Christ. There is no Jew nor Greek: there is no bondman nor freeman; there is no male and female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus". Well, that is to be
{240}
understood now; it belongs to the service of God. We are all sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus.
P.H.H. That is, you are taking the suggestion of eternal conditions, and bringing them down now into the service of God in the assembly?
J.T. That is right. You say, bring them down, but we are really being taken up to them. In Ephesians we are raised up into heavenly places, and that is the idea, I believe, of the service of God in its fulness, that we reach God, as God's sons.
{241}
THE TESTIMONY OF GRACE AND JUDGMENT (5)
@1 Thessalonians 5: 1 - 28; @2 Thessalonians 1: 1 - 12
J.T. It is thought well to linger a little on the protracted period, the prophetic period, before touching the final thought, God in judgment, in chapter 2. The suddenness of the judgment is touched on in chapter 5 of the first epistle, where the word is, "But concerning the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that ye should be written to, for ye know perfectly well yourselves, that the day of the Lord so comes as a thief by night". The disciples inquired of the Lord, according to @Acts 1, as to whether the kingdom should be restored to Israel then, but the Lord said that it was not for them to know the times and seasons. Evidently Paul had instructed the Thessalonians as to the general position as to judgment, so that is it carried down here, and in chapter 1 of the second epistle, the suddenness of the judgment being touched on. The Lord told His own at the beginning, that it was not for them to know the times and seasons, but the Father had reserved them in His own power, and that thought is generally prevalent in Scripture, especially in Mark, where the Lord says that no one knows the times alluded to but the Father, not even the Son; it is a remarkable thing that the Lord should be content to accept this. The book of Revelation evidently was held in abeyance in the Father's thoughts until God gave it to Christ, so that He should show to His bondmen what must shortly take place; so that we may have some inkling as to coming events, even before the actual facts of judgment are begun in the ways of God. John is the one that seems to have most to say, especially as to the great white throne.
{242}
A.J.G. Does this thought of the Father reserving the times in His own authority link on at all with the thought of the patience of the Christ?
J.T. I think it would. We can only speak of it according to what it is, really, as inscrutable, the inscrutableness of the Godhead; and the Lord Jesus, the second Person of the Deity, is content to accept what the words imply. And so John was in mind, the Lord reserving him, you might say, for whatever matters might come up in the course of the dispensation; whatever matters might come up. He has one under His hand who has His confidence. And so in @Revelation 1: 9 John says, "I John, your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus, was in the island called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus". His position is clear, that he is thoroughly with the Lord in the whole matter, and with the brethren too, because they are brought into it. "Your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus". The note says, 'The words'tribulation','kingdom','patience'are intimately connected, being brought together under one head by one article in the Greek'. This shows how the apostle's mind was set, and how he brings the saints into it, speaking of them as his fellow-partakers in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus. The seven assemblies are in mind, of course, in this, so that the assembly is brought into the position of judgment, the execution of it, and the Lord shows Himself in this first chapter as in the midst of the lamps. He is not mentioned first, but the lamps are mentioned first, as in verses 12, 13: "And I turned back to see the voice which spoke with me; and having turned, I saw seven golden lamps, and in the midst of the seven lamps one like the Son of man, clothed with a garment"; the lamps are seen first. That is to show
{243}
that the Lord is identified with the seven lamps, the seven assemblies, and they are mentioned first, as if they were of prime importance in the position, even as regards judgment, to have a part in it.
G.A. Would all this that you are now speaking of disclose another intervention with its own divine characteristics?
J.T. It is another, and it evidently came in late in the course of the testimony. Possibly John's gospel came in later, but evidently this book came in late in the disclosures of God, in the course of the testimony, and it is important that we should know and understand how we are brought into them, and especially that the assembly is brought into them, and the Lord is seen in the midst of the lamps.
E.E.S.L. Was the turning round of John necessary because he had his mind set upon the coming kingdom, whereas a period of judgment intervenes?
J.T. Well, he would be occupied with heavenly things, I would think. If we were to consult his gospel, or what might precede it, or even his epistles, we may conclude that he would be occupied with heavenly things, but especially with eternal life and what is substantial in regard to life. And so he is ready to turn round, and he is called back to certain conditions that he would wish to be out of, and would soon be out of, because the Lord would take him; although he is evidently reserved for something, and the Lord is not disclosing what that is. So this book shows how things become disclosed as they are needed. The Lord did not disclose everything at the beginning, although He had spoken of many things that He had in His mind and would be disclosing in due course, the course of the testimony being revealed in the Scriptures. But there is really comparatively little disclosure at the outset.
P.L. With reference to the scripture in 1 Peter, "The time of having the judgment begin from the
{244}
house of God is come; but if first from us, what shall be the end of those who obey not the glad tidings of God?". Is His judicial dealing with the assembly a necessary prelude to God taking up judicial dealings with the earth?
J.T. I think it is God patiently pursuing His ways in Christ; Christ having come, having become incarnate, and as become Man He is ready for the mind of God, at any time. And then in due course we have the apostles, the twelve associated with Him, but the gospels came in late too, relatively, because they were written by such as Matthew, and Mark, and Luke, and John, some of them apostles. They were written by these men, and what they wrote came in comparatively late, but then they were disclosures. God would prepare His people for coming events. He always does that, He gives inklings to us, whether by ministry, or even by current events. He gives inklings to us as to them, and I think that is the character of John's writings here, that the Lord took him up, and calls him a bondman, and then appears to him in this sense. He was in certain conditions and circumstances in the isle called Patmos, for the word of God and for the testimony of Jesus. That is, he was right, he was just where he should be when the event came, and then he is told what to do, he is told what to write, and the order in which it is to be written. So that the matter becomes extremely important, especially as we come near to the end. God would give indications, in ministry especially, as to what may come. And what you have just said would be preparatory. God being merciful, as it is said, "not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance". Yet He gives indications in a preparatory way so that men may know what is coming.
Ques. The Lord said in @Matthew 24: 32, 33, "But learn the parable from the fig-tree: When
{245}
already its branch becomes tender and produces leaves, ye know that the summer is near. Thus also *ye*, when ye see all these things, know that it is near, at the doors". Is that the principle to lay hold of?
J.T. Quite so. He gives them indications beforehand.
C.A.I. Would the word in @Amos 3: 7, confirm that? "But the Lord Jehovah will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets".
J.T. Well, that is a good scripture to bring in here, meaning that the prophets are His special men. There are the law and the prophets, but the prophets are God's special men in the Old Testament, and so He would make them His confidants in view of what He would have to say through them.
L.P.M. Is this protracted period, to which you have alluded, needed for the later unfolding of Paul's ministry?
J.T. Well, the Lord had Paul in His mind, and had him in reserve, because He says of him, "This man is an elect vessel to me", and He tells us what he would do for Him, and what He would show him. So that the time had come for him, and that only illustrates what we have been saying, that there are the preparatory matters, and then the prophetic matters, revelations as to the assembly which were given to Paul. All these came in in due course, but did not come in at once. It would not be easy to point out just the period, the time elapsing, but they did not all come in at once. That is to say, the saints were to learn to be patient, and to go on with what they had, and to make the most of what they had, and not to go beyond what they had. And so the apostles were always a check, and that is what you get in the appointment of deacons. The apostles, that is the twelve, were minded that they could not do everything, they could not do all that was coming
{246}
to them, and so they appointed the deacons. And many other things like that, the saints had to wait and to see what would come about, but had not to go beyond what came about, but had to keep to the truth. And hence "Thus it is written, and thus it behoved the Christ to suffer", and so forth.
G.A. Would the scripture in @Luke 21: 36 bear upon the matter, "Watch therefore, praying at every season, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things which are about to come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man".
J.T. Just so. And then the terrible thing, the suggestion of the Lord as to the days of the Son of man, that they would be like the days of Noah, showing that the judgment is a terrible thing, especially when we think of the whole world at that time being devastated, except eight persons. Eight persons!
J.E.C. In connection with your remark as to John, are we very much cast on the Spirit as to what is coming. It says in @John 16: 13, "But whatsoever he shall hear he shall speak; and he will announce to you what is coming". Would that be prophetic speaking in the assembly by the Spirit?
J.T. I think so. You say prophetic, but then there is more than that thought; that is to say there are the actual disclosures of love by the Father and the Son, and then by the Father *to* the Son. All these result in the formation of the saints in the assembly, because the assembly is the prime thought in mind from the very outset.
A.E.D. Would the passage in @Matthew 24 bear on it, "Who then is the faithful and prudent bondman whom his lord has set over his household, to give them food in season? Blessed is that bondman whom his lord on coming shall find doing thus".
J.T. Well, that shows that every one of us ought to be on the alert now, as to doing that. That we
{247}
may be *found* doing it when the Lord comes, because it is a question of food.
A.E.D. And the thought of "in season" would bear out what you say as to any particular phase in the church's history?
J.T. Quite so. And then as we have been saying, this book of Revelation is so full and precise, because it is given to Christ by God, "which God gave to him, to shew to his bondman". He has given it to Christ for the saints, but then it begins and ends with the assembly. That is, the assembly is apprised of what God is doing, and used in it. So that we must be sure to bring the assembly in in all that we are doing.
P.H.H. Is that the reason why the reader is called blessed. "Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of the prophecy, and keep the things written in it; for the time is near" (verse 3). The judgment being so drastic, one has sometimes wondered at the word 'blessed'. Is it to be understood in the light of the assembly having a place here?
J.T. Clearly, and as indicating a premium, so to speak, on the reading of the Apocalypse. So that it should be thoroughly understood. It should not be regarded in any sense as a sealed book. It is for us. And hence John says in verse 4, "John to the seven assemblies which are in Asia". Notice this, the seven assemblies. They were first in mind, first and last in mind. They must be apprised of everything that is done. If it be a question of creation, it was not so, and even in the economy of the Old Testament it was not so. But as soon as the assembly is formed, it *is* so, and it is for us to understand that it is so, and to keep to it. So that the letters that the Lord sends to the assemblies are to enforce what He has in His mind, that He thinks of the assembly all the time, and it is our very safeguard to let it into
{248}
everything, not only that it should be acquainted with things, but that it is ready to serve in whatever way it may be needed.
Ques. Would the result be a clearer and more definite line of demarcation between the assembly and the world? I wondered whether that line was clearly delineated in the chapter we were considering, the difference between those who are aware of what is about to happen, and those upon whom this sudden destruction comes.
J.T. The Lord really does what was already, intimated. Jehovah would do nothing except He showed it to His servants the prophets. That is the position here really. And so the Lord takes John and gives him instructions as to the order in which it is to be written.
P.H.H. May I ask what you meant by saying the assembly is always ready to serve?
J.T. Well, in principle it is. The letters which the Lord wrote to the assemblies disclosed much failure in them, but in principle it is that there is that here in the Spirit's power which is in accord with heaven; that is a very great thing to have before us, because it is a question of the Spirit, but the Spirit in the assemblies, and then if we connect what we have had already with Matthew, the Lord is here always, so that we are well cared for, guided too, as to what should be done.
D.J.M. Is that the thought of being sons of light, in this chapter?
J.T. Quite so. That is very important to keep before us. John of course would enlarge on that in his gospel.
G.R.D. Would you distinguish between the thought of the disclosures you have been speaking of, and then what Paul says, that the word of God was completed?
{249}
J.T. Well, that would be in a general way -- the word of God -- that is to convey the mind of God. The word of God conveys not only what He says, but His mind, and what He will say. His mind is in the thought of the word, what He may still say. Things were clearly said after the disclosures to Paul, even this book may have been written later, but the word of God was completed in Paul's time. You can hardly say the Scriptures were completed, but the word of God was completed, as he says, "to complete the word of God", @Colossians 1: 25.
J.P. Would the verses in @2 Peter 3 enter into what you have in mind? "All these things then being to be dissolved, what ought ye to be in holy conversation and godliness, waiting for and hastening the coming of the day of God ... ?".
J.T. That is what I would think. We know that Peter had the government of God in mind; his ministry was to the dispersion indeed, meaning that the judgment of God had already begun in that sense, among the Jews; and therefore the application of the judgment of God was more evident, because it immediately took effect in their case, as we have it already in the first epistle here, "Wrath has come upon them to the uttermost". The government of God in the sense of wrath took effect in them very early, when Jerusalem was destroyed by the Roman Emperor Titus, and the Jews scattered. The judgment of God was already being executed, although in a general way the period of grace remains; the period of grace is, of course, the general character of the present dispensation, but then the position of the Jews remains, the Jewish problem which is so prominent today amongst the nations was there. It was there with God and with the apostles; they all had to do with it. And so Paul in closing the matter in @Acts 28 refers to @Isaiah 6, that the judgment of God is already in action as to them.
{250}
E.E.H. Is there any correspondence between the second book of Psalms, where the remnant is cast out, and the truth that we have in mind?
J.T. The Jews were driven out, and they have in mind to return to Jerusalem, which they will do, but at the present time they are driven out. The Spirit of Christ in the Psalms is never unmindful of their position because they will all be saved; that is to say, all in the sense of the whole twelve tribes, as Paul says, "our whole twelve tribes", @Acts 26: 7. God thinks of them. He never lets them out of His mind, I would say, although He hides His face from the house of Jacob just now; at the same time He has them in mind and the Spirit of Christ never forgets them. It touches you because of what is current now, but still, it is the government of God, nevertheless. It is a very solemn thing that for the Jews the idea of wrath took effect long before it took effect in regard to the gentiles. The wrath of God coming on the gentiles is already current, you might say, but it was not at the first, whereas it *was* in regard to the Jews.
P.L. "How shall I give thee over, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee up, Israel? ... My heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not again destroy Ephraim; for I am God, and not man -- the Holy One in the midst of thee: and I will not come in anger". @Hosea 11: 8, 9.
J.T. Very good. Showing how full the Scriptures are of the thought we are considering.
D.J.M. Would you say a word on the feature of the armour in verse 8, the breastplate and the helmet?
J.T. It is an allusion to warfare. We have a clear allusion to it in Ephesians, but here it is mentioned in connection with other things, "Putting on
{251}
the breastplate of faith and love, and as helmet the hope of salvation; because God has not set us for wrath", and so forth. It is a provision for us as warriors in the defence of the truth, that we may not be overcome. The breastplate refers, I suppose, to practical righteousness, and the helmet refers to the truth; that is, the mental side of the position, the minds of the brethren being in use, because we have the mind of Christ, and it is to be used in the promulgation of the truth.
L.P.M. Is the hope of salvation intended to fortify the mind in the conflict?
J.T. Just so.
A.E.D. Alongside this matter of the conflict, would you say why the thought of peace is given such a prominent place in this last chapter, and also in the last chapter of the second epistle. The word "Be in peace", and then "the God of peace", and later "the Lord of peace", and "peace continually".
J.T. I think you might say it is a principle with the Lord Himself as having come into this world, that peace should be indwelling us; and so in @John 20 when He comes in after the message of Mary to His disciples. He says, "Peace be to you". They rejoiced when they saw Him, and then He says it a second time, "Peace be to you". In @John 14 also we have "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled". It would be, I suppose, the Lord's provision, the attitude of His mind towards us in a troubled world, because we are in a troubled world, in every phase of it, and the Lord would garrison our hearts. "The peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus". It enters into these epistles, because it is so essential for the welfare of the saints.
{252}
P.H.H. Would a man like Noah set that out? His name means 'repose', and yet he was living in the midst of such wicked conditions?
J.T. Very good. "This same shall comfort us", said his father, "because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed". That is, Noah would be a comfort to his father in respect of the troubles that arose from the incoming of sin, and on account of God's judgment as regards it. Of course, it goes further than comfort, it is a question of Noah's ministry, because we have to take account of these men that are signalised, as to what their ministry may have been, especially Noah and Enoch.
Ques. Does Paul, too, express a similar spirit to the Ephesians, when he closes with "Peace to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ"?
J.T. Yes. How much you are conscious of the need of it! As has been already remarked as to the Lord, it seems to be a characteristic feature with Him, as to His relations with His people. And then there is the thought of "My peace". It is not simply peace in a general way, but *My peace*, which is a very elevated thought.
J.S. Would "My peace I give unto you" mean that nothing less than that would keep us in His own thoughts during the time we are here, in things we are passing through or may have to pass through? He would have us in the comfort of that.
J.T. Just so. In that comfort.
W.S.S. Reading a remark of Mr. Darby's recently in regard to this passage in @John 14, I notice he said, "My peace" flowed from the unclouded enjoyment of the Father's love and favour, and He would give that to us.
H.B. Would that be illustrated in the Lord being asleep on a pillow amidst the conditions that were around?
{253}
J.T. It seemed as if He wondered at their waking Him up. Why should He be waked up?
J.P-sn. Is that set forth in Solomon, meaning 'peaceful'? He is introduced in @2 Samuel 12; just his birth and his being named are recorded, and then *antichrist* typically comes in in Absalom, but later the reign of peace as found with Solomon is brought in.
J.T. Very good, and so we can understand the place that Solomon had in the mind of heaven; Jehovah sent by the hand of Nathan and called him "Jedidiah" because the Lord loved him. It was a most remarkable thing that Solomon had that place in spite of the subsequent history, but still it was a question of what he was as a type of Christ, as really like Christ in some degree.
J.P-sn. Is this to be enjoyed inwardly among the saints, while there is what marks *antichrist* in the world around, and tribulation for the saints outwardly, but peaceful conditions inwardly?
J.T. Conditions of peace among *ourselves*. Quite so, because we so readily fall out. It was said to Jacob's sons, "See that ye fall not out by the way". We so easily fall out with one another.
Ques. Would you say a word about verses 12 and 13? I was thinking of the need that the ministry that the Lord may give should reach the saints and find them in suitable conditions to receive it. It has been an important issue in this country.
J.T. You have in mind that the brethren should "know those who labour among you, and take the lead among you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to regard them exceedingly in love on account of their work".
Ques. I was thinking of the conditions among the brethren that would provide an open door for the ministry, for "those ... who take the lead
{254}
among you in the Lord". Is it not essential that the brethren should discern where the Lord has placed the lead?
J.T. I think that is a good point to bring before us, especially in view of the many there are who are serving, that they might serve freely, that there might be, as it says, no muzzling of the ox that treads out the corn. Sometimes there are hints and suggestions as to certain ones being prominent, and why should not others be just as prominent or active, and of course it may be true; but those that are alluded to here are specifically mentioned: "know those who labour among you, and take the lead among you in the Lord". Now they are not appointed to take the lead -- there is no such thing. These persons that are alluded to here, are gifted, clearly. The saints are glad to have them apparently, but they are urged about it so that they should be more so. They take the lead, it is not a time of one-man ministry. God's thought is to have twelve; He began with that. The Lord Jesus Himself began with that, He appointed twelve and He was very concerned about having them with Him; when the thought of the Lord's supper was introduced, the twelve were there, as if He needed them to be there. He needed to have them there, so that the truth of the Lord's supper might be guarded and yet be fully unfolded and have its full place in the service of God. They would be twelve trustworthy men that He could lay His hands on, so to speak, and so Matthew and Mark and Luke tell us that they were there, that the twelve were there, and that, I think, opens up a little what you have in mind as to the saints making way for those who are in the lead. It says, "We beg you, brethren, to know those who labour among you, and take the lead among you in the Lord". Notice it is in the Lord. It is not of their own thought, of their own effort, it is in the
{255}
Lord, but they do it, they take the lead. Well, why do they do it? I would say that they do it because they are able to do it. A man does what he is able to do; that is to show what God has effected in him, and therefore it is a question of what a man is, because it is sure to come out. I would say if the Spirit of God is ungrieved, what a man is, what God has made a man, is sure to come out, and we may as well make a way for that. So that in all that has been said, the assembly of the present time is not a one-man thing, it is a community; @Acts 2 shows that it was a community, although the apostles were in the lead, and they were to be hearkened to; but they were a community and everything was there to promote confidence and mutual feeling. Therefore it is not a time of one-man ministry, but at the same time a man is what he is, that is what God has made him, and we may as well accept that.
Ques. Is that the force, too, of the word 'among'? Peter speaks of not lording it over your possessions.
J.T. Just so.
E.B. Does it appear that "Be in peace among yourselves", would be the result of the recognition of those that the Lord has sovereignly capacitated to lead among us?
J.T. That is what is in mind, clearly.
P.H.H. The term "man of God" is used in the two epistles to Timothy. In the first epistle Paul addresses Timothy, "But *thou*, O man of God, flee these things, and pursue righteousness" and so on, and then in the second epistle the Scriptures are divinely inspired "that the man of God may be complete, fully fitted to every good work". Is it your thought that the term 'man of God' would be interwoven into this matter of those that are fitted for ministry, able to take the lead?
{256}
J.T. The idea of a man of God is characteristic of the Bible, the whole Bible, but it has a peculiar place in those two epistles. The term is hardly used in the New Testament, whereas in the Old it is much used, especially in the second book of Kings, the book that treats so much of Elijah and Elisha. They were specially men that could be trusted as to the truth, and they are regarded as men of God. And perhaps something might be said as to Elijah; he was a mysterious sort of person, because he is sometimes represented in John the Baptist, and then he is alluded to in the last chapter of the last book in the Old Testament that he would turn the heart of the fathers to the children. In each and every case there is clearly a reference to what is trustworthy in ministry, men that are trustworthy in ministry. I would think that what you say is a matter that is to be taken to heart, as to whether we are trustworthy, whether in all that we do and in our travels, whether we are really clear in motive and trustworthy, only having in mind to serve the Lord's people, and take care of the Lord's interests. I believe that is what is in mind in the term, 'man of God'.
A.D. Is that why Elisha asked Elijah for a double portion of his spirit? He said "Thou hast asked a hard thing, if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so to thee".
J.T. All that is very instructive as to a younger brother in relation to an older brother that came before him, or had been before him, whether he has respect for him. It is said of Elisha that he poured water on the hands of Elijah; that is to say, he carried forward the true thought of the man of God; he respected his predecessor. He was not waiting for his death; he was ready to make the most of him while he lived, and thank God that is what marks us now; there is a clear readiness to make the most of
{257}
what there is to serve the saints. These verses set it out very fully, it says, "We beg you, brethren, to know those who labour among you, and take the lead among you in the Lord, and admonish you". Perhaps there is a difficulty as to admonition, and the brethren are afraid to carry it through, because of the effect it may have on those they minister to, but then it is a question of courage and faithfulness. That was specially laid upon Joshua who came in after Moses; he was to be strong and very courageous; and so as to the word 'admonish'; if a servant needs to admonish the brethren, why not bear it, because he is thinking of them and their good; he knows better, perhaps, as to the matter in question than they do. And so it goes on, "and to regard them exceedingly in love on account of their work".
J.E. Would these two verses govern us largely in assembly giving, when those who labour in the Lord are before us, firstly the thought of who they are, and what they are, their labour, their courage and the value of their work. Are not all these thoughts intended to stimulate us in assembly giving?
J.T. Well, a brother has to be concerned, keenly concerned, lest he be governed by what he gets. The brethren are very liberal now, more liberal than they used to be. There are special collections for those who serve, and the amounts given are liberal. And it is a great matter to be careful that one makes it clear that he is not serving for what he gets, or what is given to him. So that each brother has to be on his guard not to take up the attitude of expecting, or looking for results in that sense, but content to go on, and God will gradually provide for what he needs.
Ques. Would "in the Lord" in that sense become a governing phrase, both for the servant's own outlook, and the saints as recognising him?
{258}
J.T. Quite so; labour among you, and take the lead "in the Lord".
J.E. It is not a question of any ecclesiastical status that a brother might be given, but it is the virtue of his work and labour that counts.
J.T. That is the point that is made here. It is that the brethren *know* it. They know those who labour, it says; that is, How do you regard them? Here you have brethren coming from different parts of the world. Well, but it has to be challenged as to why they come so far, or whether they need to come so far. I am not saying they should not, only that these are questions that arise as to labourers, and how those who know them, and would be ministered to by them, regard them. We are therefore challenged as to whether it is "in the Lord".
A.E.D. The pure motives of Paul in @Acts 20 should enter into it from the servant's point of view. "I have coveted the silver or gold or clothing of no one. Yourselves know that these hands have ministered to my wants".
J.T. I think it is very encouraging to see that we have in these Pauline epistles so much to govern us. It is as if he were telling us all the time that he is thinking of us as the assembly, and thinking of what is suitable in us, as of the assembly. Hence all these hortative words, and the question is whether we are ready to accept exhortation.
D.J.M. "Ourselves your servants for Jesus¬ sake".
J.T. Quite so.
A.G.L. You have said that leaders are not appointed. Is there a danger in a democratic country like this for the saints to prefer leaders according to their own liking.
J.T. Quite so.
R.R.T. Verse 11 reads, "Wherefore encourage one another, and build up each one the other, even
{259}
as also ye do"; that would represent general conditions among the brethren, and the word in verses 12 and 13 is added to further that. Those who labour and take the lead, and admonish, are in addition to the general encouragement.
J.T. It is all most instructive and encouraging, because they have already been recognised by the apostle as doing the thing. They are doing it, they are not lazy in it, and therefore the apostle is more at liberty to encourage them to keep on doing it.
Ques. Is that why we have the phrase in @Acts 15, "leading men among the brethren"? Not merely that they took on something specific, but they were that characteristically.
J.T. Quite so. I have often thought of that, leading men among the brethren, and they were recognised. Why were they leading? Well, because they were able to do it. The idea of a leader, or a king, is a man that is able. Whatever ability the Lord gives them, it is sure to make itself felt. So, that the brethren do well to pay attention to these exhortations as to those who labour among them.
W.S.S. Would you say that it is important and a great preservative for us to recognise those whom the Lord is employing at any time?
J.T. Yes, because they are so needed, and we have the thought of the Lord thrusting forth labourers into His harvest. They are so needed and hence they should be encouraged.
A.D. Would you say that we see that in Peter and John when they went up to the temple to pray at the ninth hour? Peter said "Silver and gold have I none, but such as I have give I thee".
J.T. Quite so. They had something, that characterises labourers. If they have not something, they will not be thought of. They must have something, and it is well for the brethren to take notice of what
{260}
a man has. A man is accepted according to what he has, whatever it is.
Ques. Is not the value of this character of meeting not only the truth as it is ministered, but the personal contact it affords to those who are serving?
J.T. Just so. The brethren who are here from different parts meet one another and exchange thoughts together, and what is best comes out because the Spirit of God is with us. That is the great thing to be in mind, that we have the Spirit of God with us.
J.E. And is it specially important for those who serve to keep the assembly steadily in mind? Whatever distinctive gift may be given, is given in relation to the assembly.
J.T. The labourer is in it also. If he is a labourer in a true sense he is in it; he is part of the assembly. So that presently he will have to give up the idea of gift, because it will not carry him through eternally. It is a question of what he is, as formed of God in the assembly.
Now as regards the second epistle, there was a thought of seeing how judgment comes into it, but on the other hand how the apostle carries forward his thoughts of affection for them, as it says, "Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus to the assembly of Thessalonians", which again might be noted; it is not simply the assembly in Thessalonica, but the assembly of Thessalonians; that is to say, persons who belong to that town, and hence have some distinctive features which, may be, have to be overcome. So it says "to the assembly of Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace to you, and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ". The full titles of the Lord are striking. Then we were thinking of the way that judgment comes into the passage. It says here, "Because
{261}
your faith increases exceedingly, and the love of each one of you all towards one another abounds; so that we ourselves make our boast in you in the assemblies of God for your endurance and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations, which ye are sustaining"; that shows that they were going through things. Although they were lovable to heaven, they were not lovable to men, and they were suffering from them. Then it goes on to say, "a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, to the end that ye should be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for the sake of which ye also suffer; if at least it is a righteous thing with God to render tribulation to those that trouble you, and to you that are troubled repose with us, at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven, with the angels of his power, in flaming fire taking vengeance on those who know not God, and those who do not obey the glad tidings of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall pay the penalty of everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his might, when he shall have come to be glorified in his saints, and wondered at in all that have believed, (for our testimony to you has been believed,) in that day". I thought that before closing, we might have this word in our minds which will lead on to the second chapter, only that this is a question of the saints, and what is actually occurring, and how it works out in the judgment of God. It is in view of the fact that men have not received the truth, that they have not obeyed the glad tidings, that the judgment is coming. The book of Revelation does not disclose fully the thought of judgment on the East; it is more a question of what is coming on those who profess the truth, and it is terrible to have it brought forward in this way, because it is linked with the position of the saints in the future. "You that are troubled repose
{262}
with us"; they and the apostles will be in repose when these awful judgments will be executed.
Ques. Does it seem that repose from that point of view is not forthcoming until that time?
J.T. That is what I think. It is a question of God's righteous judgment as applied to their circumstances then, because His righteous judgment will be poured out on those who trouble them, showing that God is thinking of the persecutions that we are enduring, whatever they may be.
Rem. The Thessalonians had not lost their lovableness in the midst of persecution and shame and despising. I am referring to the first verse. He speaks to them in the same way and terms as in chapter 1 of the first epistle, as if that remained an abiding position with them in spite of all that had intervened. Would that be right?
J.T. Quite so. And then Paul brings out their association with the labourers -- "us". Whatever they come into the Thessalonians come into. "Repose with us", he says.
H.J.M. Does the book of Revelation show that all God's movements in judgment are to produce witnessing and praising companies, and that has its present reflexive fruits in the assembly?
J.T. So that the actual sufferings we are enduring -- whatever they may be, not many now, we might say in a general way, but there are some -- God is taking notice of them, and they will all come into the matter of these terrible judgments that are announced here, because it is a question of those who have not obeyed the glad tidings of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Ques. Would it leave us with the impression that the way to get through is to adopt a suffering spirit in the acceptance of the matter until the Lord alleviates it?
{263}
J.T. I am sure that is right, to take on a suffering spirit, because it is there, and we are not ignored; heaven is taking account of what is happening.
C.A.I. I was thinking of Peter's word as to Christ having suffered in the flesh; it says "arm yourselves with the same mind".
J.T. Quite so.
{264}
THE TESTIMONY OF GRACE AND JUDGMENT (6)
@2 Thessalonians 2: 1 - 17; @2 Thessalonians 3: 6 - 18
J.T. The coming of the Lord for us is set out in the first epistle to the Thessalonians, we might say specifically; and the appearing of the man of sin, or whatever it may be, is specific here; and so is his formal appearing, or coming. It is thought important at this time, that the truth should be before us, that we might be specific as to it. The book of Revelation, of course, gives us formal and extensive statements as to the beast and the false prophet, and affords us information as to what gives character to the appearing of the man of sin, and leads to finality also as to it, and the book tells us as to the doom of the beast and false prophet, but here he is called the man of sin.
The beginning of chapter 2 refers to the coming of the Lord and our gathering together to Him. The injunction is in the main, in that sense, a sort of formal exhortation or charge to the brethren not to be deceived by anything misleading. Things are apt to be misleading, and the apostle is concerned that there should be nothing to mislead the brethren as to what must intervene, that is to say, the apostasy. "Let not any one deceive you in any manner, because it will not be unless the apostasy have first come, and the man of sin have been revealed, the son of perdition". The apostle is concerned about the day of the Lord.
P.H.H. Would you mind saying a word about the various appellations, the day of Christ, the day of the Lord, and the day of God?
J.T. The "day of Christ" would be His day as doing things for God. He is the One who does things for God, who takes up things and carries them
{265}
through, you might say, to their conclusion. In the beginning of the Acts it says, "All things which Jesus began both to do and to teach", so that what follows refers to christianity, but the day of Christ would be a public matter. This is not necessarily judgment, but whatever might be necessary as characterising His day. There are the days of the Son of man, and such phrases as that, but the day of Christ, I would think, would refer to Him as doing things for God mediatorially. In "the day of the Lord" it is a question of His authority and supremacy.
P.H.H. Peter speaks of the day of God being hastened.
J.T. He also speaks of the day of eternity, does he not?
P.H.H. Yes "To him be glory both now and to the day of eternity", @2 Peter 3: 18.
J.T. The "day of God" would, I suppose, be very much what we have already touched on as to the supremacy of God, when God is to be all in all. All these appellations point to conclusions, to the settling of matters, in certain phases, but all will be settled.
Ques. Paul specifically writes about what may trouble them, saying, "That ye be not soon shaken in mind, nor troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter". Is there any present application of such matters?
J.T. Well, there is a well-known movement in America that says that 1914 was when Christ came, showing that there are such things in the minds of men, which, of course, are folly. Something like twelve years ago there was another day appointed, by one who had once been in touch with those walking in the truth, saying that the Lord would
{266}
come then. But whether there is anything of this kind now, I do not know.
This is peculiar, I do not think there is any reference like this in the epistles anywhere, "Now we beg you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our gathering together to him". This is, of course, real fact, real expectation. But then it goes on, "That ye be not soon shaken in mind, nor troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as if it were by us, as that the day of the Lord is present", I suppose it must have been some pernicious aim to disturb the saints, and mislead them as to the actual coming of the Lord. There have been terrible changes, of course, in the history of christendom, such as the fall of Rome, the French Revolution and all that, and many other such things; and not the least are the recent events in Germany, such as would disturb and distress and divert people from the real truth. It is manifestly in the apostle's mind to make it very clear to the Thessalonians that there is such a thing as the day of the Lord, and that it will come, and that the man of sin will come too. But that is the apostasy. So that there is a guide for the saints as to these matters, because it says, "It will not be unless the apostasy have first come, and the man of sin have been revealed, the son of perdition; who opposes and exalts himself on high against all called God, or object of veneration; so that he himself sits down in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God". The matter is very explicit.
Ques. Is this the opposite to the Lord Himself coming for His own? The man of sin opposes, and exalts *himself*, and he *himself* sits down in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God. One was thinking of the complete opposition to what we cherish in our hearts. The Lord Himself shall come for us.
{267}
J.T. So that the personality that is in mind is clearly indicated here, it is a real person; the man of sin is a real person.
L.P.M. Does the reference to man and son so close together, in "the man of sin" and "the son of perdition", imply satanic opposition to what God is working out?
J.T. Yes. It is to be a real man.
L.P.M. Is the reference to son, the enemy counterfeiting in this person what God had in His mind?
P.L. So that Barabbas is the son of the father.
J.T. Just so.
Rem. The Lord applies this term, son of perdition, to Judas.
J.T. Yes, I was thinking of that. And then there are other instances of the use of the expression 'son', indicating the result from some course of things.
Ques. Is it to remind us that they are not only principles at work, but they are to be personified?
J.T. That is the idea; the word 'son' would be the personification of some evil. The apostle says to the man that he had to do with in @Acts 13, Elymas: "Son of the devil, enemy of all righteousness; wilt thou not cease perverting the right paths of the Lord?", and he is condemned to blindness for a season. He appeared directly to oppose the truth of Paul's ministry, so that we get a clue as to how what the word 'son' stands for may appear. It may mean the personification of some line of thought or principle in opposition to the truth. The son of perdition would, of course, refer to what he is morally as begotten from beneath.
A.E.D. Would it be right to say that the principles are at work now in a variety of ways, and in the man of sin the thing will all have culminated in a pattern set together in that way?
J.T. Yes, and in a man, as known in history, as we say.
{268}
E.B. The two beasts that arise in @Revelation 13 are two distinct persons. Are they both brought together under the description of the man of sin, or are they distinct personalities?
J.T. Well, we also have the word 'antichrist', which is equivalent to the man of sin, only that it is another term, and bears against Christ, whereas here it is more against God, and I suppose the first beast in @Revelation 13 would correspond. He is supported by the second beast which would probably be his active agent or representative, so that we have the two thoughts brought together, the beast and the false prophet. The beast would take character from the devil himself, and indeed there the devil is in mind, because he is behind the whole movement. There is a trinity of evil, and everything here is included in the thought of the man of sin.
E.T. What is the connection between the man of sin and the system called Babylon?
J.T. The latter is a religious thought. It is well to bring it up here, because they are connected in the book of Revelation. Another thing has to be mentioned, and that is, that what is called Babylon is first represented in the assembly of Thyatira. That is to say, it is in the form of a woman but she appears later in a political sense. She has a political aspect, and that too gives us a clue as to the various workings of sin. The woman is undoubtedly in mind, as the religious form of evil, the mystery of evil, and has continued possibly these fifteen or eighteen hundred years, showing how masterful the thing is; it is now working out fully, and there is more or less a check on it in what is current in trade unionism. God is evidently providing a check and perhaps modifying both the elements, to relieve the saints and to make a way for us.
Ques. Would you, therefore, for the encouragement of those who may fear further intimidation,
{269}
distinguish for us between that which restrains in verse 6, and he who restrains in verse 7?
J.T. I think the "he who" is the Holy Spirit; at least it is usually understood to be so, and I believe it is so; and the "that" is probably government, for which we pray rightly. God uses both these elements to relieve His saints.
Ques. At the present time there seems to be a measure of conflict between the religious and the political sides, but I suppose as time goes on they will join forces, when the apostasy is fully come?
J.T. No doubt they will. The religious and the political have already joined forces, because the Romish system has sovereignty politically, in a very small measure, but still, it shows what is in mind. Their popish principles and working are undoubtedly contributory to all this, and in fact are represented in the woman in the book of Revelation; only that at the outset the assembly is involved; the assembly is held responsible by the Lord in His letter to Thyatira. One of the most terrible things that there is, perhaps, is the formation of that system, and yet it carries, you might say, some of the most beautiful truths, but applies them to wickedness, to what is really wicked. But then, the Spirit of God is turning us to the thought under the heading of Babylon in @Revelation 17, and it is in that book that we get the full destruction of the system, and it is an eternal matter: "Her smoke goes up to the ages of ages", @Revelation 19: 3.
P.H.H. Is it significant in this chapter to read about *the* apostasy, *the* man of sin, *the* son of perdition, *the* lawless one? Does that mean that all that is concerned has reached its height?
J.T. And they are known. The article indicates that they are known. There is no effort to hide them.
P.H.H. Not merely a character of things.
{270}
J.T. No, the thing is now worked out in a person, or in persons. The apostasy, of course, is a general thought, a turning away from the truth of christianity, denying the Father and the Son, that is what it is.
A.J.G. Is it not remarkable that God will employ the beast for the final overthrow of Babylon, and then will that, in a way, remove the last obstacle to the full development of apostasy? Babylon retains certain elements of the truth, does it not?
J.T. I think that is good, because we can see how it is antagonistic to bolshevism or communism, and there is a certain protection for us in that, and we may thank God for it, because it is just a check, what we might call restraint as mentioned here. There are two things that have been noticed. "And now ye know", the apostle says in verse 6, "that which restrains, that he should be revealed in his own time", and then there is "he who restrains" in verse 7. There may be the restraint of some other element, but particularly what is in mind, I believe, is the Spirit of God, and of course that would mean what we are occupied in at this present time, where the Spirit of God is operating, that we exert influence abroad, as we leave these meetings, which checks what is of the wicked one.
D.J.M. The Spirit in that way *in* us? "Greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world".
J.T. That is what is meant, I am sure, which is very comforting and assuring as to what we are going on with. God is with us. But, on the other hand, we should be careful that we are not assuming to be anything else, but *of* the assembly.
A.C.S.P. Is it significant that in this epistle, so much is made of "our God", or "God our Father"?
J.T. All that is over against what is in mind, what the devil is doing; and, of course, what is so terrible is that we are right in the midst of what is being done; that is to say, the apostasy is already
{271}
setting in, although we can hardly say that what is called "strong delusion" has begun, but still the apostasy is current, it is going on, and it is finding its support in what is called the system of trade unionism, one of the most extraordinary things that has arisen, affecting the Lord's people very widely.
Rem. So that whilst we cannot speak of the strong delusion in a general sense, it seems to be working out that way governmentally in certain quarters; God having been refused, there seems to be that element there.
J.T. Yes. Trade unionism has become a system employing violence, of wickedness in that sense, systematic wickedness. We may as well face this thing, because we have to do with it. God will be with us in seeking to maintain what is right, and in suffering too, because suffering is involved in it.
E.N.J. Does Gideon help, in having to meet Midian, Amalek, and the children of the east, in relation to the spread of apostasy? I was linking the children of the east with what is spreading over christendom, but it is met by Gideon.
J.T. Very good; met by what we are going on with today, you mean. That is to say, as we adhere to the mind of God, what is according to God. God is with us; and no doubt there is more of the east than many are aware of that has penetrated into the west, but the west is in mind in what we are dealing with, and it is a terrible thing that the pending judgment is towards the west. So the Lord tells us that it should be "as the days of Noe" (@Matthew 24: 37), meaning that it will be similar in extent.
J.P-sn. You spoke of trade unionism. We cannot allow for trade unionism with those that are going on in the light of the assembly.
J.T. Well, that is clear. They are opposites. One is concerned about it, because it is to be met
{272}
with almost everywhere, and modifications of it perhaps, are brought forward, and excuses, but the thing is as plain as possible, as to what it is essentially.
A.E.D. You just referred to the matter of Noah. This morning you said we were to pay attention, not only to Noah, but to his ministry. Had you in mind to say anything more to us as to Noah's ministry?
J.T. Well, he was a preacher of righteousness, which is a very important ministry, and it is the effects of ministry that check all this wickedness that is current, that we are speaking of. There is something that God is using in those who are ministering the truth, and we can, therefore, be emboldened in going on with what we are doing, because it is checking all these things. It is the very thing that is involved in these verses that I read; that is to say, verse 6 -- "And now ye know that which restrains, that he should be revealed in his own time. For the mystery of lawlessness already works; only there is he who restrains" -- the word "restrains" is used in both cases -- "he who restrains now until he be gone". The "until he be gone" clearly indicates the departure of the saints, because the Spirit will go with them, I would judge.
L.P.M. Would you say a word as to the mystery of lawlessness, and its present bearing on all these matters?
J.T. I think it involves what we have said already, the system called Romanism. It is a mysterious system, in that it began early in the truth, in the apostle's ministry, and the Thessalonians had been made acquainted with it; and now the apostle is confirming all that he had said to them; and it is very suggestive that the word 'mystery' is applied, because it is secretive in the sense of priestcraft, monkery, and so forth. They are all secretive, and people are affected by it without understanding it.
{273}
A.J.G. Is it suggested in the parable of the leaven in @Matthew 13, "Which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened"?
J.T. Very good. And another allusion, I would say, is in @Zechariah 5. Two women are mentioned as taking the ephah, and carrying it away to Shinar, and setting it on its own base. "This is Wickedness", it says, and no doubt it is alluding prophetically to what we are speaking of. It has its own base, it is identified with Babylon, with Shinar.
H.W. In @Revelation 17 the name of the woman is "Mystery, great Babylon, the mother of the harlots".
J.T. How the idea of mystery attaches to it is perhaps not so clear; but it is important now, as it is before us, that we should examine it a little; it is timely here, because all these things are around us, and God is looking to us, because He has His own instrumentality; and that instrumentality is the assembly, and it cannot be overcome, as the Lord says, "And hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it". The attack is against the assembly.
E.B. Would sons of light in any degree stand over against this element of mystery, and the darkness of the confessional, and so on?
J.T. Sons of light; you are referring to the previous epistle. It shows that we have the means of resistance in this very fact that believers are sons of light. "But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that the day should overtake you as a thief, for all *ye* are sons of light and sons of day", @1 Thessalonians 5: 4. It corresponds with what we have already remarked as to the word 'son', that sons are said to be the outcome of things such as light and darkness.
Ques. Would Paul's reference to the assembly as "the pillar and base of the truth", suggest that that is our own salvation? As the wickedness has
{274}
its own base, the truth has its own base here in the assembly?
J.T. Quite so, showing what the assembly is, and what God has in it. It is a system really, a divine system maintained by the power of the Spirit of God, but maintained at the same time within certain principles.
L.P.M. And mystery attaching to it?
J.T. Well, quite. It is called definitely *the* mystery.
C.F.I. Is the love of the truth important? Those who come under judgment "have not received the love of the truth that they might be saved".
J.T. That is a thing to be noticed. It comes in later, showing that this chapter is working out the full thought of wickedness, centring in the man of sin; and then that God is sending strong delusion, showing that it is judicial, and that they all might be condemned; and showing that the whole of christendom is involved in this terrible judgment.
C.F.I. Would it suggest that the truth had been made known to them in some sense, and had been refused?
J.T. Exactly. That is just it. The condemnation is that; so it says, referring to the man of sin first, "whose coming is according to the working of Satan in all power and signs and wonders of falsehood, and in all deceit of unrighteousness to them that perish, because they have not received the love of the truth". What God is aiming at here is christendom, really, those who have received the truth; and it says here, "in all deceit of unrighteousness to them that perish, because they have not received the love of the truth that they might be saved. And for this reason God sends to them a working of error, that they should believe what is false, that all might be judged who have not believed the truth, but have found pleasure in unrighteousness". That has hardly formally come in yet; that is, the strong delusion, but in principle
{275}
it may have come. Certain things are being allowed to proceed, and if people are unrighteous, let them be unrighteous still. God is not going to change matters. He is not going to give any relief at all.
E.T. In @Revelation 17, it is the system that is charged as such, but here in the verses alluded to, and also in the first chapter, persons themselves are in mind. Would that be intended to stimulate us in what has been before us, in relation to speaking to men, such as street preaching?
J.T. I would go with that. And then the Lord's words as to the truth, He says that the Spirit will guide us into all the truth, and hence the great importance of these meetings that we are having, that there is the unfolding of the truth in them, opportunity for the brethren in conversing together to get a clear view of the truth, and try to get all the truth, for the word is "all the truth". We should not be satisfied with less than all the truth.
H.B. Would you say that John, in his epistle, gives us what is preservative in that way, when he says, "If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father"?
J.T. Quite so. And then John's epistles to the fathers, and the young men, and the little children, to confirm us in the things we are going on with, and they are to guard us from the world. But he writes to the fathers "because ye have known him that is from the beginning". There is a personal knowledge of Christ through the ministry, the Spirit of God making Him known to us.
Ques. Would John's line involve that which is inward, whereas, whilst this would include that, we have the word "So then, brethren, stand firm, and hold fast the instructions which ye have been taught"? Would that include the outward order, the administrative side of things, as regards the assembly?
{276}
J.T. Well, the fathers are written to by John: "I have written to you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning". These meetings give opportunity for the Lord to be apprehended in His administrative service amongst us. The assembly remains, the Spirit remains, and the Lord remains; and as we give Him opportunity on these occasions. He shows Himself amongst us. I think one is not going too far to say that He shows Himself, the Lord shows Himself in certain ways, and, therefore, the fatherly quality is developed by the apprehension of Christ, so that we know Him.
W.S.S. Is sonship the great issue in what is before us? I was thinking of the system here, which is finalised in the son of perdition, typified in Barabbas, son of the father, and in Thyatira, which the Lord, as Son of God, addresses. I was thinking of it in contrast to the ministry, which leads us to the knowledge of the Son of God, and the sons of light being here present?
J.T. Very important. It is to be noted that the Lord addresses Himself to Thyatira as the Son of God, and I suppose one thing involved in that is that it is a question of the house, the idea of God's house. Christ is over God's house as Son, and Thyatira, I mean to say the woman alluded to there, the assembly as such, is recognised. The Lord recognises her, but He says, "thou sufferest that woman Jezebel". The Lord challenges her in that respect, that she is guilty, and therefore the assembly, in her public character is involved, for she is allowing that woman Jezebel; she is allowing her in some sense, whatever sense that would be. I would say the features of the Church of England and other such systems take on the character of Jezebel in some sense. The assembly is discredited in that she allows it. It is really 'thy wife -- Jezebel'. That is to
{277}
say, the bond is a sort of marital thing, and the system of the Church of England is a national system, perhaps the only fully national one now, but it is a national system, and it stands in relation to the whole empire, but only England itself actually. It does not include Scotland or Ireland. While, on the one hand, we are thankful for it, for there is some maintenance of the truth in it, yet on the other hand, it is weakening many true believers; many are caught by it, and the Lord is raising the question, I believe, in that way with it, as addressing Himself to them as the Son of God. It is the power He has to deal with it, that is, He is over the house, He is over the house of God.
W.S.S. Would you say that the teaching of Jezebel would rob the saints of the inheritance which is theirs as sons?
J.T. Well, it would. Then there is the systematic idea of the thing. "These things says the Son of God". He is raising the question with Thyatira as to her having an affiliation with that sort of thing; whether it is in the Church of England or the Church of Rome. Of course, in the Church of Rome it is out and out, but even the Church of England is impaired by it too, because the same sort of things are carried on.
A.M. Would you say what Sardis and Laodicea represent, for they go on to the end, do they not?
J.T. Sardis represents Protestantism, I would say, and Laodicea is more imitation, like what open brethrenism is, I think, without being too personal. I believe Laodicea is imitation of what is derived from Philadelphia; it is the effect of Philadelphia, only not real, not characterised by the truth, by reality and faithfulness. So the Lord addresses Himself to them there as "the faithful and true witness". They are not true in the witness they are maintaining.
{278}
A.M. I was thinking of that awful expression, "I will spue thee out of my mouth". Does it bear on what we are reading in this epistle?
J.T. Well, of course, spuing is the repudiation of what is nauseous, but this here is more direct judgment. Jezebel is alluded to later in the book of Revelation in a political form. In the early part, that is, in the letters to the assemblies she is viewed as identified with the assembly; but in the later references, she is simply out and out in the world as a political element.
C.S.K. Does the Lord challenge us when He says, "All the assemblies shall know that *I* am he that searches the reins and the hearts"? "*I* am he"; would that come in here?
J.T. Well, just so, He is the Son of God. He has not yet given up the assembly, because Thyatira runs on to the end, just as Laodicea does, also Sardis, and Philadelphia. They contemplate a change in the whole matter. The number seven is applied, and Thyatira is the end of one section, and then we have another section embracing Sardis, and Philadelphia, and Laodicea. Laodicea is the end of the whole matter, and what the Lord is alluding to is the nauseousness of such systems where the truth is not honoured or maintained. They are characterised by neutrality to Christ and His claims. Therefore the Lord speaks of Himself as "the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God".
J.E. I thought it was important to see that *the* truth is really the issue in all these things, is it not? Would you say that the consideration of such thoughts as the assembly being the base of the truth, and the Holy Spirit being designated as "the Spirit of truth", would give the truth a very great place in our hearts, to be regarded as an entity, something that we love?
{279}
J.T. That is what is so important in John's writings, *the truth*. He says "I have no greater joy than these things that I hear of my children walking in the truth". He keeps up the feminine side too, and the idea of children, and he had no greater joy than that his children walked in truth. So that the only hope and stay for us is the maintenance of the truth, going on with the truth.
P.H.H. Would the expression "have fallen away" in @Hebrews 6: 6, bear upon this? It says, "It is impossible to renew again to repentance those once enlightened, and who have tasted of the heavenly gift ... and have fallen away, crucifying for themselves as they do the Son of God, and making a show of him". Would that in principle be apostasy?
J.T. Yes it is. There is no escape, there is no hope of recovery. I would say it is apostasy.
A.J.D. Would the systematised error, referred to in @Ephesians 4, be set over against the knowledge of the Son of God?
J.T. Yes it would. Systematised error is just the thing that Paul in writing to the Ephesians is aiming at. What is needed to counteract it is full growth, the full-grown man, and what we have already been saying about Jezebel, I think, is quite important and ought to be followed up a little; that is to say, she is seen first of all in a religious character, and allied with Ahab, so to speak, allied with the responsible element called the angel; that is to say, what represents the assembly responsibly. But then she is detached, in the account of the Spirit in the book of Revelation, she is detached from that in chapter 16, and particularly in the 17th and then in the 18th; so much space is given to her. It is very significant that so much space is given to the subject of Jezebel, and then Babylon. That is to say, the political side is thoroughly in mind, and her relation to the seven-headed beast.
{280}
She is riding the beast; she is sitting on it, meaning that she has taken up her place. She says, "I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow". She is detaching herself and becoming independent, thinking that she has enough to rely on, but the scripture goes on to show in chapter 18 how thoroughly she is demolished, destroyed. And then chapter 19 makes way for the true assembly to appear, in the words, "the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready". All that is consequent upon the destruction of the false assembly.
H.H. Would the thought of domination come in there, the woman riding the beast as dominating that system of things?
J.T. Yes, she is clothed in purple and in scarlet representing all the show of the world. She is seen in a wilderness, a remarkable thing.
J.E. Is it instructive to see that such expressions as "man of sin", and "son of perdition", are masculine ideas? But would Jezebel, and the reference to Babylon, and the place the woman has in it, give us the climax of the enemy's work on the feminine side; this being swept away, the ground is cleared for the bringing in of the assembly, the bride?
J.T. Very good. That is open to us here, to see how the bride is first brought in, in chapter 19, as "his wife" over against Jezebel and all the horrible conditions that marked her; over against her, and all that attaches to her, we have the wife, the Lamb's wife, meaning one that would stand by His interests and look after them. And then there is what is granted to her, "that she should be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure; for the fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints". Therefore the position of the brethren at the moment is of such importance to heaven; that there is that which is according to God, according to Christ, in the sense of clothing,
{281}
and the wifely relation to Him. The book of Proverbs confirms this in type.
D.J.M. Are we only delivered from the spirit of these things in the power of the Spirit? I was thinking of sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth.
J.T. These are very beautiful phrases, and I am thinking of them in looking at these epistles. They point to the importance of the meetings that God has brought us into, these three days meetings in different parts of the world; because the truth, the assembly itself, is worked out in these meetings, and they become resistant to the wickedness of the devil in all these systems. So there is something for God; and as a matter of fact, it is irresistible. What is here is irresistible.
D.J.M. Would you say a word about "sanctification of the Spirit"?
J.T. It is what we were saying about the last chapter of the Bible; in @Revelation 22: 11 we have, "Let him that does unrighteously do unrighteously still; and let the filthy make himself filthy still; and let him that is righteous practise righteousness still; and he that is holy, let him be sanctified still". We are going on with that; these meetings are specially on our hearts for the truth, and the idea of sanctification of course comes in, because it is a question of the service of God; that is to say, priesthood, and all that enters into it. We are made priests of God and of the Christ, so let us continue in what we are made, and increase in it.
A.E.D. That links on with the thought of being beloved. We have the suggestion here of the brethren being beloved of the Lord in the midst of such conditions, and Daniel, earlier, was a man greatly beloved; what is here for the divine pleasure stands in contrast to all that has to be judged.
{282}
J.T. So that we have in verse 13, "We ought to give thanks to God always for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, that God has chosen you from the beginning to salvation in sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth, whereto he has called you by our glad tidings, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. So then, brethren, stand firm, and hold fast the instructions which ye have been taught, whether by word or by our letter. But our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and our God and Father, who has loved us, and given us eternal consolation and good hope by grace, encourage your hearts, and establish you in every good work and word". These are the things that are a sure rebuttal of all this wickedness that is current. And it is not to be despised either, in a sense of smallness, because the Spirit is here Himself, the Spirit is actually working amongst the brethren.
J.E. Would you say that the enemy's great aim is to oppose the truth working out on the masculine and feminine lines, and that the Spirit is here to support us as to that, as to the spirit of sonship on the one hand, and the means we have of really entering into what belongs to the bride, on the other?
J.T. Quite so. The Spirit of sonship: "Because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father". That is what we have in the service of God.
A.G.L. Would the blessing of Benjamin fit in with this passage? "The beloved of Jehovah -- he shall dwell in safety by him; he will cover him all the day long, and dwell between his shoulders", @Deuteronomy 33: 12.
J.T. Very good. The fact is, the allusion is to Jerusalem, that Jerusalem belonged to Benjamin in his territory. He was gracious enough to let David come in and take on Jerusalem and set up the service of God in Jerusalem, and so David became, you
{283}
might say, the leader in Israel in the service of God, especially in the book of Psalms. So that Judah is mentioned in the Psalms as God's sanctuary, "Judah was his sanctuary", which is a very remarkable thing. It really alludes to David, the place David has, because he comes in when God awaked as a mighty man and put His enemies to reproach (@Psalm 78: 65 - 72). God constituted Judah His sanctuary, and I believe that was the grace of Benjamin, because the relations between Benjamin and Judah were very strong; in Genesis, Judah pleaded with Joseph about Benjamin, about the youngest son. And Jerusalem belonged to Benjamin really, as any one can see by looking at the book of Joshua, but it came into the hands of Judah, so that the whole position has been altered through the grace of Benjamin, but then the love that operated in him afforded liberty to Judah to take on Jerusalem, through David.
H.H. There is a good word on that line in @Genesis 49 about Benjamin ravening as a wolf, in the morning devouring the prey, and at night dividing the spoil. As the One at the right hand of God, Son of the right hand, in that way Christ comes in in His appearing, and brings about these results we have been speaking about this afternoon?
J.T. So that Jacob, inspired by the Spirit of God, is enabled to put the whole truth in order, and Benjamin comes in as the son of God's right hand, you might say, the son of Jacob's right hand.
Ques. Is it diverting you to ask if you had anything to say to us about verse 6 onward of the last chapter?
J.T. Well, it is a question of importance as to discipline, and how it might be modified; how it might be reduced from severity to mildness, on the one hand, or increased from mildness to severity on the other. The idea in that word in verse 6 is not withdraw in the full sense of putting away, as
{284}
it was in the beginning, as recorded in @1 Corinthians 5. The word is 'withdraw', but in the sense of shrinking, as the note would indicate. So that the penalty may be made mild, according to the facts of the case; because what is alluded to is a person not working at all, as it says, "Now we enjoin you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw from every brother walking disorderly and not according to the instruction which he received from us. For ye know yourselves" (this is something to be noted, because they had much already, before they got this epistle) "how ye ought to imitate us, because we have not walked disorderly among you; nor have we eaten bread from any one without cost; but in toil and hardship working night and day not to be chargeable to any one of you, not that we have not the right, but that we might give ourselves as an example to you, in order to your imitating us. For also when we were with you we enjoined you this, that if any man does not like to work, neither let him eat. For we hear that there are some walking among you disorderly, not working at all, but busybodies. Now such we enjoin and exhort in the Lord Jesus Christ, that working quietly they eat their own bread". So that it is a question of something that requires discipline, but with greatly reduced severity. It is a matter that does not involve that the man is to be treated other than as a brother. Whereas in Matthew, where discipline has to be executed, he is to be to the brother who is trespassed against, as an heathen man and a publican, but here this case does not require that; "Do not esteem him as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother". There is not much more to say, only that it is something that is placed amongst the saints as discipline, when there is conduct that requires it.
P.L. Would such an attitude require assembly action to administer it?
{285}
J.T. Well, it is an apostolic epistle. The instruction here is apostolic, so that it is a question of carrying out what he says; but he is modifying it by the fact that the man is treated as a brother, he is not treated as a heathen man, or a publican.
P.L. Your point is that all apostolic injunctions are now enshrined authoritatively in the assembly?
J.T. Exactly. And it is a question of what the Lord would say. Take @John 20: "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them". Well, that is left open. It is something put into the hands of the brethren. It is a question of what they think should be done. The Lord is leaving it with them.
A.G.L. How far would you go on the line of not keeping company with such?
J.T. Well, the word 'shrink' is probably the actual thought of the word "withdraw" and it would mean, of course, that you *would* shrink from them: you would not ask them to your house, and carry on as you used to. In @Galatians 6 the idea is, "If even a man be taken in some fault" (taken in it, found in it), "ye who are spiritual restore such a one". That is left open. We are not told exactly what to do, except to restore him, and the word 'restore' means that you make him what he used to be. That is to say, he is to function as he used to. It is to set him up again as he used to be, and I think this is a similar thing.
C.F.I. Would it require that the assembly be convened to take such action as it contemplated here?
J.T. I think it is a question of what the brethren might think. @John 20 shows that the Lord leaves things with us, and if we deem it to require withdrawal, then of course, the Lord would say; He is with us, because that is the way the thing is put. It is to bear out the characteristics of John's gospel, because it is what is left with us. Well, what are
{286}
we? How are we instructed? What have we learnt? Go by that.
Rem. There would be liberty, I gather, to apply this modified discipline in other cases than a brother not working; is it according to the judgment of the brethren?
J.T. Just so. That is what I was saying, because the Lord leaves it with us, as if He were giving us a blank cheque, to fill it out.
L.P.M. So it is not a question of retaining his sins, would you say, but rather our attitude; he is still viewed as a brother basically. Is that right?
J.T. Well, that is what the apostle says; but then it may be more serious than this, because so far the apostle is only speaking of a man that is not working and yet eating; that is to say, he is not earning his living. He is really unrighteous, and it might turn to be that, in time, but that is all he is mentioning, what he is doing. Then it is a question of what the judgment of the brethren is.
Ques. The question is often asked. Can the brethren withdraw from a fully repentant person; that is, are there sins which are so serious, and connected with a course, that would require withdrawal to fully restore the person?
J.T. Well, it is a question of the brethren's decision. The Lord would be saying to us in @John 20, I think, 'I have breathed into you, and you know what I have taught you, and now I want you to be what you are, what My instructions have made you, and I am leaving it with you, as to what you do'; and "whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them", not *they shall be* but *they are*. You might say it is simultaneous, but the Lord was basing it all on what they were, what they would think.
A.J.D. Would the following verse in this chapter help us. "But the Lord of peace himself give you
{287}
peace continually in every way. The Lord be with you all".
J.T. It would. @John 20 itself is a sort of Magna Carta, really, given to the brethren, given to the saints; and the Lord would have it so. He would have christianity on that basis, the liberty wherewith *He* makes us free. It involves teaching that has gone before, what we have been brought up in, and should know ourselves.
Rem. What you are saying would test the spirituality of the brethren very much more than a set code.
J.T. I think it would. You feel that you are more in sonship. You are acting like men, as the apostle said. "until we all arrive ... at the full-grown man". We know what to do. We do not have to be told what to do.
J.P. You have already drawn attention to the fact that the assembly must be recognised in everything; would that be taken account of in connection with this section?
J.T. Well, that is what I think is of prime importance in all these meetings that we have had, the place the assembly has in the Lord's mind, and especially now that we have touched on these letters to the assemblies. He loves the thought of the assembly and how it is brought up. He is Son over the house, and how He has nurtured us! Paul, of course, being His representative, and others. How he has nurtured us in this very epistle, as a father his own children! Well now, what is the result of that, what are you? Are you naughty, or are you wise? Can you be trusted, or can you not be trusted? The Lord is aiming at that. That is what I think enters into all this, especially this passage before us.
Ques. So that Proverbs says, "The heart of her husband confideth in her, and he shall have no lack of spoil"?
{288}
J.T. Just so. The Lord is known in his wife, as it were. His wife makes *Him* known. He is known in the gates through His wife.
Ques. Have we perhaps given too much importance to the care meeting, do you think; not enough to the assembly?
J.T. It never should be treated as the assembly, because the Lord is jealous of the assembly. It is the one thing that He has given Himself for, in that sense; and He is so jealous about it, and any diversion from it or disregard of it is distasteful to Him.
C.F.I. How far should we go in the care meeting? Would we establish facts?
J.T. That is all. It is all tentative.
C.F.I. Would what might be suitable to be done in the assembly be arrived at in any sense in the care meeting?
J.T. Well, it might be suggested, of course, but we must remember that the Lord is there when we assemble, not at the care meeting, but as the assembly. The Lord is there, and everything would take character from that fact; what *He* is, what *His* mind would be, and it is a question of spirituality, because the Lord has always His own mind, and we are said to have the mind of Christ. Well, it is a question of what might be imparted to us at the moment, not to be decided by the brothers in care; whatever they do decide is only in the sense of suggestion, because it may change in the interim.
J.E. Is it not striking that while according to Matthew the Lord says Himself, "I am with you alway", yet as the matter reaches finality in chapter 18, the word is "tell it to the assembly", not to the Lord?
J.T. Very good.
A.E.D. If there is any change in the interim, that would involve that priestly persons are in touch with the persons between the care meeting and the
{289}
assembly? And any repentance discerned, is brought into the matter, is it?
J.T. Quite so. So what you get in Leviticus as to leprosy is the principle; that is, the priest is *always* there, it is not *if* he be there, the priest is *always* there, and therefore things may change in an instant, you may say. Therefore we have to go by what is at the moment.
Ques. So you would not shut up a case between the care meeting and the assembly meeting?
J.T. Quite so.
C.F.I. Would you say that something might require exclusion even if there is full repentance there?
J.T. "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted".
Ques. You mean the possibility of remission is mentioned before the possibility of retention?
J.T. Quite so.
NOTE OF CONVERSATION ON THE PRECEDING READING ON NOVEMBER 4th 1947.
Inquiry was made regarding persons who had failed and who may have repented, whether in view of their having judged themselves, the fire, so to speak, having done its work, there would be any necessity to bring the matter before the assembly. If persons have judged themselves, is their sin not gone before God and why should there be any necessity to take assembly action for remission?
Mr. Taylor remarked on the nature of such failures. Certain things may come under the heading of @Galatians 6: 1, and could be met by spiritual persons dealing with them; other things being more serious, could not be cleared apart from assembly action.
{290}
The case was cited of a person involved in a course of self-will, opposition and party activity, but he had, at least in measure, judged himself and Mr. Taylor was definite that such a case could not be cleared in the sight of heaven apart from assembly action.
He referred to @1 Corinthians 5, the purging out of the leaven, which was a deeper matter than the putting away of the wicked person. How are others, who may have been affected in any matter, to get clear? and also how are saints themselves to judge the leaven in their hearts unless it is brought to the assembly? @1 Corinthians 5, whilst involving that the person was not repentant, it says, "being such", the same principle as to purging out the leaven would operate even where repentance has taken place.
@John 20 was referred to and Mr. Taylor stressed the "ye". Who are the "ye"? It is not the care-meeting. It would be parallel to the "ye" of @Matthew 18: 18 or the "two of you" of @Matthew 18: 19. We have to take the four gospel records together and in considering @John 20: 23, keep @Matthew 18 in mind also.
The thought of grading was referred to and Mr. Taylor agreed that this would be kept in mind. There may be relatively trivial offences which could be cleared personally, or by one or two spiritual persons. It is a matter for priestly discernment as to the extent of the sin, but in cases of uncertainty it would be wiser to go to the assembly. This cannot be wrong, whereas, not to do so may be. It is not a question of endeavouring to keep things from the assembly, for it is one of the functions of the assembly to deal with failures that may arise. The scripture "Let not the assembly be charged" is not apropos in such cases.
We must keep in mind heaven's part in these matters, and assembly action, either in retention or
{291}
remission, is in the sight of heaven. If there is ground for remission, why should a matter be covered? It is pleasing to heaven, and the setting out of the whole matter helps the saints in self-judgment, and clears the position of the person concerned in an unequivocal manner. Letting things like this go by default, which leaving them in the care meeting would involve, does not clear the position and is not sufficient.
The above was confirmed by letter from Mr. J. Taylor, January 14th, 1948 (see Letters of J. Taylor, Volume 2, page  398).
{292}
THE BODY AND THE ASSEMBLY
@1 Corinthians 10: 14 - 22; @1 Corinthians 12: 28 - 31
J.T. I would like to remark that some of us here have had this book much in mind for several weeks, and what is before us now is to inquire into the difference between the body, as composing all the saints, and the assembly, as involving the gifts.
The last scripture read says, "God has set certain in the assembly, first apostles ..." and from this point we have much about gift; that is to say, about ability to serve the saints according to what is said elsewhere, that Christ, "Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men ... some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists and some shepherds and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints; with a view to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ", @Ephesians 4: 8 - 12. It says also in that chapter. "To each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ". In @1 Corinthians 10 what is in mind is the body, as the vessel in which things are worked out for God, including all the saints, and leading up to the truth of the assembly, as spoken of in the eleventh chapter, in which the Lord's supper is celebrated. The word 'assembly' covers the body too, as well as the gifts that are in the assembly, but what is in mind is that we might see the distinction that has to be made between the body, as composing all the saints, and the *assembly*; for that is the word used in chapter 12 in which God has set the gifts. Not that the word assembly always involves the gifts, for it is correlated with the body; but the gifts are set in the assembly. In verses 16 and 17 of our chapter it says, "The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ? Because we, being many, are one loaf, one
{293}
body; for we all partake of that one loaf". It says, "I speak as to intelligent persons", that is, the body.
A.J.D. Are we all committed to this, as those who partake of the one loaf, involving fidelity to the testimony and the fellowship?
J.T. That is what I understand. It contemplates the fellowship; that is what is in mind. Fidelity to the fellowship, fidelity to one another, and to God too.
T.S.McG. Is that why it is enjoined, "Flee from idolatry"?
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Do you think we need more body consciousness, the sense that we are all in the body, standing in relation to one another?
J.T. Quite so, and that involves the preciousness of each saint. You might refer to other scriptures, but Corinthians suffices for us to bring out what is necessary in this respect, what is in the body and every one of us, as thus set. How important the saints are as in the body! There is a certain peculiar preciousness attached to the value of the saints, whether brothers or sisters, viewed as in the body.
P.L. "Why persecutest thou me?" Would that be the Lord's estimate of the body?
J.T. I have often thought of that. The Lord there shows that the persecution is not directed personally against Himself; it is directed to Himself *in the saints*, those who form His body.
J.S. "I speak as to intelligent persons". He gives the assembly credit for knowing things, and I was looking at it rather, that He expects us to go in for these things; He gives us credit for being intelligent.
J.T. It is a feature of first Corinthians, what we would call an abstract idea. That is how we would regard the assembly abstractly, as intelligent, not as just newly brought in from paganism, but as having some knowledge, as filled with the Holy Spirit.
{294}
S.M. Would if be necessary to have a conscious sense of having a place in the body before one would be available, as in the end of the twelfth chapter?
J.T. I would think that.
A.J.D. Would gifts be exercised in the light of the truth of the body?
J.T. Quite so. That is why we are the vessel through which God is operating, of which we read in chapter 12, "So also is the Christ". It is in connection with the exercises of service, and hence that chapter is to be taken up with this thought of the body; but it turns to the thought of the assembly, as involved in the verses read.
F.V. Is there a difference between gifts *in* persons, and gifts *of* persons?
J.T. A very good distinction. The gifts in Ephesians are the persons themselves: "*He* has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers"; the apostles themselves are gifts. There is a difference between a person who is a gift in that sense, and what God has given to him.
Rem. The gifts are placed in the assembly for the edifying of the saints.
J.T. Just so, that is where God has set them.
T.P. Should we all have a gift?
J.T. Well; it would only be in the sense of the passage quoted, "To each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ". That would not be specific gift. Gifts are specified, apostles, prophets and so forth.
T.P. I thought we all had a part.
J.T. We have, every brother and sister has a part in this system. So the woman of Samaria is an illustration of it, being a sister. She came out of the city with a water-pot to get water, but she left that behind her, and went away to the city and
{295}
spoke to the men, meaning that she did not remain with the idea of a water-pot; the Lord had incorporated her in a new system. It is a very important thing, and covers every brother and sister who has the Spirit. So that she was in the system, as having left the water-pot; she was herself the vessel that the Lord could use.
P.W. Would what you have said relative to intelligent persons in the body, and the gifts in the assembly, govern our attitude towards the believers that are not available to us?
J.T. Quite so. We sit down together on the Lord's day morning, and I suppose our first thought would be those that are present, and our attitude towards them would be one of love; but then we widen in our thoughts as we proceed, and think of all the saints. Firstly, I would say, those who are actually walking with us, that we have no difficulty about, and then others who are not walking with us, but the Lord knows those that are His. We may have real difficulties about them, and may not be able to walk with them, but He knows them, and we too, and therefore the position is very wide. "The Lord knows those that are his; and, Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity", @2 Timothy 2: 19. If we cannot walk with them we can care for them, the attitude of our minds would be to have them with us: but if we cannot, we have to leave that to the Lord. The Lord knows them; His ownership of the saints on earth is very great; He has knowledge of everyone who is His (@2 Timothy 2: 19).
A.J.D. We value one another as we see God has set us together; we have to learn that God has set us together.
J.T. I think so. Those whom God Himself can go on with must have the first, place with us, because they are of more value immediately, not
{296}
ultimately, but more valuable immediately, because they are in themselves set right; as is said in the last chapter of Revelation, "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life". These are of much more value than those who are not washed. There is such a thing in Revelation as the Lord's washing, that He has washed us and cleansed us with His own blood, but there is the idea of *our* washing ourselves. Therefore we are more immediately available than those who are not washed.
J.J. They are valuable to one another, but not available to one another.
J.T. Just so; there is the immediate working number that we have to go on with, but the Lord goes on with all, and at the same time, He knows those that are His.
T.S.McG. These are proper body feelings. Few are available to us, because many do not avail themselves of the privilege.
J.T. Well, they are not available to the Lord in that sense, and, of course, they are not so available to us; that is why I venture to say those who are immediately available are the first to be thought of. But we widen out as we are near the Lord, and the meeting proceeds, and we increase in appreciation, as the Lord is moving about on the first day of the week; and I would say, He *is* moving about. It says figuratively in @Psalm 19: 5, "He is as a bridegroom going forth from his chamber; he rejoiceth as a strong man to run the race". We think of them accordingly, as He does. He knows where they are, from east to west, from north to south. He knows them.
J.S. Is that the reason that sometimes on Lord's day morning the universal thought comes into our minds?
{297}
J.T. It comes into our minds; that is to say, it was in the Lord's mind first, before it was in Paul's mind. The Lord says, "I have much people in this city"; that would mean that they were potentially His people, but they had to be sought out, and washed and cleansed and made available for His service.
A.M. Would you say the Lord expects intelligent believers to hear what Paul says; he says, "Do *ye* judge what I say".
J.T. "Do *ye* judge". I would say that. The Lord is looking for a right judgment with His people, and those that are immediately available to Him are the first, I would say; they would occupy the first place with Him, and correspondingly with us; we think of all those who are immediately available.
F.T. Would every believer, washed or unwashed, come into verse 17?
J.T. No, I do not think so, only those who partake. "We all partake of that one loaf", but only those who do partake. There are those who do not, and the Lord misses them; the Lord misses everyone who is absent.
P.L. Would the cleansing of the lepers apply? (@Luke 17: 17). Jesus answering said, "But the nine, where are they?"
J.T. Quite so, very good. Where are the nine? We might well ask, and make it our business to get round and find them.
G.H. "The cup of blessing which we bless", would that include all that name the name of the Lord?
J.T. I do not know that it would; it is a question of availability. There is a question of what was true, and what was not true, whether they are blessing the cup, because he is speaking well of it, and how many are not speaking well of it. The word 'blessing' would imply that, and yet we know that
{298}
such are the Lord's in a sense, so that I think what is in mind here is normal, and it was normal at the outset of the work at Corinth; things are not normal now in Perth, or any other place in the world.
G.H. Would that mean those present?
J.T. That is right; there are those sitting behind not allowed to put their hands to the cup and bless the cup.
F.S. Is it important as to what we are all doing? He says, "We are all partakers".
J.T. We should be. I suppose the apostle is just speaking of what was normal at that time; the time had not come for a number to be separated from, because they were all there as far as facts go. The apostle was holding back from the discipline; many of them were participating in the Lord's supper who were not fit for it, as we see in the second epistle.
R.C.C. Would you say, if we are not taking the loaf, or blessing the cup, there is a reason for it; it is a question of fleeing from idolatry.
J.T. The Lord in instituting the Supper said, "Drink ye all of it". He had nothing else in mind but that we all should drink of it.
R.L.B. You spoke of those that did not partake. Should we make it our business to seek after them?
J.T. That is why we have our care meetings, for that is what they are intended for. We know certain ones, and they are not walking in the truth, and it is our business to care for them. The Lord has given us extensive work to do. The whole assembly is before us and the Lord has it before Him.
G.H. Is the thought of the body brought out to emphasise affection and care of the members for each other?
J.T. That is the principle in chapter 12. We all know how much it says about the members of the body, the physical members of the body, as illustrative
{299}
of the whole assembly; and if there are some who are defective by reason of moral conditions or the like, it is the business of each of us to think of them, and if we cannot help them directly, to pray for them.
N.W.F. Would we be helped in that matter by seeing what value the Lord places upon the "one another"?
J.T. That is what I was thinking in suggesting this passage in chapter 10, what He thinks of us. There are other chapters that stress it more than these. Thessalonians expresses it, and the same in principle would apply to the Corinthians, for Paul said, "The more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved". Paul's great concern was for every one of them, that they all might be there.
N.W.F. So that it would develop with each one of us; it is the spirit of this dispensation.
J.T. Very good. The spirit of this dispensation, and we are of that spirit, we are professedly of it, and therefore we have a great deal to do; there is a great deal of work to be done.
S.M. Does love underlie this great movement, as we are consciously in that? We have love and affection for all; even if we do not know them, we have them in our hearts.
J.T. When you are going about the world serving the Lord, and you come in contact with them, it is most touching. Some of us have been moving about, it is most touching coming into contact with the brethren; as soon as one sees them they draw out one's affection.
C.S.S. That is a great suggestion in regard to the care meeting. One is not sure whether we locally regard this as a care meeting matter.
J.T. Well, it is; as far as I know of the brethren here I would think you do, at least in principle.
{300}
I know we do in New York, but there is a great deal to be done.
A.J.D. It is good to think of what is under the Lord's eye, what He loves. We see some of it in this city; those who move round the world see it universally.
J.T. And as soon as we do, especially as we come into the saints¬ houses, they draw out our affections, and we quite well understand how they draw out the Lord's affections, especially on the first day of the week. @Psalm 19 speaks of the Lord figuratively, as a bridegroom going forth from his chamber, rejoicing as a strong man to run the race. What is the object of the race? It is to get into touch with those who are His. They compose the bride, and He is the Bridegroom, and "the Spirit and the bride say, Come". @Revelation 22: 17. The assembly is with the Spirit in that.
S.M. Does this all involve oneness in gifts?
J.T. Well; what we have been speaking of belongs to chapter 10, but in chapter 12, which we read, the gifts belong to the assembly as viewed in that passage. We are not all specific gifts; you could hardly think of sisters as being specific gifts, but "each one of us" would include sisters, "according to the measure of the gift of the Christ".
A.M. Is the spirit of the matter summed up in the last verse of chapter 10: "Even as *I* also please all in all things; not seeking my own profit, but that of the many, that they may be saved"?
J.T. Yes indeed; "many". It refers to what you have already said, "we being many". How much the apostle had to do! One is impressed at times in thinking of it, besides the caring for individual assemblies he had *all* the assemblies on his heart.
W.S.S. Is your thought that the truth of the body should govern us?
{301}
J.T. It is the attitude of your mind, even if we are not actually engaged in the Lord's service, or even at the meeting; it is the attitude of your mind, and the attitude of Paul's mind was "all the assemblies". Perhaps you have something else to say?
W.S.S. I was only thinking how apt we are to be limited in our thoughts to times and seasons, instead of which it should be a daily matter.
J.T. Quite so. How full is the occupation normal to the saints, how full it would be! In the Lord's mind it should be so, but He intends us to be occupied with His own property. Having loved His own, He loved them to the end. That is His mind.
A.J.D. "He that has the bride is the bridegroom"; that is something He has Himself.
J.T. Quite so.
N.W.F. Is it in the light of that that we would seek to hold the young people? Perhaps as a result of the last war young people drifted away. Do we seek to hold them in this way?
J.T. I am sure that is the idea in what we call a care meeting. I do not know that they had such a meeting in the early days, because elders were in charge of things; in the beginning the elders were appointed in the assembly, in fact they were appointed in cities; but the first allusion to that is in @Acts 14. Elders were chosen for every assembly. Every assembly had elders, not a leader, not a bishop to assume charge of any flock; they are not viewed in that light, they are *chosen* in the assembly. They chose elders in each assembly (@Acts 14: 23). It is an error for any one man to assume to be in charge of a flock; it is a question of elders, a number of persons, two or more, but then in these last days the Lord has greatly encouraged the saints to come together. The word 'care' is used in connection with what belongs to a bishop, so that our care meeting is quite right (@1 Timothy 3: 5).
{302}
F.V. Would the word 'oversight' be a good scriptural word instead of the word care?
J.T. Just so, but you may be overseeing, and not doing very much. Overseers are to have credentials and their work may cover a wide area, whereas in truth there has been a lot of detail work to be done to bring the saints to their place; if they are turning astray a lot of detail work has to be done, especially as to visiting. Paul spoke about "from house to house" (@Acts 20: 20), so that if there are any difficulties in the way, you go to the brother's house, and see what is going on. We have a lot of that to do in large cities; you have to look them up, and they may not be at home, and you have to go back again; there is a lot of work to be done to keep the saints right.
J.S. You would not wait until you saw something definitely wrong, but at any indication would seek them out rather than wait.
J.T. Any turning aside would lead you to seek them out. Visitation often brings out exercises.
F.T. Would that be the word Peter used: "shepherding"?
J.T. Quite so, shepherding and feeding. Well, you might not get so far as feeding, but you might shepherd, and get a word with the brother.
A.J.D. Would this thought of care start early?
J.T. Caring for others? Just so.
P.L. Joseph's age of seventeen is given as a stimulus to the young. He was shepherding.
J.T. That is just what he *was* doing; so a young saint may help a young saint, better perhaps than an old saint may help a young one.
J.J. It is the idea of shepherding in that sense. A small deviation in the path noticed carefully by one or another might avoid the matter being ultimately brought to the assembly.
{303}
J.T. I am quite sure, if *care* had been exercised, many might have been saved. "He that brings back a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death and shall cover a multitude of sins", @James 5: 20. It is the result of one person doing it.
R.W. Would you help us to know how far we should go in the matter before it is brought to the assembly?
J.T. It should be brought to the assembly only as a last resort.
R.W. The scripture says, "cover a multitude of sins".
J.T. Just so, that is just what I was thinking. There is no need to relate the things if they can be covered righteously; and if they can be forgiven, the matter might be settled in that way.
T.S.McG. If it is grave, it must be dealt with. Must it then be brought to the assembly?
J.T. I should say so. Galatians, which is an assembly epistle, you may say, is severe; but in the last chapter it is said, "If even a man be taken in some fault, ye who are spiritual restore such a one". There is no suggestion there of separating from him, "ye who are spiritual restore such a one"; and the word 'restore' means to set him up just as he used to be, as in service in the assembly.
T.S.McG. When he is taken in a fault, the sin is evident.
J.T. If he be taken or found in it; that is, a brother is involved. It is "ye who are spiritual", not any one brother or sister, but "ye who are spiritual restore such a one", as if stress is laid on the *spiritual*.
T.S.McG. Involving priestly state.
J.T. Just so.
J.S. Suppose nothing like that is available, must it come to the assembly?
{304}
J.T. Well, if he judged himself, there is no reason why it should go any further; but suppose it does go further, if he judges himself on the spot why not restore him?
R.C.C. It shows evidence of repentance.
B.D. You referred to one taken in a fault; it is not a course of sin.
J.T. It is an individual fault, but it might be a serious one. The obligation is to restore him, and the word 'restore' means to set him up as he used to be. See @Galatians 6: 1 and the note thereto.
W.S.S. It is an individual here, acting in view of restoration, not an assembly restoration: "Ye who are spiritual restore such a one in a spirit of meekness".
J.T. It is clearly an individual, one individual, that is viewed here. A fault is found in one, and if he judges it, good and well, he is to be restored at once, and if there is a spiritual element in an assembly he will be, too.
R.C.C. Would you expect forgiveness to be ever present with us, that glory may shine out in us?
J.T. That is what the Lord had in mind in the highest thought we have in Scripture, the highest spiritual passage that we have in Scripture; that is @John 20. "He breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit: whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained". They are to do that, and that would mean that the person judges it, so that the saints can remit the sin.
W.S.S. It would be a joyful matter when a brother is found guilty, if he really judges it.
J.T. It would be a time for rejoicing if a brother who has been found guilty of sin judges it; then the brethren should rejoice in it, if it is discerned that it is really judged. "Blessed be thy discernment, and
{305}
blessed be thou, who has kept me this day ...", @1 Samuel 25: 33.
G.H.H. I was wondering about @Psalm 32 which reads: "I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity I covered not; I said, I will confess my transgressions unto Jehovah, and *thou* forgavest the iniquity of my sin". Would that be a judgment that we would take account of? "Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered!"
J.T. Well, what did Nathan say about it? David received acknowledgment from God that his sin was covered. "Jehovah has also put away thy sin", @2 Samuel 12, 13. That is exactly what he said to David. The assembly should not be behind that; we should be ready to forgive, and have joy in it. "There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth".
P.L. Part of the glory of the assembly is this prerogative to forgive.
J.T. Yes, till seventy times seven.
A.J.D. Do you think we should have in mind what the Lord's present service is, in removing every spot, and wrinkle, and every such thing?
J.T. That is exactly what it is in Ephesians: "That *he* might present the assembly to himself glorious, having no spot, or wrinkle, or any of such things".
A.J.D. Is that because translation is in view?
J.T. Quite so, I am sure there is not to be *one* unforgiven sinner taken to heaven, because God can do things quickly, and forgiveness may be very rapid, in the twinkling of an eye.
N.W.F. It has been suggested that it is necessary to withdraw from such a one to clear the Lord's name. If the state of the person is repentant, if he has confessed the matter, that in itself has already cleared the Lord's name.
{306}
J.T. I am sure the Lord is as concerned as we are. We have no record that he said anything to Peter; He looked at him, and Peter did the rest; Peter went out and wept bitterly. The Lord knew that too, the Lord knew that *He* had to die for that sin. In heaven things are done very quickly.
R.W. If there is repentance at the care meeting, is it necessary to bring it to the assembly?
J.T. I do not think so, if repentance has taken place.
W.S.S. There is nothing to take.
J.T. There would be the rejoicing.
N.W.F. Love would cover.
J.T. There is this to be added, that in our day we have the "little power"; people do not always do things as they should, but God does things in His own way. Sinners are often slow, and we have to wait on them.
S.M. Righteousness must underlie every act and every movement.
J.T. Heaven is up to date in every matter; things are done; and if translation is going to take place soon, you may be sure that heaven is active, so that everyone should be up to date, and ready to be translated, because at some minute it *will* take place. Everything has to be done, and God has His own way of doing it.
S.M. We have felt the Lord has been moving amongst us in view of translation.
A.J.D. Do you think we need to know the mind of heaven?
J.T. That is what I think, because we are getting near; it is of no use our saying it, and not believing it. But we are certainly getting near the time of translation; heaven knows that; heaven is very accurate. There is joy in the presence of the angels in heaven, and they know what is going on there. The Spirit is acting down here on the same principle. It
{307}
is a time of great activity in heaven, things are too slow with us on earth, but earth and heaven do agree in what is going on in the way of recovery down here; the Spirit of God is bringing about recovery.
J.J. "Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven". Is the mind of God on earth found there?
J.T. That is the idea, there must be agreement between heaven and earth, as if the translation were to take place now; there must be complete agreement with those who are to be translated. There is much going on now in view of translation, and we want to be in it, and active in it too.
J.J. We have been much impressed that the Lord has judicially visited Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Perth. And it has struck many of us on that account, that He is preparing us for translation.
J.T. There is no doubt about it, that heaven's activities, if they were known literally, would affect us more; and what the Spirit is doing in each is in perfect agreement with what He is doing in heaven. So that things can be done quickly, when the time comes.
A.J.D. The Spirit is operating to that end?
J.T. That is what I understand.
T.S.McG. Abigail, to whom you referred, acted quickly.
J.T. Just so, it is remarkable how quickly she did act; she is said to have thought beforehand; she would be like these intelligent persons.
T.S.McG. A woman of good understanding.
Rem. We would be moving quickly in view of being with Him.
J.T. Moving quickly is the word.
P.L. Is that what Ananias did?
J.T. You mean Ananias of Damascus. The Lord put him right. He brought him into accord with His own mind, therefore he did what the Lord directed him to do. That is to say, Saul was converted and
{308}
set up in fellowship very quickly, in fact he was praying himself. That is why Ananias says, "Why tarriest thou?" The Lord set him to work. Saul was tarrying, he was affected by Jewish feelings.
T.S.McG. Would he correspond with Abigail's young man?
J.T. That is another very good instance. The young man knew the position; he knew what Nabal had done, but Abigail was equal to it. What she had to do, and the number of things that she brought to David are remarkable. We are told what she did, and she knew what she was doing; the sheep and so forth, she knew where they were to be found.
R.L.B. If things are right as in heaven, we can say, "Brother".
J.T. Just so. Ananias went in and laid his hands on Saul and called him "Brother".
C.S.S. Sometimes one who has sinned is slow through lack of instruction.
J.T. That is so. I often think that the terrors at the end of the book of Revelation, as to the great white throne, should be studied. How can one be slow in regard of his sins, as he reads of the terrors before him? He has no time to spare, he must get ready at once to judge himself. They are all there, and not one missing; every one is there. Death and hell give up their dead in that great day. These things which we are speaking of now ought to have a reflection in the assembly; things ought to be done quickly.
J.J. We would expect early repentance, and look for it.
J.T. Early repentance, yes.
F.T. Where would infirmities, as spoken of in @Romans 15: 1, come in? "We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak".
J.T. It is a question of where they are; the weak ones are slow in doing things; we know they are
{309}
weak; we visit them, for we know their infirmities, and the thing is just to meet the condition. If they are weak, bear the infirmities of the weak, not please ourselves, be unselfish.
J.J. There is a difference between infirmities and sins.
J.T. The Lord looks on the infirmities; they do not mean sin, but just weakness.
A.J.D. Is the Spirit of God bringing the end in view in the matter of movement?
J.T. I think so, because there is so much to be done, we know that.
S.M. So that we know what the Lord is doing, and what the Holy Spirit is doing. "And the Spirit and the bride say, Come".
J.T. That is what I was thinking, what the Spirit is doing on the earth is in exact agreement with what is in heaven. So what has just been remarked: "The Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely". Activity is in mind, all have to be gathered. So on the other hand: "Let him that does unrighteously do unrighteously still; and let the filthy make himself filthy still; and let him that is righteous practise righteousness still; and he that is holy, let him be sanctified still", @Revelation 22: 11.
Ques. Would this matter of restoring in Galatians imply that the person was all right before he was taken in the fault?
J.T. That is right; he is to become all right again, and spiritual brothers will see to that. The Spirit of God will help them.
Ques. When one has been known to be treading a course for some time, would such a scripture apply?
{310}
J.T. Well, that would mean that the evil is deeper, and that is another thing to take account of, how deep the thing may be. If deep, we have to be more careful. In @John 21 there were seven brothers; Peter says, "I go a fishing", and the others say "We also go with thee", and they got nothing, but the Lord does not reprove them. This means, I would say, that they were not deep in the thing, they were not committed to it in any way, so that there was no great difficulty, but there are grades of sin. In @John 21, instead of reproving, the Lord asks them if they have anything to eat, and as soon as they were come to land they see a fire of coals there, and fish laid on it, and bread, and Jesus says to them, "Come and dine". We must not be dilatory.
Rem. I suppose the emphasis would be on the word "restore".
J.T. The emphasis is peculiarly on that word.
T.S.McG. Even if the course has been gross, if the man that had sinned has judged himself and forsaken the evil, and there is evidence of repentance, would withdrawal be considered at all?
J.T. Well, it would not be, if the evil is checked and cleansed, there would not be any more to do, because the system set up in heaven was set up by a High Priest. There may be other things to do, as in the case of the leper in the book of Leviticus; before he is to be set up in the assembly again, he has to be cleansed, and what is comforting is that the priest is always there; where there is leprosy, there is always a priest available.
A.J.D. The work of God itself never deteriorates, the person is set up as he was before, so that the assembly has lost nothing.
J.T. That is what the meaning of the word implies, a man set up as he was before, so that the assembly has lost nothing.
{311}
W.S.S. It is a restored leper in the chapter to which you referred. He is set up in dignity. It would be definite evidence of self-judgment.
J.T. Just so, the Spirit of God has specified even what hand the priest is to use to anoint the man, and when he is anointed he is fit for service.
P.W. In view of the imminence of the Lord's return, in the light of what you have been bringing before us, is it not exceedingly important that we should feed the lambs, in order that movement should be there?
J.T. Luke, in his closing chapter, tells us about the Lord's visit to a certain two who were going to the country, to Emmaus, sixty furlongs away. The Lord knew that, and He sets out on that journey, showing that time is taken up, which is necessary for recovery. If time is to be taken up, well, take it. Let the time be expended, the time is worth while to secure a soul. How much they are worth! The brethren may have to do more with some than with others. The Lord sets an example for us, showing what He was doing in recovery.
R.W. If we had a greater apprehension of that, we should be untiring in our service.
J.T. Just so, the saints are ready to do what the Lord did. He is going all the way to Emmaus, seven miles away; and He went all the way, and was ready to go further, and they constrained Him, and they were recovered, and they went back to Jerusalem immediately, showing that they came into the spirit of what the Lord was doing in recovery.
Rem. You were speaking just now of gradation of sin in Corinthians.
J.T. Do you mean in @1 Corinthians 5? Paul tells them to remove the wicked person from among themselves. But then in the other grade in @2 Thessalonians 3 the word is 'shrink from', not 'remove';
{312}
he is to be regarded as a brother, not dealt with finally or officially. Still there is something wrong there, and the word is 'shrink from', but he is not as bad as the man in @1 Corinthians 5: 13. It says he is to be regarded as a brother.
T.S.McG. Is he ostracized?
J.T. 'Shrink' is the word, 'ostracized' is too strong; that is tantamount to @1 Corinthians 5. There is nothing more certain than that sin is graded.
W.S.S. You referred a little earlier to priestly eyes. Does that come into the matter that has been raised?
J.T. One would think so, because that is another thing to come into our minds, that we are not simply christians or believers, but we are priests, and we are made priests unto God. Christ has made us priests unto God. But He has made us priests to Himself too. @Revelation 20 speaks of their being made priests of the Christ. Leviticus indicates that the priests are always there.
{313}
THE LORD'S SUPPER
@Luke 22: 7 - 23
J.T. What is in mind is that the Lord's supper is the outcome of the passover. In the Lord's supper the Lord is seen as the house-father; that is to say, the disciples are regarded as auxiliary in some respects; that is, as children in His household, not in the sense in which the children of God are spoken of, but rather that the Lord has this place in the economy, according to the prophet Isaiah, "I and the children that Jehovah hath given me" (@Isaiah 8: 18), alluding to Christ as the Messiah. The thought has come down to us, and the Lord, I believe, carried it through to His supper. It would allude to passages in the gospels in which the disciples are viewed as children of Christ, especially in John's gospel. Peter says, "I go a fishing", and they all say the same thing, that they will go with him. There were seven of them, and the Lord says, "Children, have ye any meat?". He regards them as His children, according to what is said again by the prophet, that He is "Father of Eternity" (@Isaiah 9: 6), or Father of the age. It is a great thought attributed to Christ, and it should have an appealing effect on the young people especially that the Lord so familiarly takes the place of father to us here. The apostles had recourse to the same thought, especially John and Paul. Paul addresses the Corinthians as his children. John several times addresses those to whom he writes as children. And so the Lord condescends to bring us into this place, the place of children; not in the sense in which God takes the place of Father, but in the sense in which the Messiah had that place, and the Lord takes it up in the gospels. I thought all this should be mentioned at the beginning, because the subject begins on the day of unleavened bread, in which the passover
{314}
was to be killed. "And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare the passover for us, that we may eat it. But they said to him, Where wilt thou that we prepare it?" (verses  8, 9). "And when the hour was come, he placed himself at table, and the twelve apostles with him. And he said to them, With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer" (verses  14, 15). That is to say, He is still on Jewish ground in a paternal sense. It is passed on to us; the Lord's supper is opened up to us, and the Lord is pleased to apply it to us as children, placing us on very free terms with Him and with each other. It will become clear to us as we look into it, I am sure.
J.P-sn. Have you in mind that we are bound together in that way on family lines, so that love should be set free to be found in expression?
J.T. Yes, and the Lord has liberty to take an official place as having priests of His own, because we are said to be priests of the Christ. That enables us to confine the Supper to the Lord. It is the Lord's supper. He has all that is necessary in the sense of official service. He has all that is necessary to carry it through, and He regards it as His own supper. It is not the Father's supper, nor the Spirit's supper, it is the Lord's own supper.
H.W. Do you think the maintaining of the thought that the Lord's supper is connected with our coming together in our local setting, would help to emphasise the thought of the Lord taking the fatherly place on such an occasion?
J.T. He should have a certain place with us in our houses, although each man is head of his house, and the sister should be subject to her husband, and so on, yet according to what we read of at Emmaus, He took the house-father's place, and gave thanks for the bread. There was no cup mentioned, but at the same time it has a suggestion of the Supper.
{315}
He took the place of the house-father, and whilst it was not exactly the Lord's supper in the true sense, yet it was liberating for them all.
H.W. The appreciation of the Lord in that way would help to liberate this feature amongst the saints as being priests of the Christ?
J.T. Yes; I think it amplifies and enlarges His place. He has a system of His own in that sense, and there is liberty in it, and we are to accustom ourselves to that. It is all to be handed over to the Father in due course. "I and the Father are one" (@John 10: 30), but at the same time He has His own system where He is entitled to have liberty.
A.M. Would it be right to say that the Lord has His own house, from that point of view?
J.T. That is right. He has a house. I might have mentioned that at first, because it enters into what is in one's mind, that the Lord's supper involves His house, what any man might have, but it links it up with the brethren of Christ, leading to eternal things, especially for young people. They are at liberty to have a part, whereas they might not have liberty if it were on other lines. He has priests of His own, and He has a system of His own which proceeds to a point, and then widens out to the full thought of God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. The place Christ has in the economy is distinct.
H.W. It would greatly help all our young people to have some sense of the magnitude of the occasion in their souls as we sit down together to partake of the Supper.
J.T. Room should be made for the very youngest who is at liberty to partake of the Lord's supper.
W.S.S. The household idea would greatly help in this connection. We see it developing in normal conditions in the christian household, children coming into their place, and the same thought would carry over to what you are suggesting to us now?
{316}
J.T. I think it does. It gives them liberty. They are not viewed as children in the sense of little children, but children as John speaks of them. He addresses the saints as his children. It shows how the matter becomes familiar, and what a system we are brought into, and what consideration there is for the young ones. Things are not at a distance from them, but they have part in things. The same idea was carried out in the Old Testament. Anyone who reads the Old Testament would see that the children were taken care of; and in the old economy they were viewed as children until the time of faith came when they graduated into full growth. That works out in Galatians; we are no longer children.
H.V. The disciples took the place of children because they looked up to the Lord as the only one who was able to teach them.
J.T. Yes, and the Lord loved to take that place with them. "Children, have ye any meat?", @John 21: 5.
W.H. Does it suggest that the children are loved, and that they know it? There is affection behind that term?
J.T. Yes, and we all know it. The parents of our children are free to address children who are not actually theirs, but in terms of affection. There ought to be full liberty for parents to address other children in terms of affection, and it all promotes mutuality. @2 Corinthians 6 leads up to a very important truth that young people should have before them: "Our mouth is opened to you, Corinthians, our heart is expanded. Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your affections; but for an answering recompense, (I speak as to children,) let *your* heart also expand itself. Be not diversely yoked with unbelievers; for what participation is there between righteousness and lawlessness? or what fellowship of light with darkness? and what consent of
{317}
Christ with Beliar, or what part for a believer along with an unbeliever? and what agreement of God's temple with idols? for *ye* are the living God's temple; according as God has said, I will dwell among them, and walk among them; and I will be their God, and they shall be to me a people. Wherefore come out from the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and touch not what is unclean, and *I* will receive you; and I will be to you for a Father, and ye shall be to me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. Having therefore these promises, beloved, let us purify ourselves from every pollution of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in God's fear", @2 Corinthians 6: 11, to @2 Corinthians 7: 1. This was one of the passages in my mind, the way the apostle speaks of the saints there.
W.S.S. You made a reference to the Teacher, "The Teacher says to thee". Would that come into what you have been saying to us?
J.T. Yes, it runs right through John's gospel, and the young people ought to be familiarised with it: the Lord teaching in the capacity of a parent, with all the affection that He has behind it. He said, "Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not" (@Luke 18: 16); and "Except ye ... become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven", @Matthew 18: 3.
J.P-sn. Has this in view the expansion of our minds, and the affections being set free so that there might be something in the way of response to Christ?
J.T. Yes. If the brethren are free about this paternal thought as attaching to the Lord it will greatly help the young, I am sure, because the Lord has His own way in becoming Man. The Father has not become man, the Spirit has not become man, but the Son has. The Lord Jesus has become Man, and He has all the feelings of a man. He is seen in Luke as an infant, and in Matthew as a little child;
{318}
so that He came through all these stages; not that He could not enter into these feelings as in the Deity, but we have them presented in Man. This does not apply to the Father or to the Spirit.
E.B. So that it is an important place the Lord has as a house-father, in view of the Supper. He is quite free, and He would set us free.
J.T. Quite so. It should attract the young people, because they have a place not only in the parents¬ house, but in His house. It is His supper, and His service. It is the Lord's supper.
H.W. So would you continue the idea of the guest chamber? It is the Lord's occasion, and we are guests?
J.T. I would rather try to connect the thought with the household, because a guest is more distant than the members of the household.
W.S.S. There is something very attractive in what you have been saying, in linking up the homes and the houses with what is before us here. Children are accustomed to the father taking his place at the head of the table, and everything proceeds in an orderly way. I think what you have said in regard to the house-father is beautiful: "When the hour was come, he placed himself at table". It is a position we come into where we recognise the place of father which He has taken.
J.T. We can visualise the position. The Lord is the Head, He sat down there as Head; and the twelve are called apostles, meaning that they were there as having authority, and all the authority was under Christ. All the young people were not there yet, but it would widen out and include all the saints. Matthew says, "Drink ye all of it", which would include all the young ones. The headship of Christ enters into it, and the young ones would participate in the whole matter as having to do with a system of which Christ is Head.
{319}
A.W.LeS. Would the mention of the day and the hour suggest that the children are brought up with a christian calendar?
J.T. Yes. It is a matter which should affect us all. "When the hour was come". It should prevent lateness in the meetings. It does not follow that the Lord will come in as we might wish, and sit down in assembly if things are not pleasing to Him. It says, "When the hour was come, he placed himself at table", and 'placed' involves that you do not sit down anyhow. Each one should know how to behave herself or himself when they sit down in assembly.
N.W. The apostle's word in @1 Corinthians 11: 18 would govern that largely. "When ye come together in assembly". It would help to provide the dignity.
J.T. The Corinthians were misbehaving, and the contrast is there. They were worse than children.
Ques. Would this matter of Christ as father come into expression at all, or would it simply be held in our minds in order to set us free?
J.T. It would add to the honour that belongs to Christ, in the sense of authority. The young ones are ready to accord that to Him. The normal use of the term father is seen in @1 Corinthians 8: 6, "To us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things, and *we* for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ". That is the ordinary meaning, and it is only a question of the use of the word 'father' as we are looking at it now; it is a question of the advantage in it for the young people in the sense of submission to the Lord.
W.H. The same expression is used in @James 1: 17, "the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning". Is that a suggestion of warmth?
J.T. It is the Father of lights. The Father is in the house as the sun is in the heavens for light, and heat too, but it is applied to God; it is God who is in mind, not Christ, but God.
{320}
A.M. Would it be right to say the Lord takes charge of the local position, that He takes it on and honours it? We honour Him, but He honours the position. Does not Luke carry forward the idea of the upper room?
J.T. I think he does. The upper room is to be understood in the presentation of the truth in 1 Corinthians. The book opens with this, "To the assembly of God which is in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints, with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours". It is a local position, it is the assembly of God, not universally, but in Corinth; in a certain locality, as it might be here in Adelaide. It is a question of the local position, and the fatherly thought enters into that in the Lord's supper.
A.W.W. Should the reference to the children, and the place they have in all this, test us in our outlook as to what we should look for in receiving children to the breaking of bread?
J.T. The children are all in mind in view of breaking bread, even though they be only ten, or even nine years of age. We might say that is too young, and in most cases it would be, but at the same time God can work in a child of that age. Children are capable of taking in the idea of father as applied to Jesus.
A.W.W. We need help in this city as to what we should look for in the children in relation to reception.
J.T. There is great need, because the schools at the present time are terrible. Things which are brought before the children which they have to learn are terrible, and anything which is an antidote to that, or a corrective of that, should be pursued by the parents.
A.H.S. Can you help us as to what we should look for in the young ones who wish to remember
{321}
the Lord? We have an exercise in our city at the present time; a number of children, some quite young, wish to break bread, and we feel we need a great deal of help in regard to what we have to look for.
J.T. We have the same exercise in our meetings in New York. Several of the very young ones are allowed to break bread. All fathers and mothers should take to heart how to help the very young ones. They should be brought up in the truth of christianity as well as in the ordinary matters of education. Their minds are supposed to take something in at five or six years of age; why not apply that principle to christianity?
A.H.S. You mean a great deal devolves upon their parents, and their careful instruction of them?
J.T. Jehovah had directed Joshua to take up twelve stones and to place them in the land of Canaan. It was not a land in any child's mind, in the full sense. Canaan was a great thought in the mind of Israel, and in the mind of God. The little children will not understand it, but they will understand the idea of breaking the bread and drinking of the cup with their parents, in remembrance of the Lord Jesus as their Saviour. They will ask their parents what these stones mean. Besides the stones Joshua was directed to take out of the midst of the Jordan, he took stones out of the land and placed them in the bed of the Jordan, and they are there to this day (@Joshua 4: 9). What would a child know about that? He would know when he gets to the actual land where the stones are placed, but he would not understand about the stones in the bed of the Jordan, but the two things are placed together.
J.P-sn. We might gather what impressions they have of the Lord Jesus themselves, and what questions they are asking about any impressions they receive amongst the saints.
{322}
J.T. The parents brought the children to Jesus, and the disciples rebuked them, but the Lord said, "Suffer the little children to come". These are the things you would expect. The children ought to begin young, and if they can learn ordinary things from a youthful book, why not learn the things of God in that way? Why not learn the truth of the Lord's supper in that way? It is something they can take in, that the Lord has made a request that they should do this for the calling of Him to mind. They will never forget that phrase, and the Holy Spirit carries the thought on to the spiritual level, and they will soon get on to that, and enter into the spirit of it in the ordinary sense.
A.H.S. Would you look for a sense of responsibility in young children?
J.T. I certainly should. At the large meeting held in Glasgow recently a question as to the young people was raised by a brother who has a great deal to do with the young, and God blesses him. I suggested that the Lord was twelve years of age when He was found in the temple and said, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?", @Luke 2: 49. Why not give some importance to that as regards the children generally?
A.H.S. Would the twelve years of age be literal?
J.T. I think so; otherwise why is it stated there? He eliminates Joseph and Mary and says, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?"
A.W.LeS. The children would be affected as coming from a house in which there is already a house-father?
J.T. Yes.
J.P-sn. Do you think there is a responsibility on us to teach them as to the responsibility of the fellowship, so that they are brought to see the distinctive place the Lord has as house-father?
{323}
J.T. Yes, that helps; and it augments the father's love and the mother's love in the minds of the children. The parents become more an object of affection and respect to the children. The more we can promote that the better.
H.H-n. Should we not look for obedience in the children?
J.T. Why should that be recorded that He went down with His parents to Nazareth, and was subject to them?
H.H-n. And the saints should be the same?
J.T. That is the idea. He is a model for them.
W.S.S. Sometimes there is the thought in our minds that the children need to learn something of the hardness of the world before they come into fellowship. Our outlook in these matters needs correcting if we have thoughts of this kind?
J.T. The less they see of the world the better.
W.S.S. The earlier they take their place, the better for them, and it is a place of salvation?
J.T. Quite so.
W.H.R. The story of Hannah in the temple should characterise our thoughts in connection with the temple?
J.T. That is an excellent example. She took a little coat every year. How that would enlarge the thought of his mother, in Samuel's mind. Each year the coat would be a larger size, and he would take notice of that.
J.P-sn. Does this not all come into the matter of the Lord's supper as applying it to ourselves? There is teaching in regard to it which the Lord takes in hand, and we are to give Him His place, and see that the Supper all centres in Himself?
J.T. This all arises from the word *hour*, and the Lord placing himself at the table, the authority of the twelve apostles also coming into this passage. In verse 15 He says, "With desire I have desired
{324}
to eat this passover with you before I suffer". This is not the Lord's supper, it is the passover. It is an idea carried forward from the Old Testament. "For I say unto you, that I will not eat any more at all of it until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God". They had to learn that they were at school. It is a question of the very early truth which enters into the Lord's supper; it is the very beginning of everything in the way of the service of God. So that "having received a cup, when he had given thanks he said, Take this and divide it among yourselves. For I say unto you, that I will not drink at all of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God come". He is not saying anything about the Lord's supper yet. This cup He has handed to them is not the Lord's supper, it is the passover supper. But He says, "I will not drink at all". He is giving up something negative, and He is going to introduce something new, something positive.
Then we get the Lord's supper. "Having taken a loaf, when he had given thanks, he broke it, and gave it to them, saying, This is my body which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me". "This do in remembrance of me". This is the Lord's supper. "In like manner also the cup, after having supped". This is not the cup of verse 17, it is the cup of the Lord's supper. The Lord is leading out from the passover and from the Old Testament economy into the new, so how much there is for the young to learn, and to learn at the very beginning of christianity.
H.W. Why is the word 'given' left out in Corinthians? "My body which is given". What would be in the Lord's mind in giving it to the apostle Paul in that way?
J.T. He left the whole matter of the Lord's supper so that it should be in Paul's hands, because Paul is the Lord's special man. Everything is placed
{325}
in his hands in that sense, and we have to learn the full thought of the Lord's supper and of the assembly from Paul.
H.W. Would Luke's presentation help us to move intelligently into Paul's line?
J.T. He follows Luke in his writings. We have Luke and the Acts, and Paul follows Luke in all his writings. You can understand how the apostle Paul would regard Luke. He called Luke the "beloved physician".
H.W. At the end he says "Only Luke is with me". In that way Luke would help us to an appreciation of Paul's ministry, and vice versa.
J.T. Some of us were speaking of what Paul endured, the things that he suffered as presented in 2 Corinthians, but especially shipwreck, and how Luke is able to use the right language; he knew what he was saying even from a nautical point of view; and Paul says, "Only Luke is with me", but he was with him all through that experience.
H.W. Is any further thought in your mind before we close?
J.T. I thought especially of the change-over from the cup of the passover in verse 17 to verse 19, which reads: "Having taken a loaf, when he had given thanks, he broke it, and gave it to them, saying, This is my body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me. In like manner also the cup, after having supped, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you", and so on. The Lord changed over, and replaced the old system by the new. We all come into the truth of christianity by seeing that the old system is displaced by christianity and by Paul's ministry.
W.H. In Mark it says, "As they were eating, Jesus, having taken bread".
J.T. And in Matthew also. It would mean that the Old Testament furnished the Lord with the
{326}
means of teaching His disciples. That is, they were already eating. The people of God could not live at all unless they had something to eat, but the old was displaced gradually by the new, and the new is the Lord's supper.
J.P-sn. Do we need a little help to see that the Supper -- the loaf and the cup -- stands in relation to Himself?
J.T. The apostles are the source we look to to learn christianity. @Acts 2: 42 speaks of the apostles¬ doctrine. It was the twelve from whom these newly converted people were to learn the apostles¬ doctrine. We must go by the New Testament, and not by the Old, if it is a question of discipline or doctrine. The New Testament comes first. They persevered in the apostles¬ teaching, not in the teaching of Moses, or David, or the Psalms, but in the apostles¬ teaching.
W.S.S. What is the bearing of the words "for you" in connection with the bread and the cup? Does it indicate the bearing of the Supper as being for the saints?
J.T. It is not for the Jewish remnant. Some say that it is, that the Lord's supper will be continued by the Jewish remnant. It is "for you". It is for the assembly only.
W.S.S. I was thinking of the words, "A body hast thou prepared me", @Hebrews 10: 5. The Lord's body there would suggest His coming to accomplish the will of God, but here the emphasis is on the bearing towards the saints: "for you". How far do we have before us the thought of the Lord accomplishing the will of God in the Supper? Would a brother who serves the saints in breaking the bread give place in his thanksgiving for the Lord's accomplishing the will of God?
J.T. I should think so. I think we ought to have before us the thought that He accomplished the will of God in it. "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God.
{327}
He taketh away the first, that he may establish the second", @Hebrews 10: 9.
W.S.S. I am thankful for what you say, because there is sometimes a tendency with us to exclude certain things, and to go beyond just what the Supper is from our point of view.
J.T. I would not like to exclude the will of God; that is all I can say. I would not like to minimise the fact that the Lord's supper is the Lord's.
J.P-sn. Would you help us in regard to the cup, as to whether it is an expression of the Lord's own love, rather than the love of God?
J.T. I think we have to keep to that in connection with the cup. The love of God comes in, but for myself I would not like to bring in anyone but the Lord Himself when it is the cup. "In like manner also the cup", and then He adds, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you". I feel it is necessary to avoid bringing God in, because it is the Lord's supper. We can reserve all that refers to God for a later part of the meeting. It is a question of "from glory to glory"; how much there is in it for all the divine Persons, but the glory of the Lord's supper is the Lord's.
W.M. "Not discerning the Lord's body", does that emphasise what you are saying as to its being the Lord's supper?
J.T. That is just the point. They were not discerning the Lord's body. It is the Lord's body, which shows how careful we should be to have the Lord in mind in everything regarding His supper, so that we do not belittle Him in any sense. "For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep", @1 Corinthians 11: 30. For that very cause. There is an actual penalty attached to the disregard of the Lord in His supper, not discerning what refers to Him there.
{328}
J.M. Would you exclude the thought of the love of God from the cup?
J.T. I do. I think we could easily lay things aside, and reserve them for other features of this great occasion in the service of God, but there is the service rendered to Christ too, in connection with His supper.
J.M. "This cup is the new covenant in my blood". Does not that touch the love of God?
J.T. It is the new covenant in *my* blood; that is Christ's blood.
J.P-sn. It is for *His* praise. It is the Lord personally who is before us.
J.M. Those words suggest to you then that the cup is the new covenant in Christ's blood?
J.T. That is what I am saying; the Lord says, "my blood". I do not believe we fully take in what the Lord's words mean, in what He said to Paul as to His supper. These are the words we have to consider in @1 Corinthians 11; they are Paul's words of what he received from the Lord Jesus. "For *I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you, this do in remembrance of me. In like manner also the cup, after having supped, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood, this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me". That is the great point in it. I would say as to the new covenant, that it was never *made* with the assembly; it was made with the house of Israel and the house of Judah. Paul's words as to what he received from the Lord are, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood; this do ... in remembrance of me". That is what the Lord's supper is for. It is not to teach us about the new covenant, but to teach us about the Lord.
{329}
M.C.T. Does it help to see we are still occupied with the Lord? We continue after the emblems to be occupied with His glory, until we are led to the Father.
J.T. Are not the saints right in attaching to Him the full bearing and the full meaning of His own words?
W.S.S. If we have the Lord really occupying our affections and minds, we would be more touched by the words "my blood", endearing Him to us afresh.
J.T. That is right.
W.S.S. What you have been saying as to what the Lord is in the Supper is very valuable. All the great thoughts as to God and the Father come with greater fulness and power when they come in their right order.
J.T. It raises a question as to the place David's ministry has in christianity. He introduced the idea of a departmental ministry and service. The department of the Lord's supper is a great matter.
W.S.S. Would you say that unless we take things up in this departmental way we will be confused?
J.T. We would get confused. David introduced the idea of the departments in @1 Chronicles 23 to the end of that book. It is carried down into the New Testament in the book of Revelation, in the four and twenty elders. The people who know God and know Christ always know what to do. They do the right thing, and say the right thing. They pass things on to the living creatures. When the living creatures do something, the four and twenty elders do more, they bow down and worship.
J.P-sn. The thought of the Lord as the house-father would bring the young people into things in a systematic way, and would bring them into liberty, and they would fit into things in a departmental sense?
{330}
J.T. Yes; the children are brought up in different grades when they go to school, and that is the way the truth grows.
E.B. What you have been saying is all in view of retaining the Lord in His own sphere until the completion of the Supper. You do not step out of that department.
J.T. "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer".
H.V. "I lay down my life ... I have authority to lay it down and I have authority to take it again", @John 10: 17, 18. What was His object in taking it again? Was it to secure a people for Himself and for God?
J.T. That is a remarkable position. "This commandment have I received of my Father". It is a commandment from the Father. We are all ready to accord to the Father what is due to Him, and the Lord says, "This commandment have I received of my Father"; that is, to lay down His life and take it again. He had a commandment from the Father to do it.
J.M. What thoughts come before *you* as you give thanks for the cup?
J.T. The Lord Jesus. The thought of remembrance. It is for a calling of Him to mind. It does not say that in Luke.
H.W. It is not the teaching of the covenant.
J.T. It is the Lord personally who is in mind in the Lord's supper.
W.M. How are we privileged to regard ourselves, as we enter the hall with a view to calling the Lord to mind?
J.T. I would say to begin with, that we meet one another; that is the beginning. We meet each other, and have each other in mind, so that the Lord can draw near to us, and have pleasure in us, because we love one another. That is the way I
{331}
would regard it; and that is the way I do regard it, in coming into the hall with the brethren. I often say to myself, 'Are we all here?'
H.W. Mr. Raven is reported to have said that the first thing he did was to have a good look at the saints, and then at the loaf. That was good advice.
W.M. We do not regard ourselves as sons?
J.T. It is too soon to bring sonship in. It is a question of what we are in everyday life. We approach chapter 11 of 1 Corinthians by chapter 10; it is a question of what we have been going through during the week, and whether we have kept ourselves right, and whether we are prepared for the Lord's supper. "Is it not the communion of the blood of the Christ?" @1 Corinthians 10: 16. We begin with that.
W.M. The Scripture says, "When the disciples came together to break bread", @Acts 20: 7. Should we regard ourselves as disciples?
J.T. I should say that. Not even as brethren, or as sons, but just as disciples. It was a question of their having light from Him. The word disciple means that they were *His* disciples. That is what should come before us.
W.H. When we sit down are we on risen ground?
J.T. I do not think so. We are just ordinary men and women.
H.W. In our local setting?
J.T. Yes. Each one should search his heart every morning before sitting down.
{332}
APOSTOLIC SERVICE AND TESTIMONY CONTINUED IN THE SPIRIT
@Acts 2: 42 - 47
J.T. This chapter sets before us the inauguration of the dispensation, and the character of it, the gospel being intended to be the outstanding feature of the dispensation, resulting in the formation of the assembly. What the apostle says from verse 32 to the end of verse 41 may be regarded as entering into the whole chapter, the result in detail being seen in the verses read; that is to say, what marked the early disciples, of whom there were more than three thousand according to what is stated. It appears as if God would signalise the inauguration of the dispensation by the immediate result of the gospel, the immediate result being that a great many relatively were affected. Then, in view of what is asserted in authority by Peter in the power of gift, the verses read, beginning with verse 42, tell us how the testimony affected those that believed, and how they persevered, as it is said, in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers. So that what is in mind now is to point out that the apostolic service is stressed; not Mosaic or Old Testament service in all its subdivisions, but what is stressed is apostolic testimony, not Moses¬ testimony. Those who believed persevered in the testimony and teaching and fellowship of the apostles.
It is thought that it would be well to be reminded of this fact, of the apostolic service and testimony, and that it continues until now, and will continue to the end; not in the same personnel, but in the power of the Spirit, the same power that marked the early believers is continuous. That is what is particularly in mind in the whole chapter, the power and testimony of the Spirit in these vessels which
{333}
are prepared for the service. Verse 32 begins with the Spirit. It says, "This Jesus has God raised up, whereof all *we* are witnesses. Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which ye behold and hear". "And having heard it they were pricked in heart, and said to Peter and the other apostles, What shall we do, brethren? And Peter said to them, Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. For to you is the promise and to your children, and to all who are afar off, as many as the Lord our God may call. And with many other words he testified and exhorted them, saying, Be saved from this perverse generation. Those then who had accepted his word were baptised; and there were added in that day about three thousand souls" (verses  37 - 41). So that the whole position is clearly and fully stated, although we know that much had to be added subsequently, and we may say is continually being added. The general truth is here, so that there should be the inauguration of the present dispensation, which is set up in faith, and it was marked by perseverance by the believers in the apostles¬ teaching and fellowship, and the breaking of bread and prayers.
H.W. Was it in mind that these inaugural features mentioned in verses 42 and 43 are to be carried down in power in the hearts of God's people to the end?
J.T. I would say that, and our meetings, now, having taken the character they have, I mean the meetings of the saints who are subject to the truth, stress the importance of the apostolic testimony, both in the teaching of the truth to the saints, and in the testimony of the gospel to those outside; and it is thought that it is to continue, and the question
{334}
is whether it does. In one respect it seems to me there is a defect in the fact that there is little public preaching, such as marked Peter's address. It is quite evident there was no hall large enough to contain the number of persons who were present and listened and received the truth. I think it might be well for us all to have it before us, that there is this defect in the service at the present time, not only in this country, but generally. We have meetings such as we are having at this moment, which I am sure heaven greatly regards and blesses, and then we have fellowship meetings too, in which large numbers of brethren come together, and these are specially pleasing to God; but then the question is whether we are adhering to the original characteristics in the sense of public testimony, or whether we are not tending to confine ourselves to what is merely private.
P.L. Would Proverbs be in line, "Wisdom hath built her house ... she crieth upon the summits of the high places of the city", @Proverbs 9: 1, 3?
J.T. That fits in exactly.
J.P-sn. We see that in the heavenly city the names of the twelve apostles are in the foundations of the wall. The wall would be what is seen outwardly, the apostolic teaching in that way coming to us in view of what is outward as well as what is inward.
J.T. The wall is symbolic of testimony, and is for the protection of what is inward and most precious. The foundations were of the wall, not in the building as a whole, but of the wall of the city; so that there is a suggestion of what is inward and precious, and this supposes the ministry of Paul, which is protected by the wall, which of course would be a great matter and a public matter. We should take account of that when we come together, and it is very pleasurable to heaven that we do.
{335}
Those who believed were together, but there is more than that. There is need of actual words, or language, or ability to speak, so that people might be affected as directed by the testimony. Of course, the heavenly city confines itself in what we get in @Revelation 21 to the testimony of the twelve, but there is not only the testimony of the twelve which is to furnish what is protective, but there is what is precious and private in Paul's testimony, and that is not mentioned at all. What marks the brethren is generally and mainly and specifically Paul's testimony, but Paul's testimony is just the perfecting of that of the twelve, and therefore in calling attention to the twelve, which thought agrees with the foundations, and the wall of the city, we are calling attention to the whole matter. That is how the Spirit of God puts it in Revelation.
H.W. We find in connection with the four points mentioned, that is, teaching, fellowship, breaking of bread and prayers, there is great enlargement in the ministry of the apostle Paul. It is he who brings in much enlargement in connection with these four matters.
J.T. That is just what I have in mind, that Paul's testimony is a great feature, and it enlarges on every one of these four points. The breaking of bread is greatly enlarged. The twelve did not enlarge on it as he does.
H.W. There is great expansion in what he brings in.
J.T. Quite so. We could hardly say that what is mentioned of the twelve here, namely, the apostles¬ teaching, and fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayers, is just what we have in @1 Corinthians 11.
A.W.LeS. Is Paul's preaching at Athens what you have in mind?
J.T. One would have to hesitate a little there, as to whether Paul's teaching at Athens goes the whole
{336}
way, because although evidently finished for the moment, and especially as delivered at Athens, yet it does not go the whole way of the truth as affecting the affections of the listeners. It was not a full gospel such as Paul preached later elsewhere.
P.L. Would that involve the preaching of the Son of God? Paul alludes to himself, and Silvanus and Timotheus as having preached the Son of God, @2 Corinthians 1: 19.
J.T. Yes. He says, "God ... was pleased to reveal his Son in me", @Galatians 1: 15, 16. That is the secret part of the testimony. The Lord said to Peter, "*Thou* art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly". The rock of Peter's testimony was the testimony of the Son of God, but it was never characteristic of Peter himself. That is an important matter. It was characteristic of Peter's testimony that he *never* stressed the thought of the Son of God, but Paul did constantly. Paul said, "God ... was pleased to reveal his Son in me, that I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations". That is what God has particularly stressed in recent times. Peter never mentioned the testimony of the Son of God, except in his second letter where he refers to the transfiguration (@2 Peter 1: 17). His testimony is largely the insistence on the fellowship, and other features that are mentioned in his first letter.
W.M. Would this scripture help, "For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus)", @2 Corinthians 1: 19?
J.T. That characterises Paul's testimony, and in that he would associate others with him. There were three of them. If they came to this town, Paul would probably give the first address, and then Silvanus might preach, and Timotheus might preach. They were all in it, and that shows that those especially under his influence were stressing the
{337}
thought of the sonship of Christ, but Peter does not. He never speaks in that way. He speaks about the Christ, and the glories that should follow. He uses the word "precious" more than Paul does, but Paul is the one the Lord took up to stress the idea of sonship.
E.B. Is Paul a good example in @Acts 9: 20, where it says that he preached that Jesus is the Son of God?
J.T. That was his first testimony, that Jesus is the Son of God.
J.P-sn. Can you help us as to whether the teaching of the apostle comes into the matter of our preaching today? I desire help as to what is in mind as to the public testimony of which you have spoken, as to the gospel being preached in public places.
J.T. It affected them at the beginning of the testimony. The beginning of the testimony is traced in @Acts 2; they were Pentecostal days, the days of the twelve, not Paul's days. It waited for Paul to make it the leading feature.
A.M. As to this side of public testimony, would it link up with the testimony of the Lord Jesus Himself while He was here, which was largely of a public character especially in its closing phases?
J.T. It was a feature which marked the twelve themselves. The Lord must have spoken in a public sense. He spoke to large numbers.
A.M. The Holy Spirit has a peculiar pleasure in continuing that kind of service.
J.T. There is no good reason why it should be given up or ignored in any way.
H.W. In the service of the Lord Jesus Himself, it is frequently mentioned that crowds came to hear the word of God. When the apostle Paul goes out on his first missionary journey, three times the word of God is mentioned in connection with the apostle's
{338}
service. Is that of importance in connection with what you have in mind? In @Acts 13: 44 it speaks of the word of God.
J.T. The words "Paul and his company" are used. It was not a one-man affair, it was a company, and Paul characterised it. At first they did not meet with very great success; they had to wait for the success after they had laboured. The first result was a distinguished public man, and he was amazed at the teaching of the Lord.
A.H.S. What had you in mind when you said there was no good reason why *it* should be given up?
J.T. Preaching in the open air. Why should it be given up? Up to the time of the revival public preaching was carried on by such men as Wesley and Whitefield. I have heard of Whitefield preaching to twenty thousand people in Philadelphia, and many others did the same thing later.
P.L. Do you think we may perhaps, alas, shirk this rough and relatively hard work of tree-felling in view of material for the assembly? I thought that the light of Solomon illustrating sonship would impel us in this character of working.
J.T. Quite so. It is rough work, but it aims at very gracious results, because the temple was of the highest quality typically. Rough work must have marked it. David was forbidden to build the house; it was his son who should build it; and the sonship of Christ is what we are dealing with.
P.L. It should impel us to go forth tree-felling.
J.T. Quite so. You mean cutting down trees. Men have to humble themselves, and fall down, and serve God.
P.L. Bringing them by water to Joppa would be a reference to baptism, in @Acts 2 for example.
Rem. Lack of results has deterred us in this matter.
{339}
J.T. There is a reproach about it, and it is not so easy to go out in the streets and testify to Christ, as to have a hall provided for you, and come here or to other halls in this city. But this feature did not mark the early believers. A nice hall and platform did not mark them. But there is that which was characteristic of them at the beginning. The cutting down of trees means that men are bowed down by the testimony of Christ.
P.L. "Do the work of an evangelist" and "endure afflictions" linked together in @2 Timothy 4: 5 would suggest the mettle that faces opposition in that way in evangelical service.
J.T. We are all free to refer to that great servant whom God used, J.N.D., and someone told me that he mentioned to J.N.D. that he had been preaching the gospel, and J.N.D. said nothing, he did not answer at all. He told him again, and he still did not answer, and then J.N.D. said, 'Was there opposition?' and then he was interested. If there is opposition there is something there that God supports and Satan would object to, and we have to bear the shame and reproach of that testimony.
P.L. "For a great door is open to me and an effectual one, and the adversaries many", @1 Corinthians 16: 9.
J.P-sn. The gospel is preached here in Acts by men full of the Holy Spirit. Do you think there has been a lack in that regard in service which has been taken up? We see power in the testimony that goes out here in Acts, and it should be so today.
J.T. Quite so; in some sense, anyway. There must be something of that kind, something which would keep up the features of the beginning, with which God began, and it involves reproach. The Lord constantly calls attention to the reproach attached to His testimony, the reproach of Christ.
{340}
Ques. "And let him that hears say, Come", @Revelation 22: 17. Does that link on with what you have been saying?
J.T. Quite so; and "He that will, let him take the water of life freely". That is a gospel feature.
A.M. The matter arises early in the second epistle to Timothy, does it not? "For which cause I put thee in mind to rekindle the gift of God which is in thee by the putting on of my hands. For God has not given us a spirit of cowardice, but of power, and of love, and of wise discretion. Be not therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner; but suffer evil along with the glad tidings, according to the power of God", @2 Timothy 1: 6 - 8.
J.T. A very good passage.
A.M. It shows the tendency in later days to fall short.
J.T. In the Acts they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers. And then we have further details of what characterised these people. "And fear was upon every soul, and many wonders and signs took place through the apostles¬ means. And all that believed were together, and had all things common, and sold their possessions and substance, and distributed them to all, according as any one might have need. And every day, being constantly in the temple with one accord, and breaking bread in the house, they received their food with gladness and simplicity of heart, praising God, and having favour with all the people". The breaking of bread was in the house; it was not in the temple. It was not in keeping with religious customs; it was in the house. And then we have, "And the Lord added to the assembly daily those that were to be saved". God did His part; the others did their part, brothers and sisters alike, and then chapter 3 opens up the work
{341}
of two of them, Peter and John, and what resulted from this work.
W.S.S. Would the beginning of Luke be in line with what you are saying, Simeon speaking in the temple, and Anna speaking outside to those who looked for redemption in Jerusalem?
J.T. Very good; a sister speaking outside to all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.
P.L. "The Lord gives the word, great the host of the publishers", @Psalm 68: 11. Mr. Darby points out that the word publishers there is a feminine one. Mr. Stoney used to refer to the sisters as retrievers going after the wounded.
J.T. The third chapter opens up with something to be noticed, because the history here is developing. It is a history marked by development, and the development is in these two men. "And Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer, which is the ninth hour; and a certain man who was lame from his mother's womb was being carried, whom they placed every day at the gate of the temple called Beautiful, to ask alms of those who were going into the temple; who, seeing Peter and John about to enter into the temple, asked to receive alms. And Peter, looking steadfastly upon him with John, said, Look on us". The allusion is to what is to be seen in those men; not in the temple, not in what was religious in character, but in those two men who were under reproach; the opposers said they were ignorant persons, but they were there in power, and they were to be looked on. It is a question of what is to be seen, so that if we go out with the truth, let us see to it that there is something to be seen in us as witnesses. Peter says, "All *we* are witnesses". @Acts 2: 32.
Ques. What is to be seen?
J.T. Three thousand had come into it, but these two are signalised, and the first thing they call
{342}
attention to is what is to be seen. "Look on us", not on the three thousand, but on these two men, because there is something there of particular beauty in the mind of heaven, two of them together, Peter and John.
A.M. Is it not one of the first features of the work of God coming to light in an initial way, that one is not ashamed to come out in the open on the line of confession, as mentioned in verse 37?
J.T. The witnesses of it are attractive. They are something to call attention to. There are large numbers now as there were in the beginning, and we thank God for them. If they are with God, they are not too large for us. We are not afraid of the size of the meeting -- Peter had to inaugurate things with the idea of three thousand persons. The principle is enlarged greatly later on in the book of Acts.
T.P. Is it right to link it up with the scripture, "How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things!", @Romans 10: 15?
J.T. That would apply to the Lord, and it would apply to the apostles. The woman in @Luke 7 kissed those feet, and anointed those feet, showing that the Lord's attractiveness had gone down to the feet.
J.P-sn. Would Peter and John be like the two pillars at the entrance to the temple? They set forth the testimony, but there was something far greater inside. Is that what there should be in the gospel testimony?
J.T. What was inside was greater; that is, the ark of the covenant, and the other features of the holiest. Those are the things especially in the mind of God.
J.P-sn. So Peter and John, as two of the apostles, set forth this testimony, but Paul brings in the greatness of the service of God and all that goes on inside?
{343}
J.T. Yes. One wonders that Paul is in such liberty to call attention to himself. We marvel at the number of occasions he mentions himself, and that he is allowed, and did take liberty, to speak of himself. The question is now whether there is anything that can be used in a public way, that can be used in the service of the gospel, that can be called attention to. It is a question of Paul's features reflecting what Christ's features are, marking the beginning of the dispensation.
W.S.S. In Colossians he says he is minister of the gospel (@Colossians 1: 23), and minister of the assembly (@Colossians 1: 25). In @Ephesians 3 he speaks of his intelligence in the mystery and says, "To me, less than the least of all saints, has this grace been given, to announce among the nations the glad tidings of the unsearchable riches of the Christ". Those two thoughts are brought together in his ministry. I had in mind the balance of the mystery of the assembly and the intelligence in the mystery, and the announcement of the riches of Christ.
J.T. He could say, "I reckon that in nothing I am behind those who are in surpassing degree apostles", @2 Corinthians 11: 5.
P.L. "Mercy was shewn me, that in me, the first. Jesus Christ might display the whole long-suffering, for a delineation of those about to believe on him to life eternal", @1 Timothy 1: 16. Was that a portrayal?
J.T. Yes, they are beautiful traits, and Paul thought of all that were about to believe to life eternal. He represented the whole thought of God's work, both the present dispensation and the coming one.
A.R.G. Is this matter of attractiveness in the person presenting the word, a safeguard against souls being converted and drifting to nowhere particular; that is, souls being converted and not attached to the assembly?
{344}
J.T. Do you mean that there is that danger in the case of a person converted by public preaching?
A.R.G. I thought of that as not giving them a start in the assembly, but is the matter of the attractiveness of the person presenting the word a safeguard against that?
J.T. The Lord's day is remarkably constituted. We have the breaking of bread, and then we have these readings on Lord's day afternoons, and the day is pretty well filled up; and then the preaching, preceded in recent times by prayer in the houses of the brethren. That is a great guarantee of success, even if you only get one soul, but there is something there that should affect him; that is to say, the teaching of the apostles, and the fellowship of the apostles, and the breaking of bread and prayers. Monday night comes in after the Lord's day, and if he is at all affected by the testimony which is rendered, he will not forget the assembly. He will be brought into it.
A.R.G. In relation to the attractiveness of the person presenting the word, this man clave to Peter and John. He did not want to leave them.
J.T. He did not go to any other religious position; he kept to them. He did not fall away, but clave to them. He held them; he held both of them, he was not a partisan. He held them both, and he became a testimony and the devil attacked it at once, and this man is twice alluded to by Peter.
W.S.S. He entered with *them* into the temple, which suggests in our day that he came into the light of the assembly.
P.L. And he held Peter and John.
J.P-sn. Are we helped in this manner in speaking to souls as to the sphere of salvation to which they may be brought, especially as we see the darkness of what is around?
{345}
J.T. "Come and see" is the other side of things. To come and see is to come and hear. But come and see, see what God's work is in its beauty. You are encouraged to say "Come and see", because you know the brethren walk in the truth, and there is something to see.
Ques. Would the preaching in public testimony be of the same character as that in our halls, and on the same level?
J.T. We have to allow for the difference in the congregation. They just pass along and listen; they have ears as well as eyes, and now and again we hear of someone being attracted, and it is worth while, even if it is only one. Gold is there, and we know what gold means. People know the colour of it, and what it means.
W.B. The apostle could say, "Those things, which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do", @Philippians 4: 9. Is it essential that the speaker should be the exponent in himself of what he presents?
J.T. Quite so. What they heard and saw in him, they were to do. And so it is said, "All things which Jesus began both to do and to teach", @Acts 1: l.
D.J. Seeing that Peter and John were uninstructed men, they wondered, and they recognised them that they had been with Jesus (@Acts 4: 13).
J.T. That shows what the public testimony may be, that these men who were preaching suggested the Lord to the hearers. They did not preach as some do; they did not have to wear any garb to signalise themselves. It is a question of what they were morally. That is the testimony.
H.M. Is it noticeable that Peter and John appeared as those who had something worth while to give? "Such as I have give I thee".
J.T. That is another feature of the testimony, that God is a giving God. John himself comes in to confirm
{346}
and support what the others are saying. "God so loved the world, that he gave", @John 3: 16. It is a question of what God is. That is for John, not for Paul; that enters into the public service of preaching.
A.M. Is there another feature of the public testimony, that the preaching and teaching are seen in the walk of the saints? It is emphasised that this man walked. Does the question of walk enter into the last few verses of @Acts 2, the way the saints behaved, and the things they did, their gladness and simplicity, their feeding, and so on?
J.T. "A certain man who was lame from his mother's womb was being carried, whom they placed every day at the gate of the temple called Beautiful", @Acts 3: 2. Notice that he was carried. It does not say that he never walked. If one may refer to chapter 14, another similar passage, "And a certain man in Lystra, impotent in his feet, sat, being lame from his mother's womb, who had never walked" (verse 8). That is not said of the man in chapter 3. In chapter 14 we have a gentile feature, and he had never walked. The gentiles never walked. They did not know anything about God. The Jews did, and the man in chapter 3 evidently knew something about God. What the man saw in Peter and John should be reflected in him, and it was, he held Peter and John; he clung to them, and he was seen together with them. The brethren are attractive, and if God is working in men and women and children, they will be attracted to the brethren, and walk with them, and do what they do. We should be able to show what should be done, and so attract them.
P.L. Have we the same thought in @Acts 14: 1, where it says that Paul and Barnabas "entered together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spake that a great multitude of both Jews and Greeks believed"? "So spake" would show the spirit as well as the substance?
{347}
J.T. Quite so. A great multitude believed. There were two of them together. "It came to pass in Iconium that they entered together into the synagogue of the Jews".
J.O. Have you in mind that at the end of this dispensation, when the service of God has been established, the Lord is going to lead the saints out in testimony? Before the people of God went out of Egypt, they had light in their dwellings, and God gave them favour among the Egyptians, and they obtained vessels of silver and vessels of gold, which were largely used in the tabernacle system.
J.T. They demanded of the Egyptians. They had certain rights, and the Egyptians gave them certain things, silver and gold. Surely God was working, to give them favour in the sight of the Egyptians.
J.P-sn. So in Solomon's kingdom there is one, the Queen of Sheba, who is directed in relation to Solomon and to his service, and she brings wealth in her offering.
J.T. No spirit was left in her. She never saw such a sight anywhere. There was no such sight to be seen anywhere as in Jerusalem, and there is no such sight to be seen now. Is there anything that is different in us from the religious bodies around us? God means that there should be.
J.P-sn. The effect of Paul's ministry upon us causes conditions in the way of illumination, so that souls are attracted and brought to Christ Himself, and the truth of the assembly.
Ques. The special feature in relation to Paul's preaching was the opposition which marked it continually. Do you think we should be more prepared for, and expect to have, opposition to our preaching?
J.T. That is a question for every one of us. One feels it as to oneself. We are most of us business men, and all these things add to us according to men. The question is whether the suffering is there.
{348}
W.S.S. Does what you have been saying to us challenge our hearts as to how far we are really in the good of the teaching of the assembly? Here we have the temple connected with the testimony. In Paul we have the ministry of the assembly connected with the ministry of the gospel, and as you were pointing out, the gift of the evangelist is found in Ephesians and not in Corinthians.
J.T. That is all very instructive. There is no doubt that the Lord is especially using the brethren, whom we speak of as the disciples of the Lord, because the word 'disciples' is a most expressive one, to bring out what was in His counsels before the world was; that is, the assembly; to bring out what it is composed of, and what it is to be now in a time of suffering. We are protecting what we value so highly, and we do not give it away to the natural man to make use of. We do not cast our pearls before swine. If we are not careful we are sure to provoke imitation. Imitation continues, but we are not to add to that imitation, but to be careful. These things are of God, and they are not to be imitated. The natural man can imitate them.
A.W.LeS. The prophet said, "He is despised and rejected of men", @Isaiah 53: 3.
J.T. Peter says, "Silver and gold I have not; but what I have, this give I to thee: In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean rise up and walk". Peter is not hiding the reproach attached to Christ. He was crucified. He was the Nazaraean, a suffering one.
A.M. Does the tabernacle system portray this? On the outside of the tabernacle there were badger skins, but the more precious features were inward, and were hidden.
J.T. Very good. That is the public position in the wilderness, whereas Paul's ministry in its fulness leads to the land.
A.M. The building of the tabernacle was marked by goats¬ hair, and rams¬ skins dyed red and badger
{349}
skins. The entrance of the court suggested how beautiful it was within.
J.T. Quite so.
P.L. And would the quantity of byssus in relation to the court suggest the feelings for men? Paul's going into Europe is connected with the Spirit of Jesus. Does that engagingly play a part?
J.T. The Spirit of Jesus not allowing him to go to a certain place, but He would have him go to another place. The inner side was there, although not exposed to the natural mind.
P.L. The delicate Egyptian byssus would speak of that tender, compassionate feelings for men, seen in that way. Was not the door connected with the byssus?
J.T. I think it refers to it as the "gate".
A.M. @Exodus 27: 9 reads, "Thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle. On the south side, southward, hangings for the court of twined byssus; a hundred cubits the length" and so on. Verse 16 refers to "the gate of the court". I was wondering if the byssus would not be the side of righteousness in the testimony.
J.T. It is the fine quality of the Egyptian cotton that is in view, and therefore it is a type of refinement, refinement in the texture of it. It has to be carefully examined to know what it really is. It was to be seen in the Lord Jesus, and it is to be seen in the saints; it is a question of the Spirit operating in the saints.
W.S.S. There would be nothing about the byssus, or fine cotton, to repel?
J.T. No. It is very different from the goats¬ hair. These things have to be compared. They have teaching in them, and that is what the byssus means, that you have to examine them closely to find out the teaching in them. That is why you have so much said about these types. There is so much to interest, but you have to examine them closely.
{350}
Ques. Were you referring in verse 16 to the gate?
A.M. I referred to that as the outside position, as compared with the inside position. Some suggestion was given in the hangings of the gate as to what was within.
J.T. The outside is in keeping with what is within. The acacia wood is to be compared with the quality of the byssus. The acacia is not a showy thing, but strong. There is great strength in it.
{351}
FELLOWSHIP AS BEARING ON THE SERVICE OF GOD
@1 Corinthians 10: 14 - 33; @1 Corinthians 11: 1 - 16
J.T. A suggestion has been made that we should look into something relating to the service of God. What has been read is introductory to it, for the service of God, in the order of it, strictly begins with the Lord's supper, whereas what we have read is not the order of it but the fellowship of it; that is to say what relates to our public life, and whether that is in keeping with the service of God. We have begun with the cup first, so that we may see it is not the order of the Supper, but some part taken which enters into the fellowship of it. Indeed verse 16 says, "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of the Christ?", as if the apostle had in mind to touch our hearts as to our public conduct, and in the beginning of chapter 11 as to our public appearance, so raising the question as to whether it is in the comeliness suitable for the divine service. Hence the cup is mentioned first, whereas in the order of the Lord's supper the bread is mentioned first. But the apostle would touch our hearts, I believe, by the thought of the blood of Christ, and the communion of it.
L.P.M. What relation has the mention of the cup first to the public behaviour of the assembly that you alluded to?
J.T. Well, it is a question of the fellowship, because the cup, the blood of Christ, is a question of communion. The word relates to a partnership with one another even although we may be absent from one another. It is a question of our public relations, as to whether we are loyal to the principles that we profess.
{352}
L.P.M. I observe that the same word 'communion' is used in connection with the bread which we break, but you remarked that the cup comes first.
J.T. Well, that is in accordance with what has been remarked already, that the blood of Christ is peculiarly touching.
A.M. Does the idea of blessing bear on the public position?
J.T. The idea of speaking well of a thing, which we ought to do. We ought to have before us that we are not only respectful of things that we profess, but speak well of them. Blessing has the sense of eulogy, I would say, that is to say, making much of what we profess, or what we have been brought into together. It is a matter of the community that we have been brought into, and there is much to speak of and to think of, so that we are not light or frivolous in our conversation, but take things up in reality as leading up to the service of God.
A.M. The idea of blessing begins with Noah, does it not? and the first element in it is that he blesses Jehovah, and then you have the idea of the spreading out in connection with Japheth -- looking on to our day. I just wondered if that would bear on this. Noah says, "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Shem", and so on -- I was thinking of that as the first element of the service of God in an initial way, that he is thinking of God first; and the light in which God would be displayed, not only in Shem but in Japheth.
J.T. Shem has a peculiar place in the economy of God, but Japheth comes in later, though in @Genesis 10: 21 Japheth is called the elder. Noah had the thought of God in his mind, and as to himself he would comfort, his father thought of him in that way. Japheth was undoubtedly in mind in view of the assembly, that is to say the western world.
{353}
E.B. In view of the public side that you have emphasised, would you say a word about intelligent persons, the question of responsible age, and the measure of intelligence that would be necessary in view of fellowship?
J.T. Well, we should know how to name things and to regard them according to how they are to be used, so that we are not ignorant. It is said, "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge" (@Hosea 4: 6), and again "For I would not have you ignorant; brethren", @1 Corinthians 10: 1. We have many such references, and this chapter is to make us intelligent, I would say. "I speak as to intelligent persons". The epistle often treats of the truth in an abstract sense, as in chapter 1 up to verse 9. It says, beginning at verse 4, "I thank my God always about you, in respect of the grace of God given to you in Christ Jesus; that in everything ye have been enriched in him, in all word of doctrine" (notice "word of doctrine" which would mean great intelligence, abstractly at least), "and all knowledge, (according as the testimony of the Christ has been confirmed in you,) so that ye come short in no gift, awaiting the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall also confirm you to the end, unimpeachable in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ", @1 Corinthians 1: 4 - 8. Now that passage contemplates knowledge, intelligence, only it is treated in the abstract and thus treated fully. It cannot be said that it is applicable to the Corinthians in a general way in detail, because verse 10 turns to division amongst them and then licentiousness, and other such things. The reference here in chapter 10, "I speak as to intelligent persons", would be taken from that thought; that is to say, it is the abstract idea, or in one sense the objective side of the truth. The apostle is giving them credit for intelligence, and of course, he proceeds to much on that line. Then next to that thought we have
{354}
headship which is the full thought of intelligence, intelligence in Christ, of course, but worked out in the assembly.
A.J.G. Is the bringing in of the cup first, "the communion of the blood of the Christ", to emphasise death as having an important bearing on our position in this word?
J.T. It would imply that, I should think, and how we are to be concerned as to every word, as to our conversation and references, that all is to be conducive to God's service, for we are identified formally with it. We may easily desecrate the truth that we profess to hold by the language we may use and the persons with whom we converse and associate.
P.H.H. Is it significant that the word 'assembly' appears in connection with the passover? "Speak unto all the assembly of Israel", @Exodus 12: 3. Would that help to bring before us in an early type the idea of the whole people being concerned in something and morally held responsible to be loyal to it?
J.T. I think that is good. @Exodus 12 comes in conveniently for us at this time, as illustrating the principle of reducing a matter, instead of enlarging on it unduly, so as to make it applicable to a given circumstance. So that whilst the chapter enlarges on the truth of the passover, Moses epitomises it, reducing the full thought of the chapter to a few verses; compare verses 21 to 27 with verses 1 to 20. What we are dealing with now, that is, fellowship as bearing on the service of God, is a great subject, but what is in mind is not to enlarge upon it because there would not be time. It deserves a fuller account of things than we are able to give it now, but brevity is in order, and headship would help us to be brief in presenting the matter in hand. The service of God belongs to the first day of the week, but what we are engaged with now leads up to it.
{355}
H.H. Would @Numbers 4 help in relation to the public side? It is interesting that the Kohathites carried the ark, the table of shewbread, the candlestick and all pertaining to it. There is the very remarkable word as to the brazen altar, that the priests were to cleanse the altar of the ashes, and spread a purple cloth thereon (@Numbers 4: 13). All that is in testimony now, and carried on the shoulder of the Kohathites?
J.T. That helps. It enters into what we have in mind now. It is more suitable for Saturday; that is to say, the last day of the week, than the first, because this chapter deals with all the week except the first day. So we have such references as being asked to a meal in verse 27: "If any one of the unbelievers invite you, and ye are minded to go, all that is set before you eat, making no inquiry for conscience sake. But if any one say to you, This is offered to holy purposes, do not eat, for his sake that pointed it out, and conscience sake; but conscience, I mean, not thine own, but that of the other: for why is my liberty judged by another conscience? If *I* partake with thanksgiving, why am I spoken evil of for what *I* give thanks for? Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatever ye do, do all things to God's glory. Give no occasion to stumbling, whether to Jews, or Greeks, or the assembly of God. Even as *I* also please all in all things; not seeking my own profit, but that of the many, that they may be saved". So that we are thus protected in our public relations, maintaining the distinction, we might say, between Jews and Greeks, and then the assembly of God is distinguished by itself. We have that in mind, and keep it in mind in dealing with men, whether in our businesses or otherwise, so that we are able to speak at any time and glorify God in regard of it.
{356}
L.F. Are you stressing the necessity for conformity with the truth in every detail, as entering into this matter? It would touch us in our homes, our businesses, and our relations with brethren, our thoughts, too, and everything like that?
J.T. The brethren can see how simple and practical the apostle is, but yet how holily he guards everything. So that although a christian might accept an invitation from another, not a christian, he protects himself in all that he is doing; he is glorifying God in all that he is doing. He gives thanks for what he eats, and whatever he does, he glorifies God. The assembly of God is the great matter in everything as regards the service of God, and the apostle is guarded in the instructions given here.
R.H.G. Is it in your mind that the blood of the Christ would give the distinctive character to the fellowship to which we are called?
J.T. It does; it is very distinctive because we are to name things, and in naming the blood of Christ before the bread, the apostle intends to put something forward that ought to affect us peculiarly in the service. There are grades and values, of course, in the service, but I think the blood of Christ is particularly distinctive.
A.J.G. Is the intelligence referred to in chapter 10 to preserve us, as to what not to be entangled with in view of moving into what is our true place in chapter 11?
J.T. I would say that is very good. And so when we come to the service, that is to say ministry, in chapter 14, a man is contemplated as coming into the assembly. Here we have allusion to the Jew and the gentile and the assembly of God, but in chapter 14 a man is contemplated as coming into the assembly of God, not to partake of the emblems connected with the Lord's supper, but to listen to ministry of the truth, and he is convicted of all, he
{357}
is judged of all, and he falls down and worships God, so that he knows what to do; he is intelligent as to what he should do, and falls down and worships God. That is an important thing, especially if we are evangelical in any sense, seeking to get souls into the truth. When they come in they are ready to do what is right; they know what to do; they know how to give names to things and to act accordingly.
A.E.D. Would these thoughts of the cup of blessing, and the blood of Christ, induce vitality in the soul so that our affections are kept pure?
J.T. I would say that. Vitality is one of the most important things, because we need to be kept fresh. Caleb said that Jehovah had kept him alive up till the time he spoke, and he was then 85 years old. He was kept fresh, and that is of great importance in the service of God, that we are kept in freshness.
E.C.T. So we can understand the determined efforts of the enemy to do away with every thought of the blood.
J.T. Quite so.
P.L. Would @Psalm 16 illustrate this? everything is enhanced with the psalmist, "my cup", and "thou maintainest my lot", and then the great energy that has been referred to, "I will bless Jehovah, ... my heart rejoiceth and my glory exulteth", and so on. Is that suggestive of stimulation in the service of God?
J.T. Quite so. The brethren come into the Lord's mind in that psalm.
J.P-sn. Do we get in chapter 11 the public service of God in the assembly, but in chapter 10 the way it is set forth in the saints individually, in giving thanks before unbelievers? So that there is an attractiveness in what is set forth outwardly, as to what is to be seen inside.
J.T. Well, we shall come to chapter 11 presently; that is, as to headship; in the meantime we are
{358}
engaged with everyday life, even with unbelievers, and we are instructed how to behave, and how to protect ourselves, and how to maintain a good conscience in what we may be doing. Others might criticise what we do because they are not free to do it, but then if a man has a good conscience in what he is doing, and gives thanks to God for what he eats, then he is protected. He is protected before God, and he can at any time have part in the service, at any time become priestly.
H.H. @Psalm 16 which has already been referred to is very relevant to this chapter, is it not? "Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another". The thought of idolatry comes in there?
J.T. Quite so. Very good. So we have here, verse 17, "Because we, being many, are one loaf, one body; for we all partake of that one loaf". And then "See Israel according to flesh, are not they who eat the sacrifices in communion with the altar? What then do I say? that what is sacrificed to an idol is anything, or that an idol is anything? But that what the nations sacrifice they sacrifice to demons, and not to God". We are surrounded in a sense by idolatry; it may take on a different character now from what it did then, yet the idea of idolatry is prevalent in one form or another among men in the world, and we are to be guarded so that we may not be defiled by the things that might be used in the service of idolatry. The fellowship furnishes the power of keeping ourselves, especially intelligently, in what we are doing.
P.H.H. Would you mind saying a further word about verses 16 and 17? First of all "the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ?" and then the bread which, as it were, we are, "because we being many, are one loaf, one body". Does the second reference in verse 17
{359}
bring in the saints, and our partaking, so to speak, of one another?
J.T. You mean what we have in Leviticus and elsewhere in the types, that we, as it were, eat one another. I mean, we have allusions to things that are clean and unclean, and therefore, from that point of view we do appropriate one another, because of what we are going on with together. As we sit down in relation to the Lord's supper, it involves the saints; it is not simply that we have Christ; of course we have, but we could not have the Lord's supper alone; no one brother or sister could have the Lord's supper; the Lord must have His saints.
P.H.H. I was wondering whether this mention of "the communion of the body of the Christ", which brings in Christ Himself, I suppose, first of all, and then the allusion to the saints, would be further features with which we could defend ourselves in the more outward position. We are associated with such features.
J.T. So that we have therefore a certain protection in the saints, and then added to that (and it is blessed to think of) that the saints afford enjoyment, in the sense of appropriation. As we appropriate the emblems of the Lord's supper the idea of the saints comes into mind, because we, being many, are one loaf, one body. They come to mind. We could not get on without them. I do not know what the brethren may think, but I feel this is a very important matter, because we are to learn to appropriate one another as we partake of the Lord's supper. The Lord comes in and He partakes of things too, but He partakes with us. And so when the Lord's supper was instituted, or rather when the passover began in view of the Lord's supper, the apostles were eating. "As they were eating" -- the principle of eating was there.
{360}
G.A. Would you mind opening up a little for us what is in your mind as to this appropriation of one another? Would it be the intelligent activities of love, and if so, in what way?
J.T. Well, we begin with one another. Sitting down to partake of the Lord's supper, we begin with one another, and then, of course, the emblems come in and make way for appropriation, that is, the idea of eating.
Ques. "We being assembled"?
J.T. Just so. You are referring to @Acts 20, "We being assembled to break bread". We are told who were there. There were seven brothers who accompanied Paul. They would be particularly in mind when they were assembled, but then the question is, were the brethren at the moment fully instructed as to the truth of the Lord's supper? The inference clearly is that they were not. And so Paul, instead of eating, discourses. That is to say, we need to be instructed as to what the saints are to God, and what they are to Christ. But then what are they to each of us? How do we regard them? What satisfaction have we in the Lord's people? Hence the necessity of purity and holiness in us, so that we might partake of each other, so to say; and hence in Leviticus the clean and unclean animals are in mind, what we should appropriate and what we should not appropriate. Therefore we are concerned at first at least, and then continuously afterwards in the service of God, with the saints and whether they too are right and pure and holy, fit to be partaken of.
A.E.D. Is that in mind in the Lord's question in @Luke 24 as to whether they had anything to eat? And then what they were partaking of.
J.T. What did He mean? In @John 21: 5, the Lord says, "Children, have ye anything to eat?", but in the passage you speak of, "Have ye anything here to eat?"; that is, had they the thing *there*? It is a
{361}
matter of the local position in Luke, but in @John 20 it is not the local position. The Lord was there with the brethren and they were glad when they saw Him, and He said "Peace be to you", twice over. But in @Luke 24 He makes inquiry, and the fact is that they were perturbed and really unfit for the Lord's supper; they were unfit for the whole matter, and the Lord put them right.
P.H.H. When Moses went up the mountain he said to the people, "And behold, Aaron and Hur are with you", @Exodus 24: 14. Would Hur stress the idea of purity?
J.T. That is very good, I am glad you mentioned that, because that is what the word means.
P.H.H. I was wondering whether it entered into the chapter, so that purity and loyalty are fully attainable while Christ is absent?
J.T. I think that is what is in mind in @1 Corinthians 5, "Purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, according as ye are unleavened". That statement, "ye are unleavened" is abstract. The saints are entitled to regard themselves in an abstract sense, and hence are entitled to partake of the holy things of God.
A.J.G. The features of cleanness in what could be eaten, that is the cloven foot in the case of animals, and the fins and scales in the case of the fish, are all suggestive, are they not, of faithfulness to the fellowship in this world?
J.T. Quite so. I believe that the dear brethren will, in view of what has been said, perhaps all be more concerned as to themselves in view of the celebration of the Lord's supper. How essential it is that there should be purity and holiness, so that we should be fit for the Lord Himself, because He comes to us! He comes into the midst of us and He is looking for what is suitable to Himself amongst us.
{362}
D.J.M. Is it significant that the teaching in @Leviticus 11 as to what we eat follows the breakdown in the priesthood in chapter 10?
J.T. Just so, and then the challenge in @1 Corinthians 11 is, "Have ye not then houses for eating and drinking?". That is to say, the brethren ought to be able to distinguish between ordinary eating and the Lord's supper, the level or the elevation on which the Lord's supper is placed, so that we should be suitable to it, equal to it. Therefore it says, "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep". Well, what is the cause? It is that we are not discerning the body, the Lord's body; not simply the saints, but the Lord's body.
C.H.G. Is this thought of appropriating one another introductory to the Supper, or does it have part in the Supper as well?
J.T. Well, these are the facts. What has been alluded to is, "And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread". We being assembled; the *we* refers to all, the whole company. I think that is the way it should read. "We being assembled", and therefore we have to consider who was there. We have certain ones mentioned, and they were the fruit of the work of Paul, but then there were more. It was a real gathering time, a rallying time for the saints, and what happened, as the sequel would show, was that Paul discerned that they were not ready for the Lord's supper and all that it means, and hence he discourses to them at length. How long it was I cannot just say, but apparently the discourse was quite lengthy, and it would look as if it were carried on until midnight.
C.F.I. Would you say something with reference to the Lord's cup and the Lord's table? Does that bring in the side of responsibility as in contrast to
{363}
the side of privilege stressed in the earlier reference to the cup?
J.T. Just so, it is the Lord, the Lord's cup, the Lord's table. The table there is apparently the bread, as distinct from the cup. The word 'table' is just something that can be eaten of, not simply a physical thought but something that can be eaten of morally.
G.A. Twice you have referred this afternoon to the discourse, Paul discoursing at length at Troas. Do you consider that that is prophetic in its character, and that we should give great heed to it, so that the patience of the Lord in His constant speaking and in the help of the saints in conversing concerning the Supper would have an increasing place in our minds?
J.T. Very good. The Lord has been so gracious to us in bringing so much before us as to His supper to clarify the whole position, and it has brought about a better understanding of the Lord's supper, I think. One can look back at least forty years, perhaps fifty, to when one was himself first conversant with these matters, and the Lord has constantly brought in the truth as regards His supper, in view of our partaking of it intelligently. It has been constant; the Lord's supper has become almost as much needed in the minds of the brethren over a considerable period now as @Romans 7 used to be earlier because of the state of their souls.
S.C. Is that why there is the appeal to the intelligence first, before the appeal to our affections in chapter 11?
J.T. Very good, I think that is true.
Ques. Would the teaching that you have dwelt on in chapter 10 break up any idea of divisions or parties amongst us in their very inception? I am alluding to the one body, the one loaf, and what has been said about partaking of one another.
{364}
J.T. I think there is a great deal of preferential regard in brothers and sisters, which raises a question as to whether love is active; and if we admit preferential regard, we are pretty certain to exclude love. I think that is why @1 Corinthians 13 makes so much of love, and how we are excluded, and regarded as nothing if we have not got love.
Ques. By preferential regard you mean putting some up above others in our affections and regard?
J.T. Very good. I am sure that is true, and therefore one often wonders, and feels as one sits down to partake of the Lord's supper with the brethren. Are we all here? The Lord said, "Drink ye all of it", @Matthew 26: 27. That is, everyone is to be included, everyone present, and one often questions in one's mind as to where the brethren are. Why are they not all there? We know, on the other hand, that there are many that the Lord knows and that we do not know, but we would like to have them with us; but we make the most of those that are there.
E.N.J. Would the condition of things, the relationship between Moses and Aaron in @Exodus 4, help as to a healthy condition between the brethren in relation to this matter of appropriating one another? That is, as Aaron drew near to Moses it says he would be glad in his heart to see him.
J.T. Very good. I think those two brothers are brought in by the Spirit of God to indicate how we should regard each other; one thing that often hinders is jealousy between brothers and sisters, or brothers and brothers. Now in regard of Moses and Aaron, Aaron was the elder of the two, and that often interferes with good relations between brothers, because the elders often take advantage of their age, and the younger are apt to be jealous; so that is just what has been alluded to. Jehovah told Aaron to go to see Moses. God had Moses in mind
{365}
to make him special, and He says, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? ... and ... he goeth out to meet thee", @Exodus 4: 14. And they did meet and they kissed each other; but in due time the difference in age affected both Aaron and Miriam, so that in @Numbers 12 they are both jealous of Moses, and a terrible thing happened because of that. I think that is a matter that should not be omitted from our present thoughts, as to the danger of jealousy amongst the brethren interfering with the communion and enjoyment that is open to us in the Lord's supper.
W.H.W. It is then an urgent matter, "Wherefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry", @1 Corinthians 10: 14. Does that then leave the brethren free in this thought of appropriation, leading on to liberty for the Lord to come m?
J.T. Quite so, and leading on to what is added in the beginning of chapter 11 as to headship.
W.H.W. I was thinking of @John 13. Idolatry was connected with Judas, was it not, and after he had gone out the Lord was free to take up things that He was not able to speak of before?
J.T. Quite so.
E.B. In those asking to break bread, would you expect to see a certain element of this intelligence that you have been speaking about? Does that become a practical test in regard to the very young?
J.T. I think that is right. It came up amongst us elsewhere, as to the young ones coming in, what might hinder and what might not hinder, and it was pointed out that intelligence is needed, not only affection, but intelligence is needed; that is, they should know what they are doing. So that, if a child is nine or ten or less, there would be a serious question as to the intelligence, the ability to take account of what it proposed. It was suggested, I believe at the time, that the Lord's own age, as in
{366}
@Luke 2: 42, bore upon the question. We speak, of course, reverently about Him. He was twelve years of age, and His parents were concerned about Him, and His mother said, "Thy father and I have sought thee distressed. And he said to them ... did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?". That is to say, the Lord shows there that He was quite intelligent at that age as to what was brought up, what challenged the whole position; and I think that is a matter which should be kept in mind as to the very young ones amongst us, in view of the Lord's supper, that it is not only a question of affection, but a question of intelligence.
C.H.G. Is that in mind in the apostle's word, "Do *ye* judge what I say". There is a certain amount of spiritual understanding necessary as to the truth of the assembly to be present with these young people?
J.T. Quite so. It is a question of being able to judge between differences. And so as to Abigail, who is a type of the assembly, David says, "Blessed be thy discernment". The word 'discernment' would carry with it the idea of intelligence.
P.H.H. Abigail seems, too, to shine in this matter of headship, would you say, although personally in very unpromising circumstances? Would that be a link at all with chapter 11?
J.T. Tell us more about the circumstances.
P.H.H. I was just thinking of her link with Nabal, that she behaves even in his household in a comely way, while having as a secret in her heart, we might say, the headship of Christ as suggested in David.
J.T. Then what is said about her as to her personal beauty and understanding should be read.
P.H.H. "And the name of the man was Nabal, and the name of his wife Abigail; and the woman was of good understanding, and of a beautiful
{367}
countenance; but the man was churlish and evil in his doings; and he was a Calebite", @1 Samuel 25: 3.
J.T. You see what he was in spite of a good parentage; he was a Calebite, and Caleb we have already alluded to, how God had kept him alive; but this man was a Calebite who did not carry down what his father had been, and so, of course, he came under the judgment of God. The whole matter came under the judgment of God, and that in ten days, and Abigail was set free for David. It is a question of our deliverance from relations or associations which are not suitable to us.
G.S. Would she, in that way, indicate the material that is actually available? You have spoken very feelingly of those who are not with us when we sit down again and again to remember the Lord. We are conscious in our cities, are we not, of the material that is available under the Lord's eye? How are we to reach the Abigail material, so to speak, so urgently needed for the assembly?
J.T. Well, I think one thing is headship, and whether the sisters are gaining as they should; we are not short of meetings and ministry but what are the sisters generally gaining from the ministry? And whether the want of real headship being maintained is with us, whether headship is rightly apprehended, and thus fitting them for part in the assembly, because brothers *and sisters* are to have part in the assembly. There are certain limitations as to sisters, but still they are priests unto God the same as the brothers, and ought to have part in the assembly, but there is something that hinders; are they getting the gain of headship?
W.H.W. Abigail would rather go to show us that hindrance can be overcome. David says "Blessed be thou", indicating that she was the thing itself.
J.T. Yes, and she knew what to do, she knew what to bring to present to David. And then, moreover,
{368}
she was in herself able to adjust David; that is to say, David ceases to be a type of Christ there; he is just one that might be regarded as a brother, and how a sister might help him.
T.C.McG. I was wondering whether what God says of Moses in @Numbers 12, when he was opposed by Miriam and Aaron, "The form of Jehovah doth he behold", would have a bearing on this?
J.T. Very good. A remarkable passage, because God is vindicating Moses in what he is saying; his brother and his sister were not vindicating him, they were attacking him, and therefore disqualifying themselves as priests unto God, and Miriam became leprous, showing how serious this matter is.
P.H.H. What does that mean, "the form of Jehovah doth he behold"? Does that come near to something inscrutable?
J.T. It would. It shows that God is in Christ as Christ comes in amongst the brethren in assembly; it is a question of God; God is there. The word 'form' could only be in the sense in which it is apprehended in Christ, because Christ is God. The word 'form' is applicable in that sense, I would say, because as to Jehovah or as to God Himself, no one has seen nor can see Him. So that we must, I think, use intelligence as to what is meant, that Christ is God Himself, and whatever reference there may be to form would be a reference to Christ. In @Deuteronomy 4: 15, Moses refers to the fact that they had seen no form, that is to say, the idea of form in itself would induce idolatry if it were taken up in a natural way.
Ques. For us would the economy always be in mind in interpreting such expressions?
J.T. Quite so, because it is a question of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the divine Persons, and we are baptised to the Name of the three divine Persons.
{369}
G.A. You referred in Sydney to the matter of teaching, the necessity for the taking up of teaching in our households, including our wives and sisters. What would be the bearing of those remarks in relation to this matter of headship which you are now enjoining upon us?
J.T. Well, it is a question of how the verse reads. Verse 16 of chapter 11 says, "But if any one think to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the assemblies of God". And I believe there is a great deal of contention about this matter, and not a real laying ourselves out to get understanding as to what these verses mean, because they are introductory to the truth of the assembly as to intelligence.
A.E.D. Does not the thought of glory attaching to it make it attractive to us?
J.T. I should think so.
A.E.D. Could you say something as to that expression, the man being God's image and glory, and the woman being man's glory?
J.T. That is something to keep in mind, too. It is a question of how much time we have to enlarge on all these things, but certainly the word 'glory' is very beautiful there, and the allusion is to the beginning of Genesis, that is to say, the relation of man and woman. In @Genesis 1 the word 'man' covers both, but we have to go to chapter 2 to get the detail, the working out of things, and that is, that Adam was intelligent; he knew. In chapter 2 the point is intelligence; the great creature, man, was intelligent. God knew, of course, but God put intelligence into him, and so He placed the animals before him and he was to name them, and whatever Adam named an animal that was its name; meaning that God was committing Himself to man in these matters as to intelligence. But then as to woman, there was no helpmate, no counterpart for Adam, and God had to make another creature, and He brought the creature that He made to Adam. God
{370}
did not say anything to Adam as to her, but He brought the woman to the man to see what he would say about her, and Adam said, "This time", alluding to the previous creatures that had been brought before him, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man", @Genesis 2: 23. He knew what to say, he was intelligent, and therefore we get the distinct relation between man and woman; and then it goes on to say, "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and cleave to his wife; and they shall become one flesh". So that we have the full relation of man and woman, I believe, here, and the glory that attaches to that relation, that whilst there is a certain inferiority in the woman yet there is glory there; there is glory in the man as to God and glory is in the woman as to man, and that, of course, would make way for Christ and the assembly.
P.L. Would the passing from glory to glory be illustrated as each finds their place in recovery in relation to the order of creation? Would each thus be qualified to pass over to the peculiar glory of the assembly?
J.T. I think that is what is in mind in the Lord's supper, that there is a passing over from glory to glory, and you can see that there must be intelligence, for these things are to be appropriated, and the question is whether sisters who have so much opportunity in meetings and ministry are really gathering up and taking on what is being ministered. The brothers, of course, I suppose, have gift and have time and devote time to it too, and perhaps have a certain ambition to ministry, but the question is whether the sisters are taking hold of things in the measure in which they may do so.
J.P. The range of the instruction contained in what has been brought before us in chapter 10 would
{371}
emphasise the great importance of the Lord's supper and the assembly service?
J.T. I think that is right, and how way is then made for John's ministry. The apostle Paul is speaking as a trusted man, the Lord's trusted man, to bring out the doctrine of things; but then we need more than the doctrine, not that he does not give us more, but John gives us more; he is specially raised up of the Lord to continue in the dispensation, to be with us at all times, and he adds the thought of life. @John 20, I believe, is intended to represent the thought of life entering into the Lord's supper.
P.L. And does John make so much of trustworthy holy womanhood in his gospel, in chapters 4, 12 and 20, and in his epistle in the elect lady?
J.T. Very good. I would say that fully, especially Mary Magdalene, who represents a woman in the sense of intelligence, because she calls the Lord "Rabboni". The Lord is understood by Mary, and she calls Him "Rabboni", which means 'My teacher'. That is, she represents teachable sisters, and such teaching as may be conveyed in messages by them to the brethren.
L.F. Would it be correct to hold to the thought of glory in both these chapters we are looking at; in chapter 10 everything is to be done having in view God's glory, and in this chapter there is an expression of it in this great thought of headship?
J.T. Well, I think so. And what the man is as representative of God, and what the woman is as representing man, that she is man's glory.
P.H.H. Is there in that sense some feature of representation that goes right down as far as the woman? I was thinking of the representation of God being primarily in Christ, but also in the man, who is said to be "God's image and glory". But would it go a little further, that is, would the representation of
{372}
God in this world be seen in the subjection of the woman?
J.T. Quite so. I would say that. Of course, Proverbs is intended to implement that in the way the woman is treated of. "Who can find a woman of worth? for her price is far above rubies", @Proverbs 31: 10. I think that is intended to bring out the thought of the woman in relation to man, how the man, that is her husband, is known in the gates. That is to say, what God is in Christ is known in the gates.
G.A. Having in mind your reference to Mary Magdalene, would she provide a living illustration of this matter of the apprehension of headship? Would what she had come out of, in that seven demons had been cast out of her, be Corinthian in its character? Would she not in a sense illuminate the passage for us as a typical person, a woman, who has proceeded in the apprehension of this great matter of headship?
J.T. Very good, what is possible. And so I believe the Corinthians were like that, as has often been remarked. Corinth itself was proverbial for its lewdness and looseness, and that the Lord should select that city in which to work out the truth of the assembly is very remarkable. So He says to Paul, "Fear not ... I have much people in this city", @Acts 18: 9, 10. He remained there for a year and six months teaching these people, and now these two epistles are written to them, you might say to bring the thing out fully, what is possible in spite of the worst conditions among men, what is possible in an assembly, and how the ministry is intended to bring about what is suitable to the Lord's mind.
Ques. You alluded a while back to verse 16 which speaks about contentions. Was it in your mind that contention would destroy the happy working of headship?
J.T. Well, indeed. And so the word is "If any one think to be contentious, *we* have no such custom, nor
{373}
the assemblies of God". That is, the universal working out of Paul's doctrine excludes contention; it excludes Nabals, for instance, churlish people.
C.H.G. Is there a distinctive glory in the saints as they come up to the assembly and its service, as headship is apprehended and acted upon?
J.T. Yes, I would say so.
A.J.G. Would you say that the practical recognition on the part of sisters of headship as we have it in this chapter, is very important in view of the great dislocation in the world around?
J.T. Just so. Perhaps there has never been more dislocation than now.
A.D. Would you say that the mother of Moses would illustrate this, the matter of discernment and intelligence in what she did in putting Moses in the ark of bulrushes?
J.T. I would say that fully. God intended to give her that place, that peculiar place, when the male side was so scarce, as it were, because the intent of Pharaoh was to destroy the males. Moses¬ mother preserved him, and then Pharaoh's daughter also is provided to preserve Moses.
G.A. Why does the Spirit of God use the word 'think' in the verse you have called attention to, "If any one think to be contentious"? That might not mean actually an expression of contention. How far are we to submit ourselves to the scrutiny of the Lord in the matter of our thinking in the direction of contention?
J.T. Well, I think, thinking to be contentious would be that your mind is in it, you are planning in your mind how to work out contention to defeat the truth. That, of course, would mean serious opposition to God in all this precious instruction that we have.
G.A. Would that have been current, so to speak, in the mind of Miriam and Aaron in what preceded
{374}
the actual event of their rising and inciting others against Moses?
J.T. Just so, their minds were in it. That is to say, Miriam especially (it was a question of a sister) one has often thought, would resent having a Cushite, that is a black woman, as her sister-in-law; and that sort of thing often interferes with the unity of the saints, especially as we sit down to the Lord's supper.
Ques. So that the matter of the mind and what we think has a very definite bearing in regard to the Lord's supper?
J.T. Yes, of course error of all kinds arises in that way from man's mind, such as Darwinism as an example, a terrible thing that is working out in infidelity among men, schools being impregnated with it; it is the mind given a place to interfere with the truth of God.
A.J.G. So that Paul in writing to the Philippians urges on them to think one thing. If all our minds are on the truth as we have it through Paul, we shall be safe, do you think?
J.T. Quite so. "Thinking one thing", and how the Lord Jesus is brought into that very passage. "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus", and then it goes on to say, "Who, subsisting in the form of God, did not esteem it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself", @Philippians 2: 5 - 7. So that the Lord leads the way in this matter of the mind so that we should not be damaged by error.
D.J.M. And the sisters in taking up this truth are protected? I was thinking of the scourge of mixed marriages.
J.T. Well, just so. I am glad you brought that up because they have come up universally, and they have been ignored by many of the Lord's people.
{375}
Mixed marriages mean light being darkened by associations, whatever the associations may be. We see in @2 Corinthians 6: 11 - 16 how mixed marriages will affect the truth that we are dealing with: "Our mouth is opened to you, Corinthians, our heart is expanded. Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your affections; but for an answering recompense, (I speak as to children,) let *your* heart also expand itself. Be not diversely yoked with unbelievers; for what participation is there between righteousness and lawlessness? or what fellowship of light with darkness? and what consent of Christ with Beliar, or what part for a believer along with an unbeliever? and what agreement of God's temple with idols? for *ye* are the living God's temple"; and so forth. So that the thought of mixed marriages means darkness, the darkening of the truth.
P.L. Those who so acted are called by Nehemiah, as addressing his God, "polluters of the priesthood, and of the covenant of the priesthood and of the Levites!", showing what disaster spiritually would thus spread.
J.T. Clearly, and hence we are warned, parents are warned, about the marriages of their children, so that they should not be mixed. If a man leads about a sister as wife, well, it is to be a sister. If he leads about a wife, she is to be a sister first before she is a wife; that is to say, there is no mixture, they are both born of God, and that is the basic thought of the purity of the truth in the assembly. A brother was raising the question with me yesterday as to what is the basis of brethren of Christ. Would you mind saying briefly what you had in mind?
A.J.G. I was inquiring for my own help as to whether the thought of being born of God was basic to our being recognised by the Lord, according to @John 20, as His brethren.
{376}
J.T. That helps. I thought I would bring that out from you, because it helps in what we are saying, that mixed marriages disregard the new birth, because an unconverted person marrying a converted one, and vice versa, disregards the new birth. The Spirit of God has to transact what is called the being born again, so that both of them are on the same basis. The redemption wrought by Christ establishes the full thought of the two persons, of the husband and the wife, that is they are of the same order, that she is a sister to him first before there can be a marriage according to God.
A.J.G. I think sometimes the difficulty amongst us is not in regard of a believer marrying an unbeliever, but a believer who is walking in the truth, at any rate outwardly, marrying a believer who is not walking in the truth.
J.T. We must always have the idea before us of what mixed marriages mean.
Rem. In that regard you might help us in relation to the governing word as to marriage: "in the Lord".
J.T. That means that there is subjection on both sides. Subjection is the great principle laid down in Romans, and of course Corinthians goes with that.
G.A. Does @1 Corinthians 7 connect itself with what you are now speaking of? Verse 39 reads: "A wife is bound for whatever time her husband lives; but if the husband be fallen asleep, she is free to be married to whom she will, only in the Lord". Are these last four words the underlying principle?
J.T. Quite so. "Only in the Lord".
R.R.T. Connecting it with the chapter that we began with, it says that "we all partake of that one loaf". That would entirely exclude the thought of mixed marriages, would it not, with anyone that was not a partaker? Would that connect with our chapter?
J.T. Quite so.
{377}
Rem. The Lord's authority which has to be recognised in such matters is not so much an impression that one may have from the Lord, but light which the Lord has given us to govern such matters. Does that become authoritative in that way?
J.T. Just so.
{378}
ABILITY TO TAKE ON CHANGE
@Revelation 1: 9 - 20; @Revelation 22: 16, 17
J.T. These scriptures will help us as conversing with one another, as to the capability to change in the Lord Himself, and in the saints too, in view of certain services. So that in John's case he says, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day", and then certain things happened. In verse 9 he is just the servant, John, in his ordinary condition, but he became something else; that is, he became in the Spirit. Then in verse 10 John says, "I heard behind me a great voice as of a trumpet, saying, What thou seest write in a book, and send to the seven assemblies", and the names are given, and then John says, "I turned back to see the voice which spoke with me; and having turned, I saw seven golden lamps", and in the midst of these things the Lord is seen in certain judicial garb which He took on for a judicial purpose. And then in verse 17 it says of John, "And when I saw him I fell at his feet as dead; and he laid his right hand upon me, saying, Fear not". That is, the Lord is now returning, we might say, to Himself, speaking reverently; that is, He is now with John and dealing with John, and so He becomes Himself as with a loved one, with one whom He would regard in love, and care for. So He says in verse 17, "Fear not; *I* am the first and the last, and the living one, and I became dead, and behold, I am living to the ages of ages, and have the keys of death and of hades. Write therefore what thou hast seen, and the things that are, and the things that are about to be after these". So that the Lord is now with John on personal terms but in view of helping him in his service; so He tells him what he is to do, and the order in which he is to write. Thus the matter stands, and the whole book comes in in the meantime, a book which is in the main a symbolical
{379}
book, containing symbolical thoughts and revelations, and then all being over, at the end of the book the Lord returns to Himself, as it were, addressing the assemblies, "*I* Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies. I am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that hears say, Come. And let him that is athirst come, he that will, let him take the water of life freely", @Revelation 22: 16, 17. So that we are now back to the Lord Himself, not in view of a further revelation, but in the light of what had been made known, that is, Himself, as with His own, speaking to them in the most familiar terms, and yet retaining His dignity, and we may say, His deity. So I thought, having mentioned all this, that the Lord would help us to see how it works out on the first day of the week, and whether we are ready for the changes that are necessary, and how we apprehend the Lord in His services coming into our midst and opening up to us the great divine thoughts which belong to the service of God on the first day of the week. So that we have the Lord Himself in freedom to present Himself as "*I* Jesus", and on the other hand, John, as is seen very much throughout the book, is also personal in addressing the saints, "I John"; so that personality enters into all this matter of change in view of the service of God. One thought that perhaps the service that we often speak of, and we speak a great deal of the service of God and the Lord's supper, should become more intelligible to us, old and young, and then all that flows out of it, too, in the sense of public testimony.
Ques. You have in mind, I judge, that there should be a quick response with us as apprehending the changing phases from glory to glory?
J.T. Well, I think that it is good to use the word 'quick', because we are very apt to be slothful in taking
{380}
on the change that is suitable; whereas, as we think of Zion, to refer to an Old Testament expression coming into the New, as soon as we leave our houses in view of the assembly, everything changes; that is to say, Zion involves a change. It is not our houses, it is God's realm where He operates in view of His own thoughts, and having a certain sphere in mind which is His own; it is constantly used in the Old Testament, and used in the most striking terms. So that it is a question of whether we are accustomed to change over, leaving our ordinary affairs and entering on the service of God on the first day of the week, or any other day too that may be used in the same sense; to change over and lay aside for the moment at least what is normal, for the change that is due to God in His realm, the assembly, or Zion.
P.L. Would the reference in the Canticles to the gazelle or hart, in connection with the bridegroom and the bride, bear on the rapidity and agility of the change?
J.T. Just so. We have to watch carefully the words used in that book, because it refers to Solomon, typical of Christ, of course, but Christ taking on certain attitudes, and then the feminine speaker taking on corresponding attitudes; so that their communications are on a level according to all this; and it is a question of whether we are ready for these changes, because the service of God is peculiarly in mind in the Song of Songs, which is said to be Solomon's, and there is a special reference to Christ which it seems to me peculiarly fits into the service of God on the first day of the week.
E.C.T. You were referring to Abigail yesterday; she seemed ready for the change; she had sheep ready dressed, and so on. Would that come in?
J.T. Just so. She was ready for every change that was needed, or that occurred, even the wifely one; and of course we have the same idea in this book,
{381}
how the Lamb's wife is equal to that position, and then she is provided with suitable attire.
H.H. Is the Lord's personal presence connected with these thoughts -- the changes operating in relation to the Lord as present?
J.T. You mean the Lord's presence on the first day of the week?
H.H. Yes, or at any time.
J.T. Well, just so, whenever it may be, but especially on the first day of the week when these changes are particularly in view. But I wanted first to indicate the general thought in what I have been saying, that we are to be ready to leave our ordinary affairs, houses, children, and businesses; for a change is necessary to take on what is suitable for the sake of righteousness and holiness, so that we should be usable to the Lord as priests unto Him, because the priestly thought must come into it.
L.P.M. Does John being on an island facilitate the position? What is in mind in "the island called Patmos"?
J.T. Well, I think it is isolation, very likely alluding to certain parts of the earth that are available to God in His government, and isolation is an advantage. And then, of course, if that be brought down to saints who may be isolated on the first day of the week, it is quite applicable, and so the change comes about in John's case. I would say that he was in prison, or in some sense under persecution and all the more ready for the change that came about, the Lord taking account of him as in those circumstances.
C.H.G. Would the males going up three times in the year to the place where Jehovah would place His name, fit in with this thought of change? They would have to leave their own affairs, many of them for a considerable journey, but their affairs would be looked after.
{382}
J.T. Just so. There would be hostile conditions on the way, as the Song of Solomon indicates; and then there is the occurrence recorded in @Luke 2 as to the Lord Himself. He had been with His parents on the way going up to Jerusalem, and when they were returning they thought the Lord was with them, but He was not, showing that they were not in accord with the time. They were not in a state for such a time, and so they had to come back to Jerusalem and learn that they were in a position to be regarded as unfaithful to a charge. They were not fit at that time for the charge that was given to them. Mary says, "Thy father and I have sought thee distressed", but He says, "Did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?". That is to say, He is ready, but they are not. So that may enter into what we are saying as to being ready for a change; if there be a charge, be faithful to it.
A.W.B. Would the instruction in @Psalm 45: 10, 11, fit in here? "Hearken, daughter, and see, and incline thine ear; and forget thine own people and thy father's house, and the king will desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him".
J.T. Very good. I would say that is quite applicable to what we are saying. She had to forget her own people and her father's house so that the king should greatly desire her beauty.
W.H.W. Would the voice here be like a word in the morning meeting that would bring the brethren to the point of being ready for a change?
J.T. Very good, only I think that the readiness ought to be in each of us in leaving our houses. We need a change to take our way from our houses to the place of assembly, because there is apt to be danger in that way. We are apt to be damaged or be the cause of damage, so that the moral side comes in there particularly, the purifying side, so that we are ready.
{383}
J.P. Does this matter come out on the holy mount where the Lord was transfigured, or changed, before them. Peter was not ready for the occasion, but later in the chapter the Lord says, "For me and thee", bringing him into the light of the change himself?
J.T. Just so. So that the Lord in due time, although He had taken on change Himself, came to where they were, "they saw no one but Jesus alone", @Matthew 17: 8. Mark's gospel adds "with themselves"; that was the final result, showing that the Lord takes on change when necessary, but then the question is whether Peter and the others were ready; clearly they were not.
A.E.D. Is that initial change seen in the reference to the Lord in @Mark 16: 12, "After these things he was manifested in another form"?
J.T. Just so, I was thinking of that. We are not told what that form was, but it was another, a feature particularly seen in Mark.
A.J.G. Have you in mind that this, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day", is something that we should all be concerned to take up as we leave our houses?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. *All* are to be concerned, even the children are involved, in so far as we may impress them with what is their privilege, that the children are holy; so that the whole household may come in in this sense for the change. But, of course, if they are really believers and have the Spirit the thing should be more manifestly seen.
E.B.McC. I thought we saw the change in the @Song of Solomon 3: 6, "Who is this, she that cometh up from the wilderness like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant?". She would be ready, would she not?
{384}
J.T. Yes, indeed. That chapter involves much in that sense as to the daughters of Jerusalem. Were they ready? because they are called upon to go forth and behold king Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart.
L.F. Is this change in any way consequent upon that which we had before us yesterday afternoon in relation to @1 Corinthians 10?
J.T. Well, what was before us then was the fellowship, and, of course, it enters into what we are saying.
C.F.I. Would you say something about the Lord's day in this connection as in contrast to the first day of the week?
J.T. It is the assertion of the Spirit of God as to the Lord's authority and His having a right to certain days, to time. It really is an allusion to His deity, that He has a day. Of course, He made time; "All things received being through him, and without him not one thing received being which has received being", @John 1: 3. He made everything, but He made time, and there is much said about it and about what is in the heavens, as to the lights and so on, but then He takes one day to Himself. It is the first thing alluded to, the idea of day, "God called the light Day", @Genesis 1: 5. Surely He has a right to one day; He has a right to them all, but He is asserting that right. He has rights in the sense of His part in the assembly in the service of God, and His own service. He has rights, and that brings up the question of the days of the week, the working days. Very many terms are used in Scripture as to these days, and now of course, we are in the midst of all these things like trade unionism and its assertions in regard to time; we are therefore dealing with a very important and practical matter, as to the first day of the
{385}
week and whether we are ready for the Lord's claim to time and our part in it.
Ques. As this assertion of the Lord's authority is made, it may confidently be expected that the Spirit would be especially active on that day?
J.T. I think so. That is good, for the divine Persons act together. It is a point which is in mind in Matthew particularly, that baptism is "to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". If today the question of days comes up and what our baptism implies, then we are committed to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, and the question of days would necessarily enter into that, whether we are ready for what divine Persons may require in the sense of time.
P.H.H. May I ask if there is a kind of parallel change in the ground that the Spirit takes, alongside the changes that the Lord takes, and the saints, when we are speaking of the whole range of assembly service? I was thinking, for instance, of the Spirit as called the Spirit of the Lord, perhaps to occupy us with the Lord; and then the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of adoption, perhaps to occupy us with God, the Father, and with sonship, when the times for those changes are upon us.
J.T. The passage which comes to my mind immediately is @2 Corinthians 3 as bearing on the Lord's supper, and the idea of change. It is said that we are "transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". The Lord is said to be the Spirit there, showing the interchange of thought between divine Persons, that the Lord is the Spirit. It also says that, where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, so that this idea of change enters into that section peculiarly, and into the service of God beginning at the Lord's supper. But the idea of the days is in our minds, and the divine Persons affected in them.
{386}
C.C.C. Would an example of readiness to take on change be seen in Abraham in @Genesis 18; when the three men stood near to him, he ran to meet them?
J.T. Very good. He is ready for the great moment, whereas Gideon in a like situation is not ready. He has great objections to make to the angel, to Jehovah Himself indeed, so that we have two cases in which one is ready and the other is not so. But there was the readiness with Abraham when he met the angels who came as three men. That would undoubtedly suggest the Godhead, which was not disclosed as yet, of course, as it was later, but undoubtedly the suggestion was there. Abraham is ready to remain with the Lord, but then they take on a certain mutual feeling toward Abraham and he is allowed to proceed in anything he wished to do toward Jehovah. The whole passage shows that he is ready and it helps us greatly in what we say, that is being ready, so that he is able to serve God; he distinguishes between Jehovah and the other two, and the other two are marked off as angels, whereas Jehovah allows Himself to be detained by Abraham, because He would specially distinguish Abraham, saying, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" @Genesis 18: 17. Then we are told why, because "he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice"; hence much is opened up in the way of light for us in that particular incident. It should encourage us as to what we are dealing with now as to being ready, otherwise we may miss a great occasion.
D.J.M. Is that readiness seen in, "I rejoiced when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of Jehovah. Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem", @Psalm 122: 1, 2?
J.T. Very good. There was the state for it, you mean.
{387}
A.J.G. The idea of haste and moving quickly marks Abraham and Sarah and the attendant, they are all in readiness to contribute to the occasion?
J.T. Yes. Sarah, however, is remiss in not being fully ready to make way for Christ, because we have to learn to make way for Christ as well as for God. She was not ready for what God was ready to disclose to her, that she was to have a son. She dissembled really.
A.W.B. Samuel mourned for Saul; he was not ready for the anointing of David, was he?
J.T. Very good. He had plenty of time to be fully ready, because it had been disclosed to him what should happen, but he was not ready, and therefore exposed himself to a great mistake, to great error in his judgment. He called Jesse's firstborn the Lord's anointed, which he was not. All this only shows how we may be misled unless we are ready, and there is ample room to be ready because the Lord has given great light as to His Supper and the service of God in recent times, and the brethren ought to be ready, brothers and sisters alike, otherwise we shall miss great opportunities on these great occasions.
P.L. It says in @Exodus 19: 11, "Let them be ready for the third day; for on the third day Jehovah will come down"; and again in verse 15, "Be ready for the third day". That is in relation to the service of God, is it not?
J.T. Quite so, and in a later allusion in the same book to Jehovah coming down, Moses was to be ready (@Exodus 34: 2).
E.B.McC. I was wondering if we see too how quickly Abraham was able to have things ready, when he is about to offer up his son. He rose up early in the morning. It says, "And Abraham rose early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son;
{388}
and he clave the wood for the burnt-offering, and rose up and went to the place that God had told him of", @Genesis 22: 3.
J.T. Very good. Much has been opened up from that; we all know that it refers to the sufferings of Christ.
A.C.S.P. Does @Joshua 3 bear on this, the insistence that the people should be ready in view of crossing the Jordan, and keep their eye on the ark, and then the word, "Sanctify yourselves, for tomorrow the Lord will do wonders among you"?
J.T. Very good. They were to be prepared with victuals, ready in that sense for the great matter of crossing the Jordan.
A.C.S.P. I was wondering whether the insistence that they should watch the ark bore on what you were saying about the Lord's preparedness to change?
J.T. One was aiming at the very practical side of the service of God which requires change when the time comes, because it is from glory to glory, and how many glories there are! Well, that we have to leave, because we are touching on infinitude as to glory, but we certainly ought to be ready for some of them, at least the idea of them, and hence, from glory to glory. The chapter alluded to in 2 Corinthians opens up the thought of glory. It began with the idea of a letter of commendation, which enters into our Lord's day morning meetings, that is to say, in the announcements. Some of us were saying yesterday that in certain places the announcements of marriages, which are, of course, very important in relation to the testimony of God, are only made on the prayer meeting nights; whereas these announcements should precede the Lord's supper, because we are dealing with the service of God, and the accompanying circumstances that may bear upon it at any time. Certainly marriages and deaths
{389}
and the like ought to be announced as interesting to the saints.
D.J.M. Providing an occasion for the manifestation of His glory as at Cana of Galilee?
J.T. Well, it would. That is where the manifestations of His glory began, really. They began at that time, at Cana, "This beginning of signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested his glory; and his disciples believed on him", @John 2: 11.
A.E.D. Would this matter of readiness bear on our right use of the small amount of time available to us?
J.T. Well, indeed. This very day and yesterday prove that, and we might say for the last week we have had constant pressure as to want of time. The service that we had in mind required time and the Lord was entitled to it, so that all this is of practical importance in regard to the service.
L.P.M. So that we should be ready to break bread when we come together, and thus give plenty of time for the phases of the service as they are developed.
J.T. Quite so. Only that there is the exception as at Troas, that the apostolic rights, or rather Christ's rights, enter into the matter, so Paul instead of having the bread broken or breaking the bread himself, discoursed at length. That was another change that had to be taken, because the brethren did not understand the truth of the Lord's supper.
P.H.H. When the Lord Jesus rose from the dead He said to Mary, "Go to my brethren". Would that enable the saints to take on quickly a new appellation, a change in their own mind as to themselves?
J.T. Yes, because another thing comes up there, and that is the word 'brethren'; it is used in a variety of ways, but the Lord's using the phrase "my brethren" is another matter that comes into @John 20 peculiarly. Although the synoptic gospels
{390}
all have the thought of the Lord's brethren (see @Matthew 12: 49, 50; @Mark 3: 34, 35; @Luke 8: 21), John is exceptional and fuller in his meaning. So that the question now is whether we understand the word "brethren", and in what sense the word applies when we first come together to partake of the Lord's supper. We meet, and sit down together, and how do we regard each other? and then what may ensue after that? Another use of the word 'brethren' appears, but it is "my brethren". Therefore we have to take on a change in both cases; that is to say at the beginning of the meeting, well, we are just as we were as we left our houses, as having already taken on change we may say, but the word 'brethren' there is just what we are as christians; we are just "brethren" to one another. Compare @Matthew 23: 8.
G.A. Would the power of that communication, "Go to my brethren", to which reference has been made, stand somewhat in relation to the matter of Mary experiencing change in herself? She first supposed Him to be the gardener, but then as the Lord speaks she immediately recognises Him as Teacher. Would not the saints as conscious of change be influential?
J.T. Very good. I am glad you brought all that up, because it is certainly very applicable. Mary was the one who bore the message to the disciples, showing what a great honour is put upon her, and she would not have had it were she not ready; but she was ready, and the fact that she was ready is seen in her ability to bring in a word that perhaps she may not have used much before, that is, "Rabboni". It is not much used, but she used it; she knew the value of it. Only one other used it as far as I know.
G.A. Would the spirit of readiness be seen in @John 12 where understandingly they made Him a supper, in consequence of what had preceded in chapter 11?
{391}
J.T. They are ready now for what chapter 12 opens up, you mean?
G.A. Yes, that the power of what was operative in the eleventh chapter, a great change, so to speak, had entered into their spiritual being, and they were ready for the great change now of making a supper for the Lord.
J.T. Quite so. So that the disclosures to Martha were essential to the readiness that He required in chapter 12; that is to say, she had to learn something about Him. He came into Judaea, but then He stayed in a certain place and Martha came to Him there, and He opened up certain things because she came. He could not have opened things up to her unless she came, but she did come. That just enters into what we are saying. She made herself ready in that sense for a disclosure, and so the Lord disclosed certain things to her, finally saying that her brother should rise again, and that He was the resurrection and the life. Then she went off to seek her sister and said to her, "The Master is come, and calleth for thee", and then Mary came to Him, but the Lord did not come to meet Mary, she had to come to where Martha met Him, which is another matter. The Lord respected a woman like Martha when she was more or less right. She had not been right as to her state of soul, and indeed Luke does not disclose that she was corrected at all; but John gives us what is needed to show that she was corrected and ready for a disclosure, and that enters into chapter 12, which opens up another line of truth altogether.
H.H. Would not there be a difference between the Lord's supper and the Lord saying, "Go to my brethren"? We break bread in the wilderness, and in that way we are not viewed as risen people; but the message conveyed to the brethren by Mary Magdalene would open up a new situation where the
{392}
saints would be viewed as risen in relation to Christ. Is that right?
J.T. That raises the whole question of John's ministry, and we are hardly equal to it now, nor have we the time for it. The message through Mary really rests on a change in her, because she had changed from the natural to the spiritual. She changed over when the Lord called her by her name, Mary; she discerned Him in that word. Then the Lord kept her from touching Him, but He says to her, "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God", @John 20: 17. So that she is in the position of being used. She does not really come into the full thought of the chapter, she is just a messenger. The disciples viewed collectively are seen in the full thought of the chapter; there is a collective position and the brethren are coming into it, and the message prepared them for it. So that the whole matter is full of changes, and enters into what we are saying today as to the first day of the week.
A.J.G. Do the fifth and sixth chapters of the Song of Songs illustrate what we are saying? In one case she had put off her tunic, she was not ready; but in the next chapter he says, "Before I was aware, my soul set me upon the chariots of my willing people", @Song of Songs 6: 12. The willing people would indicate a ready response, would they not?
J.T. Just so, they were willing. He was on the chariots of His willing people, as far as the passage goes, which very much corresponds with the third chapter, where it is a sort of sedan chair; but the Lord had prepared for Him that by which He was carried, and it was paved with love. So that the whole matter alludes to what is provided for the Lord Himself.
{393}
P.H.H. I should like to ask about the Person of the Lord in all these changes, because in Revelation chapters 1 and 22 it would appear that in our minds we must make room for His deity. Should we regard that at all?
J.T. I think we should. I intended that to come in, that the verses read in the last chapter involve the Lord's deity, and it involves at the same time the great thought of the assembly. Throughout the whole book the truth emerges in that way as to Christ and the assembly, and that the Spirit is involved. We have already alluded to the divine Persons and how They relate to One Another in the services. In that chapter "The Spirit and the bride say, Come", they both say the same thing, showing that the assembly is viewed very near to the Deity, perhaps nearer than any other family in the universe, to the Deity, to God; to the Father, the Son, and the Spirit.
P.H.H. Would you, in that connection, make room for any expression of the Lord's deity in addressing Him in this bridal relation?
J.T. Well, in so far as it is necessary to make clear in a spiritual sense that the Person is God, only it is a question now as to names used, and the relations conveyed in these names. But above all things we must ever bear in mind that the Lord Jesus is not changed, that there is no change in His Person; He may take on conditions, which He does, that is, human conditions and other forms as we have been speaking of it, but there is no change in His Person; He is the same all the time as to His Person.
P.L. "He is thy Lord, and worship thou him", @Psalm 45: 11.
J.T. It is conveyed there. Quite so.
E.B. Does that verse in a sense mark the terminus of the marital relations with the Lord in assembly? Is that the highest point that can be reached when
{394}
we are in marital relations with the Lord consciously, "He is thy Lord, and worship thou him"?
J.T. I do not know about the highest, because authority is involved in it; that is to say, from her side she is to recognise that He is her Lord. I do not know that I would say that it is the highest point. I would like to know just what you have in mind.
E.B. I thought it was a reference to the Lord's deity. I thought we had so used it as bearing out what our brother was inquiring about.
J.T. Well, what I was endeavouring to say, which I am sure is right, and what has been said by others is right too, is that the deity of the Lord must be ever kept in view in some sense; it may not need to be asserted, but I am sure His deity ought to be ever kept in view in our dealings with the Lord Jesus. He is a divine Person, equal with the Father, equal with God, and He Himself is God, and it may be a question of discernment and taste as to how we convey it, but it should always be in evidence. The changed conditions into which He comes do not alter His Person, because He says, for instance, "Before Abraham was, I am", @John 8: 58. That is His Person.
Ques. Might there be a moment in the service of God when we could sing that verse of Hymn 181,
<blockquote> 'Thee -- the great "I AM" -- we worship, <br>Mighty God, Eternal One!'? </blockquote>
J.T. Very good. We entered into that fully at the time of the revision of the hymn book, and it was much before us and it ought to be before us. It was thought at that time, and it remains so, that the deity of Christ should always be put forward, however it may be expressed; whether in spirit or in formal statement it ought to be there, because infidelity and unitarianism are so much in religious thought, that we should be very careful to guard the
{395}
Person of the Lord Jesus in every occasion in which it has to be mentioned, publicly and otherwise too.
P.H.H. Do I gather that the thought of the deity of Christ, so to speak, interweaves itself in our minds with all these stages, or phases?
J.T. Quite so, so that the truth should be in conversation and in ministry, in the ears of men and in the ears of the saints; that there should be a fluid condition, as I understand it, in dealing with these matters, so that we can turn instantly to what is needed to preserve the truth, especially of the divine Persons.
A.J.G. So that in making the garments of glory and beauty for Aaron it says, "And they beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into wires, to work it artistically into the blue, and into the purple, and into the scarlet, and into the byssus", @Exodus 39: 3. Is that the idea?
J.T. Very good.
C.F.I. Would you say a word as to union in relation to this thought? While the deity of Christ is ever in mind, is it His manhood that is especially in view in union?
J.T. Well, quite. We are not united to God, and yet He to whom, in manhood, we are united, is God. A certain denomination has no hesitation about saying that Mary is the mother of God; it is a terrible thing to say, but still it is just one of the things that we have to be guarded about; that we protect the divine Persons, and that there may be no allowance of anything that would discredit the Deity or assume that the creature belongs to It in any sense.
A.J.G. Does not that emphasise the importance of what you have said recently, that the truth must be held in the Spirit. That is, that no human substitute for the truth will do; the truth has to be held in the Spirit, the Spirit being the truth.
{396}
J.T. Just so. So no one can say "Lord Jesus" except by the Spirit.
P.L. Would this be assured in the priests covering the ark before the Levites carried it?
J.T. That is a typical reference to what we are saying, that the Kohathites are the special Levites to look after what relates to divine Persons, and the holy things too.
G.A. Could we have the full substance of your thought as to verses 16 and 17 of chapter 22?
J.T. Well, we have the Lord introducing Himself, just Himself. As we were saying, it is Himself now, having passed through all the symbolical meanings of the book the Lord comes back to Himself. We are to be reverential about it; He says, "*I* Jesus", speaking personally, and the "*I*" is emphatic, "have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies. *I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come". Now the Lord Jesus is speaking first, in the sixteenth verse, and it is as divine that He is speaking thus, and so He says, "*I* am the root", that is in itself an assertion of Deity. He is the *root* of David, which means that He must be God. And then "the bright and morning star", which is a title that He takes in view of the coming glories of His appearing -- And then "the Spirit and the bride say, Come". The Spirit is a divine Person, speaking as a divine Person, but the bride, although so glorious, is a creature. But she is the bride, and what is said in these verses indicates a family that has the nearest place to the Deity. That is what I would say as to verses 16 and 17.
J.P. Does the root and offspring of David come out in @Colossians 1, the Lord as the Son of the Father's love, His glories in deity and in manhood being brought before us there?
{397}
J.T. Yes, the Son of the Father's love. Both divine Persons are implied.
G.A. Could you aid us in indicating how these two verses will help us in the service of God?
J.T. Well, to distinguish, as Abigail was able to distinguish certain features, as the word was, "Blessed be thy discernment"; so that in dealing with the service of God and having part in it, we are to have discernment, to have intelligence in it, so that we know how to speak to God, to speak to Christ, to speak of the Spirit, and even to speak *to* the Spirit, although it is very rare in the scriptures; it is right, because @Numbers 21: 17 says, "Sing unto it". "Rise up, well! sing unto it". The "it" is an allusion typically to the Spirit. Therefore, as knowing these things, we know how to speak to the Father, know *when* to speak to Him, and we know when to speak to the Son and how to speak to Him, and so we *may* speak *to* the Spirit as a divine Person, equal with the Father and the Son.
G.A. You have touched every heart present, I believe, in that remark as to our great desire to know in what way we may speak to the Spirit. Every true heart longs to understand that, in the spirit of reverence, and anything further that you might be free to say as to that, I believe every heart here awaits.
J.T. Well, He certainly is a divine Person, and He speaks independently as a divine Person, especially in regard to the service of God. He says, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them", @Acts 13: 2. Who could say that but a divine Person, and a divine Person in authority? And so there are other scriptures. But then, what I am speaking of is the type in @Numbers 21; the word is, "Rise up, well! sing unto it". The "it" is the Spirit typically, that is to say, the singing
{398}
to the Spirit is warranted. We have a hymn that refers to praises for the Spirit. Hymn 126 (Hymns and Spiritual Songs for the Little Flock, 1932 edition),
<blockquote> 'Praises for the Holy Ghost, <br>Sent from heav'n at Pentecost; <br>¬Tis through Him that now we live, <br>And the precious truth receive'. (see `191:3)</blockquote>
That hymn was changed as used in our meetings. But, anyway, it is right as warranted by Scripture as I said. It is only a question of the Spirit Himself hiding His own glories, because He has taken a lowly place.
P.H.H. I think we have all found a desire in our own hearts at times to speak to the Spirit, but would you make room for such a thing in assembly service?
J.T. Well, I was just saying that the Spirit is wonderfully lowly in the place He takes in the economy of God; the Father is supreme, but then there are three Persons. The Lord says, "Baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". @Matthew 28: 19. That phrase asserts the deity of all Three, only that Two of Them are taking a lower place than the First, but that is only in the economy; it is not at all to weaken in any way the fact that the Three are One and the Three are equal. And when we are in the service of God we know, we are instructed, according to this verse, as to when to speak and how to speak to each Person, if necessary; we know what terms to use, and the Spirit is wonderfully lowly, as we have said. He is said to be *sent* from heaven. The Lord Jesus is *never said to be sent* from heaven, as far as I know. The Spirit *is* said to be sent from heaven, meaning that the Spirit is taking an inferior place publicly, or outwardly, in regard to the divine economy.
{399}
E.B. Would you say that the reference in @Ezekiel 37: 9: "Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind" (the alternative translation is 'spirit') would have any bearing upon what you are saying?
J.T. Certainly. The Spirit is there; but He has taken a lowly place, and that is a wonderful thing for us to keep in mind. He has taken a lowly place, and has been here on earth for over 1900 years in that lowliness. He maintains what is due to God according to what God is in heaven; there is a perfect answer to that in the presence of the Spirit down here, and the Spirit is here in the assembly; and that brings out the greatness of the assembly's place too, but nevertheless the assembly is never part of the Deity.
J.P-sn. Do we see this matter coming out in Rebecca? She says to the servant, "Who is the man that is walking in the fields to meet us?". Would speaking to the Spirit be in that way about Christ Himself? The Spirit as unfolding Christ to us?
J.T. Well, indeed. In fact the man wonders when he sees the features of Rebecca coming out in what *she* does, the service *she* renders. The man, that is, Abraham's servant, the chief servant of his house, is undoubtedly typical of the Spirit of God, and he wonders at what Rebecca does, showing how the Spirit can take such an attitude, and yet He never changes as regards His Person -- God is here by the Spirit according to Ephesians. God is here by the Spirit, for the Spirit is God. In @Ephesians 2: 22 it really reads, 'A habitation of God in Spirit', not in *the* Spirit, but in Spirit. It is God; the Spirit there is God.
D.J.M. Have you time for a word on the latter part of verse 17 and how it widens out?
J.T. Well, it is just to show how that when a great event such as is depicted in that verse occurs.
{400}
the influence of it is spread. For instance, when the Lord Jesus comes from heaven, as He will, according to @1 Thessalonians 4, it will be a great occasion, and the influence and bearing of it will spread everywhere. It is the time of the resurrection, so we are said to be sons of God, being sons of the resurrection. We are sons of a *thing*; that is, the resurrection, which will be worked out when the Lord Jesus descends from heaven and the saints are raised. But there will be more than that, for the ascension will also take place then. I am using all that to show how a great spiritual event spreads out in its influence and bearing; and that is what will happen when the Lord comes and the assembly goes up. There will be the greatest matters occurring on the earth at that time, and the saints will no doubt be ready for them.
{401}
THE LORD AS HAVING A HOUSEHOLD
@Isaiah 8: 18 - 20; @John 13: 33 - 35; @John 21: 5, 6
J.T. What is in mind is that the Lord Jesus has a household, which He regards as His own, and hence these scriptures speak of His children. They are to be viewed relatively, not in the sense of His being a father, as God is, but as given children Himself, and hence having a household. And so these scriptures in the New Testament show how He regarded the disciples, involving tender affections, parental affections, but tender and gracious. So that the thought will bring out the link between the Old Testament and the New in this sense, that Christ being the Messiah was regarded as having a house, and hence the passover became introductory to the Lord's supper, involving all the government of a house. This should have a special reference to young people, and to parental feeling in older ones so that the young are cared for in view of the Lord's supper and the service of God working out in it.
Ques. Is it that conditions have been set up in which this peculiar affection can be expressed continually?
J.T. Well, I had thought of that. There is much inquiry as to children, and how the question of age enters into their participation in the things of God. It works out in protection, and also in the advantage that they have as being the children of believing parents. It is said that the children are holy.
H.H. In the previous chapter it says "the virgin shall conceive", then we get the thought here as you say, then in the next chapter, "Unto us a child is born". All that comes into the thought of the children, does it not?
J.T. Quite so, in @Isaiah 7: 16 the age of the child, too, is mentioned; the age of one of the
{402}
children alluded to is mentioned as marking off something.
H.H. That is very typical of these days, is it not? That section in Isaiah refers to what would be true of the conditions of the last days, and then the coming in of Christ?
J.T. Quite. To bring out the place the children have.
L.P.M. Does verse 4 of chapter 8 also enter into that; "Before the lad knoweth to cry, My father! And, My mother!"?
J.T. Well, I was thinking of the first part so as to proceed in order, as to what was referred to in chapter 7; it says, "And Jehovah spoke again to Ahaz, saying, Ask for thee a sign from Jehovah thy God; ask for it in the deep, or in the height above. And Ahaz said, I will not ask, and will not tempt Jehovah. And he said, Hear then, house of David, Is it a small matter for you to weary men, that ye weary also my God? Therefore will the Lord himself give you a sign, Behold, the virgin shall conceive and shall bring forth a son, and call his name Immanuel" (which we all know means 'God with us'). "Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and to choose the good. For before the child knoweth to refuse the evil and to choose the good, the land whose two kings thou fearest shall be forsaken. Jehovah will bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy father's house, days which have not come since the day when Ephraim turned away from Judah ..." (verses  10 - 17). Now you referred to another scripture.
L.P.M. Verse 4 of chapter 8.
J.T. So as to get the full bearing of the text, the chapter begins, "And Jehovah said to me, Take thee a great tablet, and write thereon with a man's style, concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz. And I took unto me to witness, sure witnesses". And then it says in
{403}
the end of verse 3, "Call his name, Maher-shalal-hash-baz. For before the lad knoweth to cry, My father! And, My mother! the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before the king of Assyria". And then we have this reference already made in verse 18, "Behold, ... the children that Jehovah hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel". Then there is reference to another child in verse 3 of chapter 7, which reads, "And Jehovah said to Isaiah, Go out now to meet Ahaz, thou and thy son Shear-jashub, at the end of the aqueduct of the upper pool, on the highway of the fuller's field". Now, that word "Shear-jashub" means, 'a remnant shall return', so that all these children are signs and full of instruction, but especially now in view of the Lord's supper coming in in this prophetic part, the passover leading up to the Lord's supper.
A.J.G. Have you in mind that the passover was to be celebrated in households, and that it becomes the moral preparation for the Supper?
J.T. That is just the point that I had in mind, because the passover was introduced in @Exodus 12, and it was to be the beginning of months, the first of the year for Israel. So that it is a significant thing and opens up wide avenues of instruction, and particularly because it makes way for children; and then the Lord's own part in it in the sense of government, for He is the Son over the house of God.
E.C.T. Does verse 18 suggest that there are to be good conditions prevailing -- signs and wonders in Israel?
J.T. Yes. And then another thing, in chapter 9 the Lord is said to be "Father of Eternity", meaning the 'Father of the age'.
R.H.G. Would you say a little more as to what you have in mind as to the age of children in these matters?
{404}
J.T. The reference to it is striking, because it is alluded to several times here, and the age of one at least is in mind, and sometimes the question arises as to the age of children, whatever it may be, and whether the Lord's own age would be a guide, for He was a Child. Luke, of course, presents Him as a Babe. He is alluded to in His very earliest moments; but Matthew treats of Him as older; that is to say, He is under the care of Joseph, but Joseph is to take His mother, "the little child and his mother"; and then in Luke His age is given as twelve, when He asserts His responsibility, so to speak, to do His Father's business. Mary, His mother, said that she and His father (meaning Joseph) had searched for Him, and He said, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?", meaning that God was His Father. He was asserting Himself in that sense at the age of twelve, and whether that may not guide somewhat as to children's place in the service at the Lord's supper, and leading up to having part in the service of God.
C.A.I. Would the fact that "Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and to choose the good", indicate that there was moral discernment in the children?
J.T. Well, it is to be noted that it is not the same child as Immanuel. *This* child is meant, I think, meaning that it was the child immediately before the prophet.
A.J.G. Do you mean it refers to Shear-jashub?
J.T. Yes.
A.J.G. Do you think that these two children. Shear-jashub and the other one, one meaning 'a remnant shall return' and the other referring to the quickly-coming judgment, are intended to suggest what may take shape in the children of the saints now, the evidence of a remnant going on with
{405}
the truth, and bearing testimony to what is about to come?
J.T. Very good. Going on with the truth. They are to be brought up with a sense that they have something to go on with, in a sense of responsibility, and that they should take it on early, as early as possible. Their parents should have that in mind, to bring them up with that thought, that there is something of God to be taken care of. And so the Lord says, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?". There is something to be taken care of, and they should have part in it.
E.T. Would @John 16: 21 bear upon that, when the Lord is about to leave His own? He refers to them as having sorrow as a woman "because her hour has come; but when the child is born, she no longer remembers the trouble, on account of the joy that a man has been born into the world".
J.T. Very good. One has often thought of that. It is not a child, but a man, meaning one to take on things, reverting back, really to Adam. The man is born into the world, he is potentially a man if he is a man-child; and, of course, that runs right through Scripture, as, for instance, in @Revelation 12: 5, where the word is "male son", which is very remarkable. He is referred to as caught up to God, as if God took Him out of the way so that the devil could not attack; but He is still there and in due course will come in and take His part in everything. The book of Revelation, of course, opens up all these things.
G.H.H. Would John have in mind what you say in writing to the elect lady? "I rejoiced greatly that I have found of thy children walking in truth", @2 John 4.
J.T. Just so. The elect lady; a very remarkable designation in the scriptures, that a woman should be called an elect lady, but then an elect lady and
{406}
her children. While she was a lady she was a woman, and she had children, and her children walked in truth. So that again bears on what we were saying as to the children coming into truth. Peter refers to someone in Babylon, that she greeted others. Some think that it was his wife, but it might be an assembly in Babylon. And if there were one, possibly there was, it would be all the more significant.
A.D. Would the man in @John 9 help us in this matter? His parents say "*He* is of age, ask *him*".
J.T. Very good. That is they asserted that he was of age, and therefore responsible to answer for himself, which is a great matter too for children, to know what to say in answer to any question raised, because questions are raised with children. But then he was a grown up man.
L.P.M. Is it your thought that the Lord's supper is a family matter?
J.T. That is just the thought. The same idea extended back to the Old Testament, and now it is worked out in the New.
C.C.C. Do you think the occasion in @Luke 24: 30 would bear on it? The Lord taking the house-father's place.
J.T. The house-father is the word there, meaning that the Lord took the place of the head of the house in giving thanks for the food, in giving thanks for what was on the table. A remarkable time as entering into the Lord's supper, because it was at that time that He vanished out of their sight, and they made their way to Jerusalem; showing the effect of the occasion was to gather, to bring the saints together, so they were able to contribute to what was current in Jerusalem.
A.G.L. So that as the passover is introduced in @Exodus 12, it is contemplated that the children will
{407}
ask, "What mean ye by this service?". Do we look for that inquiry amongst our children?
J.T. I am sure we do.
Ques. This thought seems to run right up to the idea of the Lord's coming to us. I was thinking of @John 14: "I will not leave you orphans"; is there a paternal suggestion there?
J.T. That is very helpful. "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you". Showing that the Lord was mindful, according to what He said elsewhere, "as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings". The youth are brought under the Lord's wing; and, of course, much is made out of that passage in @John 14, because it begins with the incoming of the Spirit, and that He would come to remain with them for ever.
P.H.H. Do I gather from your remarks that the Lord Jesus in the character of house-father would in some way enter into the Lord's supper?
J.T. Well, that is what we have been saying, because when He inaugurated it, according to some of the records, they were eating; "as they were eating", @Matthew 26: 26. The allusion is to a father with his children.
P.H.H. That would open up a wide range of thought as to the way that we could address the Lord, or at least the thoughts that we would have in our minds in relation to His coming in, and His touch upon us at the Supper?
J.T. "As they were eating" would indicate that the idea of eating was there. It belongs to a family, and these allusions that we have made, and these passages, all bear on that. It is a question of a family, and the ages of the children. And then the Lord Himself coming into all that in Matthew, and in Luke, and how He was cared for, especially in Matthew, in view of the assembly. "Take to thee the little child and his mother", meaning that the
{408}
mother at that time was the vessel chosen to take care of Him. So it says Joseph was to take them and flee into Egypt, and then He was to be there; hence the word in the prophet, "Out of Egypt have I called my son". So parents can see that the Lord is placing within our range advantages as to our children, and nothing less than His own Supper, the Lord's supper, that they are to have part in it.
Ques. Would the discipline and admonition of the Lord, in which the children are to be brought up, have their place at the Supper in view?
J.T. I would think that, and especially as it is in Ephesians that we get that expression. It is for the fathers to look after them. "And ye fathers ... bring them up in the discipline and admonition of the Lord".
L.P.M. In the scripture in Isaiah it says, "Behold, I and the children that Jehovah hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel, from Jehovah of hosts, who dwelleth in mount Zion". In what way does this reference to Jehovah of hosts, who dwelleth in mount Zion, enter into the matter that you are now speaking of?
J.T. I suppose that mount Zion is an allusion, constantly found in the Old Testament, to the sovereign selection of God for Himself. And undoubtedly the application to children is striking, because it is in the children He makes His selection. And therefore in Matthew the Lord says that "their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven", @Matthew 18: 10.
G.A. You have referred on three occasions to the Lord's own words to His parents. "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?". Do you think it would imply that from twelve years of age and onwards, God would wish to give to our children some apprehension of sonship?
{409}
J.T. Well, something that would lead up to that. Of course, in using a thing like that it has to be somewhat fluid in our minds. It is not a question of literality as to the exact age of twelve, but to give an idea, indicated in the Lord Himself, as to when they should be taught to accept responsibility.
G.A. One asked the question in view of the great feature of divine compression in the holy life of the Lord Jesus, thirty-three and a half years; in the antediluvian economy they lived for nearly a thousand years, did they not? Yet God would express everything in thirty-three and a half years.
J.T. What an age! What a life! What a Child! So His forerunner, that is, John the baptist, is also made to serve in this same sense. In Luke he responds, even when unborn, to the voice of Mary. A very remarkable thing, showing what God can do in children, and what tenderness there should be and holiness, because it is said, "else were your children unclean; but now are they holy", @1 Corinthians 7: 14. That is, compared with the children of unconverted people, converted people's children are holy, relatively holy. They are not so literally. The Lord was literally holy; "That holy thing", it is said. A remarkable statement too, He was personally holy, intrinsically holy; not simply relatively, but really so. Therefore we think of Him reverentially in that sense, and as comparing our own children, think of them too with some thought of holiness, because God has ordered that for them. The parents have that advantage, and the children have that advantage that they are regarded as holy.
A.M. As to the family side of things, does the reference in @Luke 8 to the man, and the woman, and finally to the child. Jairus¬ daughter, aged twelve, raised to life, all bear on this thing working out practically in localities?
J.T. Quite so, there it is.
{410}
R.R.T. With regard to Samuel, it is said, "And Samuel ministered before Jehovah, a boy girded with a linen ephod". Would that illustrate what we are having, a boy growing into this thing in the house of God in relation to service?
J.T. It is very appropriate to bring that up, because in fact he *was* in the house. An extraordinary circumstance, of course, was that seemingly the house of God was somewhat reduced in the esteem of those that were responsible then; but still Samuel was laid there, as set there. And his mother brought him a little coat every year, showing that the growth of the child was in mind, and therefore it is most appropriate to bring his name in now.
W.H.F. Does Paul refer to that in @1 Timothy 5, where he honours the widows who had brought up children; not simply had had children, but had brought them up?
J.T. Brought them up, very good. And the one who is especially mentioned is not to be less than sixty years, showing how age enters into all these matters.
Ques. Would it seem that the mother has a special part in this matter? I was thinking of your reference to John the baptist; the movements of the unborn child really came about through the ears of Elizabeth as she heard the salutation of Mary.
J.T. Wonderful. It is really a striking illustration of God's power, even in a creative sense, in the creation of man. But it is not merely as being created, but as being born, a person being born. The idea of birth is really more important than creation in that sense.
P.H.H. Alongside of that there is the reference, in the last piece of ministry in the Old Testament, to the turning of the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers. Does that mean that happy and mutual relations between
{411}
old and young are to characterise the houses of the saints in view of the children coming into the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. And that brings up the idea of a ministry, and Elijah is the man in question, reminding us of the importance of ministries, and how a man may be addicted in a peculiar way to the service of children. And so the Lord was not behind in that Himself. He says: "Suffer the little children to come to me; forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom of God", @Mark 10: 14.
P.L. And His vindication of the children who cried "Hosanna to the son of David", in the temple. "Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise", @Matthew 21: 15, 16.
J.T. Very good. That should appeal to every mother's heart, and every father's heart.
L.P.M. So that you would allow scope for service in a special way to children if the Lord directed a servant in that way. Is that what you had in mind as to the end of Malachi?
J.T. I am not so sure of people addicting themselves to children's education, because the parents ought to look after the children's education; the parents ought to be the immediate vessels of looking after their education. I doubt very much the wisdom of little children being separated and given over to others to educate them. I think the mothers and the fathers ought to do it. It says "Ye fathers ... bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord". It is an authoritative allusion.
L.P.M. I had more the thought of ministry bearing in the direction of the children.
J.T. Well, quite. I am not sure about children's books and the like, picture books. I am not saying that our brother is alluding to that, but I think the children ought to be brought up on the highest level possible, that they might be taught to learn things
{412}
about God, and about Christ, and about the Spirit, and even about the assembly; and they do too -- they are ready to take in those things.
J.P. Would the law and the testimony have its place in that connection, the children would be made conversant, as far as they are able to understand, at an early age?
J.T. That is just what is brought in here. "To the law and the testimony! If they speak not according to this word, for them there is no daybreak". So that the testimony is brought in here, and, in regard of the children, we are to bring them up in view of the testimony. Someone had alluded to a remnant, a continuation of the service of God, and the elder brethren being taken away, the Lord taking them away one after another, and of course, we elder people are very sobered about that, but then the children have to be thought of. "One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh", @Ecclesiastes 1: 4. That other one, the coming one, is the one we are dealing with now.
D.J.M. I wondered if Eutychus would come in there. It says, "They brought away the boy alive, and were no little comforted".
J.T. Very good; but the boy had been in a dangerous place first, at the window-opening. There was need of care on the part of somebody.
Rem. Referring to Elijah again, he was sent to a widow's house where there was no fatherhood, but he supplied it. He stretched himself upon the child three times and then he said, "My God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again!". Is that the fatherhood that you have in mind?
J.T. That is an incident I have often thought of, and you have, too, I am sure. And another thing is how, in Elisha's day, a child had to be raised up, and he was raised up; there was a father in that case. The child died on account of some condition
{413}
in his head, and Elisha walked up and down through the house; there had been a place for him suggested by the mother of the child, and he walked up and down through the house, as if he were looking round for books or the like, or pictures, or anything that might defile the child. I was just transferring your thought to Elisha, because in a way Elijah and Elisha are one piece, and in Elisha's case also the child died. He was given according to promise, but he died, and the woman sent for Elisha who was at mount Carmel, and his servant with him, and she insisted that he must come. He first sent his servant with his staff, as if his experience might raise him, but it did not; experience in itself will not do, there must be personal intervention. And so the servant took the staff and laid it on the child, but there was no result, there was no life. And then he went himself, and he lay upon the child, just as you said about Elijah, and there was no result, and he walked about the house, as if he did not know what it was, but there might be something hidden that might have caused the death of the child. And I believe that that is often the case, that things are hidden and secreted and children are damaged by them.
Ques. Would what Elisha did bear very much on the meeting for ministry? I was thinking of Elijah as setting out fatherhood, but the activity of Elisha is more prophetic ministry, would you say, which would always bring in a challenge to anything that would cause us to lose our children?
J.T. Quite so.
G.A. Would you say something at this juncture too, as to the woman who was faced with the creditor in the same surroundings? The creditor was come, and she feared the loss of her sons. Does that have any bearing on our exercise in relation to our sons?
{414}
J.T. So she is to shut the door on herself *and* her sons. Her husband had died. She is to shut the door on herself and her sons, and then what had she in the house? Well, she had something; it was very little in her account, but it was something. There was a little oil in the house, and Elisha enjoined her to shut herself in with her sons, and then get vessels and pour out the oil. And she did so, and the oil filled all the vessels, and she asked for another vessel, and the answer was, "There is not a vessel more". But then there was enough there to pay her debt. She asserted that she was in debt, and that the creditor had come. He says, "Go, sell the oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy sons on the rest". That is to say, the great lesson is to live by the Spirit, and that we discharge our indebtedness; the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. We discharge our indebtedness, we liquidate it, and then we have means of living. That is another feature of the subject. And, of course, it bears on what we have said as to the children getting the Spirit.
A.D. "Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child; but the rod of correction shall drive it far from him", @Proverbs 22: 15. Would that be in line?
J.T. The rod of correction would be the father's part more particularly. And so, transferring the thought fully, Timotheus was sent to Corinth to instruct the Corinthians; the apostle addresses them as children, and Timotheus was sent to instruct them, which he did. But then the apostle later asks them whether he should come with a rod. He sent Timotheus instead of a rod; he was a young brother with tender affections, I would say.
H.H.S. Have you in mind that the children, as brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, are steeped in such thoughts in the home, and they learn that the Lord has a house of His own in
{415}
which they are to be free, and into which He calls His own children as in @John 13?
J.T. That is good, and it gives one an opening to speak about these points, as to the Lord having a house of His own, which He has. And we have the two passages read in @John 13 and @John 21. In both the term that is used is "Children". The first refers to love among the brethren. "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves". It is not simply each one having love, but love as in quantity where the children are, or may be; that they are brought up in that atmosphere. And in chapter 21, they were, you might say, naughty children, because Peter says "I go to fish", and the others say "We also come with thee", and they went off and they did not get any fish; but the Lord did not give any reproof, no formal reproof. He just dealt with them in a fatherly way with a view, in due time, to correcting them, but they were brought round. He said "Have ye anything to eat?", and they said, "No". They had to admit that the whole expedition was a failure. But then the Lord said, "Cast the net at the right side of the ship and ye will find", which, I think, is a reminder to us of the need of the element of grace; and in due time the opportunity will come for correction. But at first there was no reproof.
A.C.S.P. Would Paul's reference in Colossians to not vexing your children and in Ephesians to not provoking them to anger bear on what you are saying?
J.T. Quite so. Ephesians on the higher level, I would think; and so as to wives, for it is all bearing on the same thing.
A.M. Do the disciples get an early impression as to this in @John 1, where the two disciples followed Jesus, and He says to them, "What seek ye? And *they* said to him, Rabbi, ... where abidest thou?
{416}
He says to them, Come and see, ... and they abode with him". Do you think that would bear on early impressions that they would receive as to knowing the Lord in this way?
J.T. Yes, and the minister too. The minister, that is John the baptist, so to say, preached his followers away from himself to Christ. He was affected by the walk of Jesus. He looked upon Jesus as He walked, and said, "Behold the Lamb of God". The two disciples heard him speaking, and they followed Jesus. I suppose that these disciples may be regarded as young; they were young anyway in a spiritual sense, and they called the Lord "Teacher", and said "Where abidest thou?". And He says, "Come and see", which is a very tender way of dealing with young people. That is to say, it is not simply what I say, but what you may see in Me, or around Me. It is a question of the circumstances in which the Lord is to be found; and it is a very tender thought that the children are invited by the Lord to come and see.
P.H.H. In chapter 13, just before the Lord uses the word "Children". He gives them great impressions of glory. "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him", and so on. Would that be to fortify children, the saints in that way, in the position of the testimony, by giving them a sense of the great glory of divine Persons? Would you mind saying a little about those glories, because they come immediately before the Lord says, "Children, yet a little while I am with you"? Is this the inside position, John being in the bosom of Jesus, and therefore love and restfulness making for the expression of these great things, and moral glories attaching to the Lord, even as He goes into death; and then actual glory as He is contemplated in heaven; and then in addition to that, glory in the assembly?
{417}
J.T. Quite so. I am just thinking for a moment of the chapter; what a chapter it is! It is somewhat corresponding to @Acts 20, which is a love chapter, and it looks to me as if @John 13 is similar. It begins thus. "Now before the feast of the passover, Jesus, knowing that his hour had come that he should depart out of this world to the Father, having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end". A beautiful suggestion for young people, having loved His own, He loved them to the end. And then the supper is spoken of, and then the feet-washing. It says in verse 3, "Jesus, knowing that the Father had given him all things into his hands, and that he came out from God and was going to God, rises from supper and lays aside his garments, and having taken a linen towel he girded himself, then he pours water into the wash-hand basin, and began to wash the feet of the disciples, and to wipe them with the linen towel with which he was girded". Well now, this is well known, of course; it has always been well known to the brethren, but the tenderness of it perhaps has not been so much touched; I mean the applicability of it to young people. The tenderness of the Lord Himself -- in pouring the water out into a wash-hand basin, and then washing the feet of the disciples, and then using a linen towel, because linen is absorbent; there is a tenderness in it to relieve the discomfort of washing, so that the person is set at ease. I believe all these things are very touching in this chapter, and then all that you say as to the glories of the chapter. We considered yesterday as to how many glories there are; we read of "from glory to glory". John certainly furnishes us with glory and glories, and this glory of the feet-washing is one of the most touching, because the children, the young people, need the washing, and the Lord explains that one who is washed does not need to wash save his feet, because he is clean every whit; that is to say, that the word of God effects that,
{418}
but then there is the detail, the need of washing for persons who are youthful and in contact with the earth. The feet get contaminated, and there is constant need of washing, and the washing is by the word, the ministry.
A.D. Would @Hebrews 10: 22, come in? "Let us draw near ... having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water".
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Connecting the passage in @John 13, the Lord having a house at the present time, with the next chapter which speaks of the Father's house, and then "I go to prepare a place for you", do we get touches in the Lord coming to us now, of what we will enter into in the future when the Lord comes for us?
J.T. Quite so, the Father's house, of course, is the full thought. It is no question of youthful persons or juvenile persons, it is the full thought of God. The Lord rises to that in chapter 14, "Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe on God, believe also on me. In my Father's house there are many abodes; were it not so, I had told you, for I go to prepare you a place". Now He is rising to the full thought of the family of God. But it is quite in order that this question of children should be brought up too, leading up to that.
R.R.T. In regard to what we have been saying, would it be a right thought with us to have children according to the high level of things as we have been speaking of it? I was thinking of Abraham, who said "What wilt thou give me? seeing I go childless". Here it is "The children that Jehovah hath given me". Would it be a spiritual thought with us to have children according to this high level of things?
J.T. Well, clearly. It ought to be the thought of parents to have children, and the Lord taking them on according to what we have been saying, the parents themselves nurturing them in the nurture
{419}
and admonition of the Lord. But we must come to the divine thought, it would be a mischief to keep people down; let the thought of manhood be in mind always. That is what has already been alluded to, as to the gospel of John; the Lord says "for joy that a man is born into the world", @John 16: 21. That is, a man is the full idea. The ark had no children in it, and that is the idea of the divine abode eternally, that developed people are there, persons that have intelligent affections; although as we have remarked already, "their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven", which is very beautiful; but at the same time what is in mind is the full grown man.
R.S. Would @Psalm 127 bear on that, "Children are an inheritance from Jehovah"?
J.T. Just so. Well, now we are going back to the juvenile class, so to speak, whereas the divine thought is to lead up to the fathers. So whilst John's letters are written to fathers, and young men, and children, yet the fathers are the highest thought, and it is clear that the fathers are in mind. So that what we are dealing with now ought to lead us to the fathers, the full thought of God; and the full thought is "my Father's house". There are many abodes there, which probably alludes to the families that God will have, but the Lord says, "I go to prepare you a place", meaning that the saints of this dispensation have the first place, and I believe the same thing is true in Matthew. "Two of you" is a question of the part that we have in the assembly; in the assembly, down here; in the Father's house, up there.
G.A. As your last scripture bears so directly on current exercises, one wonders if you would be free to say a little more to us as to that, for we feel the urgent need of help and instruction in that matter which your last scripture bears on? In @John 21,
{420}
following Peter's word, "I go to fish", they say, "We also come with thee". And then your scripture, "Jesus therefore says to them, Children, have ye anything to eat? They answered him, No", and so on.
J.T. It is to bring out the grace side. John has the grace side in mind; he begins with grace and truth, "For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ". And so the Spirit of God says, "And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father), full of grace and truth". Grace and truth! @John 21 contemplates that grace is to prevail, because the Lord does not rebuke the naughty attitude of Peter and the others in going to fish; He does not rebuke it. But He does things that lead up to a full rebuke; Peter is left in the position of becoming a martyr according to the divine thought, and John is left here to carry out the behests of grace during the dispensation.
L.P.M. There is an interesting footnote in the New Translation to the word "children" here that might serve. The footnote is '*paidion*', the diminutive; it expresses peculiar affection.
J.T. The different words that John uses as to children are striking in that sense.
A.J.G. Is it significant that when they come to land they see a fire of coals there, and fish laid on it, and bread; is all that suggestive of the Lord's house that you were speaking of?
J.T. Very good. What a touch! And there the word that He uses as to the meal is *dine*, which shows that it is not merely something to eat, but it is a dinner; and the Lord Himself clearly has prepared it. The things are found there, and then He associates them with it saying, "Bring of the fishes which ye have now taken", as if they had done it. There is a certain distinction granted to them, that they had
{421}
caught the fish, and there were a large number, a hundred and fifty-three great fishes. The Lord gives them credit for that, showing that it is a question of grace in the last chapter of John. Indirectly it is a testimony to the spirit of John's ministry; it runs right through the dispensation.
P.H.H. Does the net draw attention to the assembly?
J.T. I suppose so. The net did not break, so there is no fear, even as we read in Matthew, "hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it". The net does not break, so that the catch is secure. So that we have in @John 11: 52, "That he should also gather together into one the children of God who were scattered abroad". That is the ministry that is to characterise us, to gather together into one the children of God that are scattered abroad.
P.H.H. I wondered whether it was remarkable that the net was there, and this adjusting word of the Lord, "Cast the net at the right side of the ship". The children in that way were immediately amenable to adjustment.
J.T. Very good, and so the last chapter leads to completion in what we are saying as to the ministry. Peter is the martyr, and that is what is needed at the present time, martyrdom. The Lord says, "When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not". Meaning that he would be carried to death for the Lord. He had asserted that he would die for the Lord, and the Lord says, so to speak, You will be allowed to do it; you shall have the opportunity of doing it. But then on the other hand Peter says, "What shall this man do?". The Lord said, "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?".
{422}
That is to say, we have John, as it were, running down the dispensation, the spirit of life.
C.F.I. Is it your thought that this scripture in @John 21 bears on the question of the food supply amongst the brethren? "Have ye anything to eat?"
J.T. Quite so. Another thing comes up in Matthew to support that: "Blessed is that bondman whom his lord on coming shall find doing thus". And that 'doing thus' refers to food in the household, the Lord's household.
C.F.I. Would it be a word as to the headship of Christ? "Cast the net at the right side of the ship and ye will find", the direction that is available there.
J.T. Very good. It is a question of knowing how; in Luke the net broke, but not in John.
F.W. Would this ministry be calculated to prepare us for anything that might happen?
J.T. Very good, *anything* that might happen. And, of course, many things have happened.
W.H.W. I was wondering if this word, "Children, have ye anything to eat?", might come as a test to any of us at any time, but where it is honestly answered to as they did here, help is given.
J.T. Help is given, exactly. The Lord was there to do what was needed; to light the fire, and to make the meal, and to do anything else; to provide the food by direction, by order to Peter, and all the chapter runs down on those lines. It is a grace chapter, and we may rely upon it through all the vicissitudes of the assembly's history. At the same time, there is nothing omitted that is not cared for, and if severity is necessary it has to be used.
J.S. It is a great comfort to us to know that whatever happens the net cannot break.
J.T. Whatever happens; and how many things are happening, and we need the Lord nearby. The word is, "The Lord is near". He is near to help.
{423}
Ques. Is all this care of the Lord in view of having us free and available for the Supper?
J.T. That was in mind at first, but we have travelled pretty well, I think. I think we have reached a good end, and it bears on the Lord's supper. We specially stressed the youthful elements that are coming in, and ought to come in, and specially the age that would govern the whole matter, the different ages. Age has a great deal to do with all this. And so we read about those different children in the prophets, each of which has significance, and it is for us to be instructed.
A.G.L. Would you say a word about @Isaiah 8: 18, being quoted in @Hebrews 2, "Behold, I and the children which God has given me", after referring to His brethren?
J.T. There are several quotations in the chapter, leading up to family conditions, and the Father and the Son are eventually in mind, that is to say, the Father is to be praised, to be worshipped, as we might say; and then the Son active in that service. So the assembly is the great field in which the service is carried on, but the Son is the One who does it. The Lord is the One who sings in the midst of the assembly. Therefore we come back to the assembly again.
{424}
THE THINGS THAT ARE MORE EXCELLENT
@Philippians 3: 7 - 21
J.T. This section is very attractive, for there is something to be added, and it is the principle of excelling coming into christianity; and the apostle himself is an example to us of excelling. Even if it were to be applied in an ordinary sense, in ordinary affairs, the thought of excelling is a right thought to have in mind; whatever we are going to do, to do it well, to excel in it. If it is right at all, it is right to excel in it. But if you refer to the word of the apostle, then we are, of course, attracted to the excellence of the things, not simply what Paul excelled in, but the excellency of the things that are indicated in this chapter. I suppose Philippians is a sort of pointer to what is excellent, as it is said, "The things that are more excellent" (chapter 1: 10). But even as to ordinary things, here the apostle refers to what marked him as a Jew, in order to combat the Jewish opposers of the truth. "As to the law, a Pharisee; as to zeal, persecuting the assembly; as to righteousness which is in the law, found blameless". So that he himself excelled even in that, and this, no doubt helped him to combat Jewish efforts against the truth. They could not boast much in the presence of Paul, even as to the great distinction that judaism had acquired in the world.
Ques. Is this a practical working out of what he has stated, "*We* are the circumcision"? While he had excelled in these features, and they were gain to him, yet he counted them loss.
J.T. Yes. "*We* are the circumcision". He meant it was a real and genuine thing in its import.
Rem. I thought his personal exercises would show what was appropriate to those who took that ground, the genuineness of his desires, what he had really discarded, and what he had really taken on.
{425}
J.T. Quite so. "*We* are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh". Then he turns to what he could boast in as regards what judaism was, so as to combat those who used it to oppose christianity.
Ques. Does he use the same principle in his second epistle to the Corinthians in outlining his own experience as an apostle as over against those who were boasting of themselves?
J.T. As we pursue that we shall see how Paul excels in what he did in the Lord's work. We marvel at the things which he did in his lifetime. We do not get them all in Corinthians, but there he gives such a list that you marvel at it, showing how the principle of excelling was with him. It seems to me that it would be wise for the young people, brothers and sisters, to take on the thought of doing things well, excelling in them. In christianity, of course, the object is obvious, because we are very often half-hearted in what we profess. If things are worth professing at all they are worth excelling in.
A.M. Does Paul open out to the Corinthians, that the way to excel is the way of love? Without love one is nothing.
J.T. Yes, surely. "Yet shew I unto you a way of more surpassing excellence". What a thought that is for us to lay hold of as being called, coming into christianity, to go in for it fully and wholly.
A.M. That would be an abstract idea as Paul presents it to the Corinthians, but here we have something very concrete and substantial?
J.T. As to these elements referred to, he points out that he excels in them. We have read certain of them. Then he says, "What things were gain to me these I counted, on account of Christ, loss ... if any way I arrive at the resurrection from among the dead". Evidently he had the idea of the resurrection
{426}
from among the dead as the prime thought in his mind to attain to. He wanted to attain to it experimentally.
F.W. So that once christianity has come in, is it that everything in comparison with that is to be considered negative?
J.T. Just so, in comparison with that. So we are led to think of the excellencies of Christ, what they really are. Paul's judgment was based on experience in some sense.
F.W. Why does he use such very strong language in verse 8? "For whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ"?
J.T. I suppose it is to bring out his own estimate of values. Paul is challenged as to whether things which might be called good, should become as filth, so that it is a question of the ability that one acquires to judge as to comparative values.
J.P. So that in chapter 1 the apostle prays "that ye may judge of and approve the things that are more excellent".
J.T. That was just what we were alluding to a moment ago. It is characteristic in this epistle.
F.W. Is it to emphasise that the thought concerning the flesh is so radical that it must be regarded in the light of those words, whereas the christian position is that the believer is in Christ, not in the flesh?
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Is there a reference to the prophetic word "all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags", @Isaiah 64: 6? It is not our sins but our righteousnesses. Is there a reference to this in Paul saying "not having my righteousness"?
J.T. That is good.
Rem. It is the best features of the flesh that are the trouble, not the worst ones.
{427}
J.T. Yes.
A.M. Would not the concision seek to preserve those kinds of features, just as Saul preserved Agag, and so on?
J.T. Seeking to preserve these things, not going all the way in judging them.
A.M. The circumcision would be going the whole way.
J.T. Quite so. Hence, "*We* are the circumcision". Paul went the whole way with the truth of circumcision.
A.E.D. The emphasis would be on the word "all things" in verse 8; not just a few things.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Does it show that experimentally we come to a judgment? But then it needs to be maintained, for Paul speaks in the past tense; then he speaks in the present. Is that a practical working out of circumcision? He says, "What things were gain to me these I counted, on account of Christ, loss", and also, "I count also all things to be loss". Is the maintenance of the matter important?
J.T. Quite so. That is to say, not consenting to it as a matter of light to be enjoyed, but to be maintained in its full effect, because the thought of God is that we should be in the thing fully. The full effect of christianity is the testimony. As we proceed in the chapter we shall see how the apostle worked it out in himself, and how he regards the goal, in his mind. He stretched himself out towards it. That is to say, he would excel in that. He did not reckon he had fully reached it, but it was reachable, and if anyone would reach it, it would be he.
D.J.M. So he says, "if any way". Does that mean that no suffering would deter him?
J.T. Whatever obstacle there might be, the point was to reach the goal.
{428}
F.W. Is that a positive thing, the knowledge of "the power of his resurrection"? Not only the great fact of it, but the power of it, for that to be known?
J.T. "If any way I arrive at the resurrection from among the dead".
Ques. Is that arriving in soul experience?
J.T. That is what I thought. God intends to have one man to lead in things, and, you might say, in everything. So as to the question of knowledge, there was one who knew the mystery, for instance. God had one man in that way here to set out the truth of things, and there can be nothing to equal them. He had this man in His mind, and the Lord laid hold of him to work out things in him. It was a triumph, really, that it was so, that there was one man capable, equal to be used in anything that would be needed in the way of indicating what christianity really is.
Ques. Is that what is meant by the 'delineation' in the word to Timothy in @1 Timothy 1: 16?
J.T. It had in mind those who would believe on Christ "to life eternal". God is not saying that it is the best that can be done. It is the best, of course, but I am really seeking to indicate the idea of our doing the best possible; the thing must be done according to the full thought of God, and there is one man who exemplifies it. It is Christ, of course; but still, it is Paul; and this book, especially this chapter, is intended to set out for us that thought.
Ques. Is that why he could say, "Be imitators all together of me" (verse 17.)?
J.T. Just so. He could say that without any hesitation.
F.W. "You have us for a model". Is that the point? "Be imitators all together of me, brethren, and fix your eyes on those walking thus as you have us for a model".
{429}
E.T. What would be understood by, "the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus"?
J.T. The importance is in the words "on high", not simply the calling of God. That might be choice, but "the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus" is to bring out what there is on the part of God, what you might call the expanse, that which is seen on the second day, the sphere of His operations, and what He can do. He has this man in that sphere. This chapter is to bring out what can be done. What a vessel Paul must have been to God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit; the whole divine thought is to be exemplified in him.
Rem. And all the more remarkable seeing he was in prison.
J.T. Quite so. He was just waiting to see what would turn out for him, but this was what is going on in his own soul.
A.M. In connection with what was going on in Paul's soul, what would be the distinction between "to know ... the power of his resurrection", and then "arrive at the resurrection from among the dead"?
J.T. Verse 10 reads, "To know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings". The stress is on "his", not simply the thought of the resurrection, as, for instance, in connection with Lazarus or others, but the power of His resurrection covers the whole divine thought. That is to be realised, and realised in Paul's soul. Of course, the raising of Lazarus was power. The raising of Jairus¬ daughter, and others too, was power; but this is the power of *Christ's* resurrection.
A.M. And then arriving at the resurrection from among the dead, would that be something more general?
J.T. It would be more general.
{430}
A.W.B. You spoke about "the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus". I was wondering about @Isaiah 35, "the excellency of Carmel and Sharon", and "the excellency of our God". Is this something additional in @Philippians 3, "the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus"?
J.T. I would have thought so by the way Paul deals with it here. He is dealing with the greatness of christianity, what is set out in Christ. Paul was aiming at that, that he would come to it himself. God was with him in it. It is to be attained to. Christianity has been fully expressed, not only in Christ, but in Paul.
D.J.M. Is this the moral road to it, the fellowship of His sufferings?
J.T. That is it exactly. If anyone wishes to win Christ, this is the moral road to it. It is quite a good word to use.
Ques. Is that why he brings what we might call a Roman touch into this passage: "That I may be found in him, not having my righteousness"? Is it not an evidence that in the most spiritual touches that marked Paul, he carried forward the truth of the gospel in his soul?
J.T. Yes. It is mentioned of Abraham that as believing it was reckoned to him as righteousness. It is a question of righteousness by faith now.
A.E.D. Would you say a word as to the end of verse 12? "Seeing that also I have been taken possession of by Christ Jesus".
J.T. Of course, that would be the guarantee in Paul's soul that what he was aiming at would materialise. He was taken possession of by Christ Jesus, but then he was working the thing out in his soul, and the Lord would be with him in that. Taken possession of is one thing, but he is not satisfied with that. It is a blessed thing to have, and be satisfied with the thing in an objective sense, but then Paul
{431}
is labouring on positive lines and the Holy Spirit, of course, is operating in him to that end.
F.W. In verse 12 he says he is not already perfected. In verse 15 it says, "As many therefore as are perfect, let us be thus minded". What is the difference between the two thoughts?
J.T. I think is it what would be acceptable. Matthew says, "As your heavenly Father is perfect", @Matthew 5: 48. We have to read a statement like that in the spirit of it, and get the meaning of it. So we are to be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect. We have to work it out, what God is in His operations here. Paul is an example to His people.
Ques. Would you think that being *perfected* would really await its consummation till the latter part of the chapter comes about, the actual conforming to Christ, and the second is rather the idea of growing up into the thing as being fully matured?
J.T. The position is, that it is the time of the Holy Spirit. There are things that enter into that. It is not what it will be in the coming glory exactly, but what enters into that in the present time is to be regarded as perfect and belonging to christianity.
Rem. So that Paul in writing to the Hebrews speaks not only of full growth, but the things that belong to full growth. Is that what you have in mind?
J.T. Yes. They belong to the Spirit's realm where the operations are going on. So that they are attainable by any of us if, we go in for them. This chapter is to show what is attainable on this line, because it is a question of working out real christianity.
J.P. Is the word in verse 10 important in that connection, "the fellowship of his sufferings"? They peculiarly come into the position at the present time.
J.T. Well, sharing in it. That is the principle of the fellowship. We are to share in the sufferings of Christ.
{432}
F.W. So that Paul has nothing less in his soul than the full standard of christianity.
J.T. The full standard. And it has a status in heaven, so to speak. Christianity has its proper status in heaven. It is what is attainable in view of what has been accomplished, and what the Spirit has done here. But then there is the full thought of God in what we get in the latter part of the chapter. It says, "As many therefore as are perfect, let us be thus minded; and if ye are any otherwise minded". That is to say let us keep on together as far as possible. "And if ye are any otherwise minded, this also God shall reveal to you". God is operating to help us through. "But whereto we have attained, let us walk in the same steps. Be imitators all together of me, brethren, and fix your eyes on those walking thus as you have us for a model". Paul was the model, the standard. God helped him.
A.W.G. I notice Paul uses the expression "I pursue" once or twice.
J.T. The allusion is a technical one. 'Lay yourselves out fully for it'. Attain to it. It is attainable. "For many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ". He touches on the terribleness of enemies in that sense; working against him as enemies of God. "Whose end is destruction, whose God is the belly, and their glory in their shame, who mind earthly things". It is brought down to that, but worse than that, really, could be said of such enemies. But "*our* commonwealth has its existence in the heavens, from which also we await the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour". That is to say, the apostle is thinking of salvation in the full thought of what is to be attained, of what is in Christ.
Ques. And whilst he is waiting he is *stretching* towards the mark?
J.T. Quite so.
{433}
E.E.S.L. Is it noteworthy that he uses the word 'us' including Timothy, not only Paul the aged, but a relatively young man? He says, "you have us for a model".
J.T. Just so. He had the full thought in his mind. It was attainable in his mind; it was possible. And now perhaps we might apply ourselves more fully to the end of the chapter. "For *our* commonwealth has its existence in the heavens". That is to say, our system of living is in heaven. It is the full thought of God. The Lord's body is the thought for us to have in mind. "Who shall transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory". These are the two extremes, our body of humiliation, and His body of glory. It is not simply what He is as risen, but what He is as glorified -- His body of glory. We need to see how that develops in the chapter. It says, "We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is", @1 John 3: 2.
Ques. "We shall see him as he is". Does that emphasise what was just said? John says that he had seen the Lord in the forty days. Is there something in what John says that synchronises with what Paul had in view?
J.T. Yes. I thought so. "If it is manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is".
Rem. I wondered if it was the very greatest thought that we could conceive.
J.T. I think it is. God has that in His mind for us too, and it is all going to be effected by Christ, for it is a question of salvation. The word salvation covers much. We have the same thought in @Romans 8: 23 as to sonship: "And not only that, but even we ourselves, who have the first-fruits of the Spirit, we also ourselves groan in ourselves, awaiting adoption, that is, the redemption of our body", adoption here is sonship. I would say @Romans 8 is not quite so full as our chapter, because it is a question here of
{434}
the Lord's body of glory that we are to be conformed to. @Romans 8 says we are awaiting sonship. The idea of sonship synchronises with what we are thinking of.
D.J.M. Is it calculated to make us buoyant and happy?
J.T. Quite so. What thoughts are before us tonight!
Ques. Do you think it would also help us to appreciate "the power which he has even to subdue all things to himself"? But the finishing touch will be, "who shall transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory". He has that power now, it is operating now, is it not?
J.T. Quite so.
F.W. Has the expression in Corinthians, "our house which is from heaven", anything to do with this passage?
J.T. I would rather think so. "We have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens"; we await that. Wonderful thought!
F.W. Is there some way in which that is being, in a sense, prepared now morally, in order that the body literally raised will be manifested with it at the time of glory?
J.T. Quite so. In @1 Corinthians 15 (if the brethren wish to look into this matter more fully and carefully) you are sown in corruption and dishonour, and raised in incorruptibility and glory.
Ques. It is sown, it is raised; does not that show that identity is retained?
J.T. I think so. I think the thought of identity must be there. "The dead" carries that with it.
Ques. I would like to ask, when you speak of @Romans 8, "awaiting adoption", whether that means the full thought of sonship as including conformity to Christ? That does not militate against what Paul says to the Galatians that we are sons now. We are not waiting for it in that sense.
{435}
J.T. We are sons of God by faith. It is on the principle of faith we get it. This chapter presents the full thought of the reality of it.
J.P. May we have a word as to the commonwealth? In Colossians it says, "Ye have died, and your life is hid with the Christ in God". The word here is, "*Our* commonwealth has its existence in the heavens". Would it be a wider thought?
J.T. There would not be much difference. "Your life is hid with the Christ in God". It is pretty much the idea of what is in mind here, as to the word *commonwealth*.
J.P. 'Associations of life', is the idea according to J.N.D.¬s footnote.
J.T. That is it.
E.T. It is timely that the brethren here should be reminded of our living associations, our own commonwealth, because there is fresh pressure coming to some in the railways in membership of the unions being compulsory. It will be a test. It is a time of suffering.
J.T. Yes. It is a time of suffering. I am quite sure we are now realising anticipatively what is ahead of us. The Lord is speaking to us indeed in this very chapter. If we enter into these thoughts we shall be above it all.
J.P. Is the word "together" important in verse 17? The apostle uses it a great deal, and says here, "Be imitators all together of me".
J.T. The brethren are to be moving together. The word 'together' is a characteristic word in christianity. "Raised us up together", "made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus".
Rem. The enjoyment of the commonwealth, being our commonwealth, would practically involve that. It is not a lonely thought, or an individual link
{436}
with the Lord, it is a linking on with the amenities which christianity involves, with the saints, is it not?
J.T. Yes.
A.W.G. "We await the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour". Would Paul include himself in that?
J.T. Quite. The thought that has been expressed is that salvation includes all this, includes sonship. We are awaiting that, we do not await soul salvation, but body salvation; the redemption of the body. Body salvation is involved in what we are saying.
Ques. Is that what you referred to as complete salvation?
J.T. Quite so.
A.E.D. Would not the enjoyment of this deepen feelings, as Paul tells us in verse 18, "now tell you even weeping"? Are not these feelings to be developed in us?
J.T. I just wonder how much we know about these feelings, these tears, as mentioned here. "Remembering thy tears", Paul says to Timothy.
Rem. It does not seem as if Paul ever wept over his own conditions, pressing conditions and limitations that came upon him, but rather in relation to the truth and the conflict that was going on, ever moving on with what the Lord was giving.
J.T. We do not want to be behind in these things. Paul would indicate that we do not want to be behind. He would fill out the sufferings of Christ for His body's sake.
J.P. Is it interesting to note what you drew attention to at the beginning of the meeting, that the very hall-mark of the apostle's zeal was persecuting the assembly, and now what you quote in @Colossians 1: 24: "I fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the assembly".
J.T. That is the allusion, as if Paul would not omit that. They were the things he was engaged
{437}
with on the dark side. As to zeal, he calls it persecuting the assembly; the kind of zeal belonging to judaism, showing what judaism is, but the thought of persecuting the assembly enters into it characteristically. Whatever it may mean now, persecuting the assembly was its feature. Paul knew it well because he was engaged in it.
Ques. He would excel no less now in suffering for it?
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Referring again to the "on high", and "in the heavens, from which also we await", does that suggest the direction to which our gaze would turn, and to which we look for this great final phase of christian experience? In the raising of Lazarus the Lord lifted up his eyes "on high".
J.T. Yes.
A.W.B. In @Acts 20: 31, tears were a great feature with Paul. For three years he ceased not admonishing the Ephesians night and day with tears.
J.T. It shows what a feeling man he was. God is watching for such tears.
{438}
THE FEMININE FEATURES OF THE TRUTH
@1 Samuel 25: 1 - 19, 32, 33, 39 - 44
J.T. The proposal is to speak, as we are together, of the truth as apprehended in the feminine feature of it, and therefore we have read from @1 Samuel 25, because it speaks of one of the leading types of the assembly; and, of course, if we are to apprehend the feminine side of the truth, we have to consider the types, beginning with Eve. But this chapter is chosen because it presents such an important type, and one that bears on assembly service, and particularly on procedure. The book of Samuel affords opportunity, as we have said, to speak of the truth from the feminine standpoint, and Abigail comes in as a leading type; but then she has to be regarded as associated with David, therefore our subject is Abigail and David combined. The next thing to consider is the fact that Samuel is said to have died. That is to say, there is a circumstance of serious occasion in Israel, and the question is as to how it is to be met. We have the fact of Samuel's death, and then immediately it is said in the first verse, that "David arose and went down to the wilderness of Paran"; and we are told about Nabal in order to bring out the facts relative to Abigail. Abigail is in mind to indicate to us how the assembly is to have its place with us in all crises or difficulties, the assembly is to have the first place in regard to procedure generally. So that we err greatly unless we take into account the saints as a whole in all matters, bringing in the assembly; she must be regarded in *all* matters. What is called a care meeting can hardly in itself be regarded as a means for dealing with matters finally; for finality, matters have to come to the assembly.
{439}
A.E.D. It says in verse 14, "And one of Nabal's young men told Abigail". Are we to learn to tell Abigail, in that sense?
J.T. That is just the thought that I have in mind, that if a matter is serious enough to acquaint all the saints with it, then Abigail is the type. This young man is said to be one of Nabal's young men, but Abigail was Nabal's wife, and so the young man belonged to the household; he is said to have "told Abigail, Nabal's wife". That is to say, he put the information where it should be; it was a serious matter, because Nabal had insulted David, and anything that tends to an insult to Christ, or the assembly, or the truth, has to be told to the assembly. It cannot be treated secretly or held to be treated secretly; it must be spoken of openly.
J.P. So that in the New Testament, @Matthew 18 would answer to this. "Tell it to the assembly".
J.T. That is the word exactly, the word that bears directly on our scripture, "Tell it to the assembly"; significantly it is in Matthew's gospel.
F.W. Would the young men indicate that there are persons who are intelligent as to whatever may be in hand?
J.T. Yes. If it is a matter of information, I would say it is to be in the mouth of two or three witnesses. If it is a matter of implicating anyone criminally, so to speak, or in any sense that involves discipline, then it has to be told by two or three witnesses.
E.D.L. "Tell it to the assembly"; is that because the assembly knows what to do? We read of Abigail here as being a woman of good understanding. David also says later, "Blessed be thy discernment", before he speaks of her beauty in other ways.
J.T. Very good. Therefore we are instructed as to her immediately in the chapter. It says in verse 2, "And there was a man at Maon, whose business was
{440}
at Carmel; and the man was very great, and he had three thousand sheep and a thousand goats; ... And the name of the man was Nabal, and the name of his wife Abigail"; she is brought in immediately. And so in verse 14, "one of Nabal's young men told Abigail, Nabal's wife". We may easily introduce the book of Revelation to amplify this passage, because we are told of the Lamb's wife, that is to say, she is in that relation with Christ.
A.E.D. Is that why this chapter is largely in a militant setting?
J.T. Just so. David is a military man; it is what characterises him. But then the wife is what is in our minds, we are told about her early, "The name of the man was Nabal, and the name of his wife Abigail", and then we are told as to her character, her qualities; she was of good understanding and of a beautiful countenance, then we are told about Nabal; but the point is to bring out Abigail.
C.P.F. Everything in the house is under her hand?
J.T. Clearly; she does not consult him, showing that she was such a woman as that, she knows exactly what to do; and although there is no evidence that David knew her earlier, he tells her here in verse 32, "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me", that is to say, she is under Jehovah's hand. It is a question therefore of the assembly being available in these matters.
E.E.S.L. Would the reference in @Romans 7 to the two husbands have a bearing on this? Abigail acted anticipatively, did she not? Her husband was still alive, but she recognised in David the man of God's choice.
J.T. Quite so. She was thoroughly in the mind of God, and hence the importance of sisters knowing things as they happen, and in their conversation in a godly way dealing with these things, so
{441}
that the brothers do not assume to be in a position to handle matters solely. There are other scriptures, of course, that bear on sisters, such as the statement that they are to be silent in the assembly, but at the same time they are to ask their husbands at home, they are to be conversant with what is current in the history of the saints.
J.P. You have mentioned that what is in mind is to view Abigail and David as combined. Is it right that David is viewed in this earlier part of the chapter as not rising to a full type of Christ?
J.T. He is not a full type; he is needing correction, really. So that we have to discriminate, and not always deal with things as if everything were the same; there are differences, and therefore David here is not a full type of Christ. Abigail is a full type of the assembly, however, and that is the point that is before us now, that the assembly is trustworthy, even viewed in the sisters it is trustworthy, and, of course, that means that the sisters are to be sure that they are speaking facts, if they are extending information. "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established", @2 Corinthians 13: 1.
D.J.M. She is able to name things, "For as his name is, so is he: Nabal is his name, and folly is with him"?
J.T. Just so. Very important; the idea comes in early in Scripture. Adam was designated to name the creatures, and then he was able to name Eve. And so he says to Jehovah, "This time", as if to allude to what he had been dealing with, that is the cattle, but now it is another being altogether, and he says, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh, this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man". That is, he gives the reason for it; he is intelligent as to the names.
{442}
E.T. Is the stress on the importance of the assembly today linked with the fact that we have not any apostles or apostolic delegates? Does that link on here with "And Samuel died"?
J.T. Quite so, but even when they had apostles the assembly had its place. I mean to say, Paul links himself up with the assembly in the discipline of @1 Corinthians 5. The assembly was the assembly from the start, from the time the Spirit of God came down.
F.W. So is it upon her, so to say, to safeguard the interests of Christ?
J.T. Exactly, so that the book of Proverbs would say, "Her husband is known in the gates". That is to say, what the assembly is, reflects what Christ is. She is here on His behalf; that is one of the most important things we can keep in our minds.
J.P. So that while Samuel dies, and he would have been, perhaps, the most spiritual man in Israel at that time, yet as the assembly is brought forward and given her place, things are held and go on.
J.T. That is the idea exactly. There is no great dislocation of anything now, even though Samuel had died. If he had died earlier it might have been different, but he did not. Things happen because God orders them.
A.E.D. So it says in verse 17, "And now know and consider what thou wilt do".
J.T. It further adds, "for evil is determined against our master, and against all his household"; and then we are informed that "he is such a son of Belial, that one cannot speak to him". So that he comes under the direct dealings of God, and we are told that he died; in about ten days he died. David awaits that before his next movement, but still that was important. That is to say, God acts with us in our exercises, in the government of His house here
{443}
God acts with us, incidents occur and we are guided by them.
A.C. I was wondering whether Nabal would not answer to the responsible element of christendom, for it says in the footnote speaking of his name that he was not only a fool, but he was ungodly and impious, and whether Abigail would be an outward link with this responsible element?
J.T. And so the first and second epistles to the Corinthians treat of the assembly more fully than any other passages, especially in the government of it. Hence the assembly is regarded as including brothers *and* sisters.
L.B.G. Do temple conditions enter into that, that the saints, brothers and sisters together in assembly conditions, secure temple light?
J.T. They do. We can count on the Lord to give us light, too. "Think of what I say"; that is the apostle's word in @2 Timothy 2: 7. "Think of what I say, for the Lord will give thee understanding in all things". That would apply to all of us, that first we consider what is said authoritatively, and then the Lord will give us understanding in *all* things.
Ques. Does the apostle bring these features to bear upon the Corinthians when he says, "I speak as to intelligent persons, do *ye* judge what I say"?
J.T. It is significant that that is brought in in connection with the Lord's supper, too. That is to say, we are regarded as intelligent, and it really becomes the beginning of the divine services, whatever they may be, even if they be disciplinary; we have to consider the intelligence of the assembly.
C.P.F. Is that why she gives these gifts to her young man, to go on before her?
J.T. Well, I would say she is indicating her authority, her place, her power to do these things. She is the mistress, as you might say, of the house. That is to say, the Lord's authority is carried out
{444}
down here, the saints are regarded as trustworthy, and He commits things to us.
E.E.S.L. Is that why we are told that the wives should rule the house (@1 Timothy 5: 14).
J.T. The wives rule their husbands¬ houses, you mean? That is because they have authority to do it, and they are supposed to have skill, too. God has given them skill as wives, to know what to do.
A.G. As Abigail is informed, is the matter urgent with her?
J.T. Well, clearly; and with the young man, too; he understands the urgency of it.
E.E.S.L. Would not unmarried women have a part in this, too, as subject?
J.T. Certainly. They have the Holy Spirit. What could be greater in a sense than that? And so it is not for young wives to depend wholly on their husbands. Of course they do depend on them, but they have to look into the Scriptures for themselves, because certain things will be required of them. They do not always have their husbands by their sides to ask them, although they are told to ask them, but at the same time they are themselves to judge, too. Abigail herself judged what to do. In fact, it is urged upon her, in that the young man said to her in verse 17, "Now know and consider what thou wilt do, for evil is determined against our master". It is put upon her by this young man to consider as to what she should do, showing how we are to be subject to one another. Even a young person may give a word to an old one as to what should be done; a sister may give it, too, as to what should be done. So that we are a community, in that sense, set up here according to @Acts 2, and the Lord is with us and in us. So as things arose from time to time, from the time the Spirit of God came in, what was needed was supplied. If there were deacons, if the food question had to be handled, well,
{445}
there were certain men, seven men, chosen among the brethren, who were full of the Holy Spirit, and they were set over the business, as was said, "whom we will establish over this business".
W.H.F. You referred to the matter being put back on Abigail in verse 17. I was wondering whether in bringing matters to the assembly, it affords an occasion to show what great resources are already there?
J.T. Quite so. We are to know each other, really; of course, in a large number as we have it in this city, it is somewhat different from what is usual, but the brethren here ought to be able to know each other, to be conversant with each other; we should know what we are equal to. That is very important, and visiting each other's houses enters much into it, so we converse with each other, having, as it were, equality.
G.W.B. Is there significance in the fact that though this is one of Nabal's young men, he says "our master"?
J.T. Yes, he is respectful, which is very important.
A.E.D. Have you in mind in all this, the danger of matters getting perhaps into the hands of a few, or of being handled in such a way that the assembly is disregarded?
J.T. That is just the point, and it is a question whether we are not exposed to worldly methods in appointing committees to look after matters. We are dealing with holy things. We are to know each other, and the resources we have in each other, and to use each other accordingly. It is a question of using each other in a wise sense.
W.R. Would Abigail's discernment here be consequent upon her coming to a judgment as to this man Nabal?
{446}
J.T. Yes, apparently she did, and God acted with her discernment; so that, as we were saying, it is not simply mere circumstances; it is a question of God acting with us in the circumstances, and using what there is in any locality. God knows what there is and He uses it accordingly.
E.E.S.L. She had a judgment, too, about Saul: "If a man is risen up to pursue thee", she says.
J.T. Quite so.
J.P. Your remark as to our knowing one another seems to be important as underlying all this. That involves the whole truth of the assembly, does it not? It is composed of men and women who are set together in relation to one another, as of the body.
J.T. Quite so. God has overruled things for us, I think, in the last, say, twenty-five years, in the two wars we have been through. I think God has helped us in putting us into touch with each other -- I mean the brethren as a whole -- so that the saints know each other better than they used to; they know each other's circumstances, and God knows them too, and takes account of them, and so we are dealing, as we said, with a community. We are a community knowing each other, and knowing the resources that there are; and then the Spirit is assisting in all that, so that the matter of distance is not allowed to weigh too much with us, because after all we are brethren, we are all brethren. We never forget that. We are apt to let national feeling arise, and the like, and circumstances and distances, whereas God has overruled things for us so that we know each other better than we used to.
D.J.M. Is that resulting in increased confidence among the brethren?
J.T. I think it is. I certainly feel it in myself. The first time I came down to these parts, I was not so conversant with the circumstances as I am now;
{447}
I feel more liberty among the brethren than I did then. And I believe it should be so as God overrules things for us. He takes account of circumstances as they arise and uses them, so that we might know each other better, because we are presently going to dwell with each other for ever. It is important to get accustomed to each other's ways so that we are not strangers to each other, "no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God".
D.J.M. Is that the thought in being "bound in the bundle of the living"?
J.T. Exactly; that is what Abigail had in mind, showing what a woman she was, she was of good understanding. She was not a woman that was making too much of her appearance; she had a good appearance, but she had a good understanding, which is more important.
H.S.D. Have you in mind that this matter of knowing each other develops in a constitutional way that respect for the assembly which is to be brought to bear on all our matters?
J.T. 'Constitutional' is good. You mean it bears on what we are, because we have, ultimately anyway, to think of ourselves as a whole. I mean that the assembly has to learn to think of itself as a whole, because it is an immense thought. @Revelation 21 shows how immense it is; it is a regular cube of persons. It is difficult to lay hold of it in a natural sense, but these are the facts.
F.W. Is it in that sense that the discernment really operates and manifests itself?
J.T. That is what David notices. "Blessed be thy discernment", he says. It is beautiful phraseology. In verse 32 David said to Abigail, "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me. And blessed be thy discernment, and blessed be thou", and then he says, "who hast kept
{448}
me this day from coming with bloodshed, and from avenging myself with mine own hand". So that David is learning too; we could never bring that thought in as to Christ, that He is learning from the assembly. He is not. So that we have to be discerning, too, in our judgment of Scripture, and use of it, to compare spiritual with spiritual.
F.W. Does this in christianity involve the known presence of the Spirit?
J.T. That is the point, I am sure, and we can hardly say it too often that the Spirit of God is here, and remains here. He remains here from the time He was sent down; "sent from heaven", as the scripture says. The Spirit of God remains here, and He will remain until we are taken up. He does not take us up. The Lord takes us up, but the Spirit remains with us until the time of our taking up or translation.
J.C. As to matters requiring to be told to the assembly, how far is it permitted for us to carry them in care? Are we to form any temporary judgment as to them prior to telling it to the assembly, or is it to be purely deliberative?
J.T. Well, it is a question of being able to visualise what the Spirit of God means in these expressions. We suppose one hundred, two hundred or five hundred brothers sitting together, they have intelligence. As a thing arises, we have intelligence and speak of it in an intelligent way; so we have, as it were, to discern what the Spirit of God means when He says, "Tell it to the assembly". Well, facts would mean that we may tell it to each other as brethren; we may tell it to a few as brethren, but in due time we have to tell it to the whole company, the whole assembly has to be informed, and informed in an orderly way, in a holy way, too; not simply as men do in a parliamentary sense, for we are dealing with holy things.
{449}
J.P. So that in any matter, particularly a matter involving discipline, brothers together as having the mind of Christ and able to form a moral judgment about a matter, could not help but arrive at a judgment, but that would only be tentative in any matter.
J.T. Quite so. Tentative is the best word that one can use, and a very important word. We await the *completion* of the matter, but much has to be done tentatively. We know each other, and speak freely to each other, have confidence in each other, and believe each other, and the Spirit of God joins His help to our weaknesses too, so that presently things happen according to God; so that what is done on earth is done in heaven; it is in agreement with heaven.
R.S.D. You said elsewhere that these matters should be resolved quickly, did you not?
J.T. Just so. I think that is important, *but* if we are dealing with the truth of the assembly from Matthew's standpoint, perhaps we would make more allowances and wait longer, and give opportunity for everybody to be informed, and to think, and weigh over the thing; if we are dealing with Mark, we are dealing with gifted men as it were, the leading men are involved, men that are gifted by the Lord and used by the Lord, and they are able to do things more rapidly. We should not from that point of view have to wait too much because their minds are able to act quickly, and if they are heavenly, as we would suppose the case, it should not be held over for months because it will deteriorate if it is, if it is held too long. We should apply the principle in our time, and have the thing done quickly.
E.D.L. I think you mentioned once in connection with this matter, that when things are clear, they should be done at once.
{450}
J.T. That is just what I would say, if they are clear.
E.D.L. Would that be suggested in the way in which Abigail is mentioned three times as hasting?
J.T. Very good. There is certainly a great shortage of time. I do not know of anything shorter in these days than time. I speak especially of those who are in the Lord's service immediately. We should learn to do things quickly, and in the gospel of Mark it is one of the leading thoughts, that things are done immediately.
Rem. The informing of the saints that you speak of has action in view? It says, "Know and consider what thou wilt do".
J.T. Quite so; "consider what thou wilt do"; very good.
F.W. You have spoken about the feminine side. Is the idea in mind that she is acting for David, and the assembly is acting for Christ?
J.T. Quite so. And then another thing arises; that is, that the marriage comes into view, that union comes into view, and how are we to act in that? How are we to follow on in that line? That is the end of the chapter, the idea of union. We must dismiss mere natural thoughts and get spiritual thoughts in this chapter. What is meant by this union?
A.E.D. You referred to Revelation. The whole system of Babylon comes down quickly, just prior to the mention of the marriage of the Lamb being come. "In one hour she has been made desolate". I was thinking as to the matter of our judgment being judged on that system, that we would have learned to come to things quickly, so that in the actual destruction of the system, it only takes one hour. The urgency of the marriage of the Lamb is in mind?
J.T. Quite so.
{451}
A.C. What is the thought when it says in verse 38, "It came to pass in about ten days that Jehovah smote Nabal, and he died"?
J.T. I think it is God coming in, to act with the assembly; that is, He is supporting, as you might say, Abigail. He is supporting what she is doing and saying, and she discerns it quickly. It is said, "And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be Jehovah, who has pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and has kept back his servant from evil; but Jehovah has returned Nabal's evil upon his own head. And David sent and communed with Abigail"; there is no delay; "David sent and communed with Abigail, to take her as his wife. And the servants of David came to Abigail to Carmel, and spoke to her, saying, David has sent us to thee, to take thee as his wife. And she arose and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and said, Behold, let thy handmaid be a bondwoman to wash the feet of the servants of my lord. And Abigail hasted, and arose". She did not delay, but it is not only the thought here of doing things, but of doing things in an *orderly* sense, you might say, as they should be done. That is to say, there should be no failing of feelings; we should be real and simple as to everything. So then we come to the full thought of Christ and the assembly; we are now on sure ground.
Ques. Does the death of Nabal, as seen in the first epistle to the Corinthians, make room for the apostle to bring in the espousal to one man in the second? Would that be seen here?
J.T. Quite so; there is room for that. If we consider that particular section of Scripture, and the much that Paul has to relate, we can see how important it is that things should be done quickly.
D.J.M. "His wife has made herself ready". Is Abigail on that line here, taking these five damsels?
{452}
J.T. Yes, quite so. All that would fit in with the Lord's own thoughts. And so in @Revelation 19: 7, it says, "The marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready", and then again in the last chapter, "the Spirit and the bride say, Come". That is to say, the Spirit and the bride are saying the same thing; a wonderful suggestion, that of the Spirit and the bride. God Himself really in the Spirit, the Spirit of God being there, and the bride saying the same thing. It is very remarkable. I would say that perhaps it is where the assembly comes nearest to Deity, to divine Persons, in saying the *same* thing.
J.P. In order that matters may be clear in the minds of all, it would be right to say that David is now looked at in these last verses as a type of Christ?
J.T. I think he is. You feel the Spirit of God would not leave him without bringing that in. But Abigail is true to herself, she is true to what she is; I mean to say the assembly is true to her constitution. She knows when the Lord says, "*I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star"; she says, "Come". The assembly says, "Come", but it is the Spirit and the bride that say, "Come".
J.P. So throughout what you have had in mind, you would have us to realise that the emphasis is on the assembly.
J.T. It is, and I hope every brother and sister will understand that that is the cause of this meeting; that each will know that he or she is part of the assembly, and act in it, and know what to do and say in all circumstances.
C.E.J. Would that be emphasised in the last part of verse 35? "Go up in peace to thy house; see, I have hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted thy person". Does it show that the assembly has the confidence of Christ, in that way?
{453}
J.T. It is wonderful to think of it, that we are sitting here, a goodly number of us in these southern parts, that we have part in all this; no less than that; what we are doing and saying now is just what is in the spirit of this chapter.
G.C.S. "We have the mind of Christ". Is that individual, or does it refer to the assembly?
J.T. The "mind" is the faculty, the thinking power of Christ really. It is a question of the faculty, the means of thinking which He has, and I would say it is collective.
W.H.F. In that passage you referred to in @Revelation 22 regarding the Spirit and the bride, the Lord says in verse 16, "*I* Jesus, have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies". That is a peculiar word to the saints as in the light of the assembly.
J.T. Quite so. "Testify these things to you in the assemblies", as if the Lord is finishing the great subject in mind. He is saying all that He intended to say, but He is saying it quickly and fully and with great feeling, if one may speak thus of the Lord.
F.W. So you would impress upon us the necessity for our understanding the idea of the woman.
J.T. We begin with that in @Genesis 2; we begin there. Adam is alone, and he is conscious that there is none his like, and God knows it too; God uses the word 'counterpart'. And then a sleep follows, Adam is caused to sleep, and in the meantime, God built the woman out of a rib that He had taken from Adam; a remarkable fact; and Jehovah does not say anything, but He brings her to the man. God does not say anything, but Adam does, and what he says indicates that he knows, and although he was asleep when she was formed, yet he knows all about her, about what is happening, showing how intelligent he was, and we may say, speaking with reverence, this applies to Christ. He knows the formation, He
{454}
knows what we are; and how we are formed. He loves us, "Christ also loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it". He loves us from this point of view.
F.W. Does the idea of the assembly as one entity, the woman, need to be borne in upon our spirits? Because we may think that the assembly is simply the aggregate of a large number of persons who have known Christ as Saviour, but it is the divine operation of the Spirit to bring about an entity. Is that right?
J.T. Quite so; and then to follow up the instruction of the Spirit in @Genesis 1, He made them male and female, He created them both, but the second chapter is what we are dealing with, and then to follow that line throughout the Scriptures. And so we come on to Eve as having sinned, but she is the "mother of all living", and Adam knows that. It is to bring out what he knows. Then we come on down to the next great figure of the assembly, Sarah, her name means "princess"; how dignified she is in the house of Abraham. It is to keep up the line of thought right through scripture, and be nourished in the thing, so that we are livingly of the assembly, acting in it, and able to act in it too.
F.W. In this administrative setting of @1 Samuel 25, that you have been emphasising, have we the idea of "let them have dominion", that is, Adam and the woman?
J.T. Just so. That is how the matter is to be seen, that in the coming age especially, in what we call the millennium, the assembly will be seen here giving effect to everything, giving right names or right understanding of everything. I believe that is the way things will go until we all merge into the eternal state of things. There is much to be said about that, but I believe that is the way the thing will go for us.
{455}
Ques. Is that secured through the ministry?
J.T. It is. The idea is just there, that God is helping us through the ministry; through one and another. He is putting us into circumstances where we get taught, and then the Spirit operates in these thoughts so that they take form in us.
Ques. I was thinking of the messengers bringing her to David here. Would that have the ministers in view?
J.T. Just so.
D.J.M. "Head over all things to the assembly". Would that come in?
J.T. It does come in, and that is the idea. He is Head over all things *to* it, not of it, but *to* it. That is to say the assembly is in mind in the headship. He is Head over all things *to* her.
D.J.M. And that in view of universal dominion?
J.T. Exactly. So that things are set up in intelligence and in feeling and in right affection too, all leading on to the eternal state of things which God has in His mind. We are in the forming time now, it is a question of whether we are taking hold of what is available to us, as *of* the thing, not viewing it objectively, but as *of* the thing itself, we are essentially of it.
F.R.H. Would "two of you" be in that way two of the assembly (@Matthew 18: 19)?
J.T. That is what I understand. "Two of you".
A.E.D. You referred to the matter becoming established; she became his wife. Is there a great need that the establishment of the thing should be reached in our minds?
J.T. Quite so. It is remarkable how that comes in here in David's case and Abigail's. The word is she "became his wife".
A.E.D. Would that as understood, induce more holy emotions in the service?
{456}
J.T. I would think that. God is endeavouring to bring us all into it, to make us all consciously of it.
D.J.M. It is said of Rebekah, too, "she became his wife, and he loved her". Should we be conscious of union?
J.T. Quite so. And another thing here is the way the feminine side comes in; it comes in here as well as in Rebekah's case. It is said of Abigail in verse 41, "She arose and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and said, Behold, let thy handmaid be a bondwoman to wash the feet of the servants of my lord. And Abigail hasted, and arose, and rode upon an ass, with five damsels of hers". That is to say the feminine side is emphasised or enlarged, because that is the idea, the feminine side becoming involved in intelligence, five damsels. The same thing is seen in Rebekah.
A.E. What is in mind in Abigail desiring to wash the feet of David's servants?
J.T. Humility. The same thing is seen in Rebekah; it is a question of humility. We are to bind it on.
F.W. And yet eventually the assembly reaches the point where she is spoken of as the fulness of Him that filleth all in all?
J.T. Quite so.
G.C.S. Does the assembly qualify for union in the sphere of administration?
J.T. Quite so. We must have union; we must keep in mind that it is not a mere ideal, it is an actual thing, *union is* an actual thing. It is worked out especially in Colossians, but the great end is in Ephesians.
{457}
THE WORD OF GOD
@2 Timothy 4: 1; @Genesis 15: 1 - 21
The passage in 2 Timothy is particularly in mind for this meeting. Paul saying to Timothy, "Preach the word". On the boards, outside the doors of the meeting rooms, usually the gospel is announced, which is quite right, but "the word" at the present time is really more accurate than "the gospel"; for the importance of preaching the word, that is, the word of God, cannot be over-emphasised.
I have selected Abraham for enlargement of this thought, because he is the one to whom *the word* is first said to have been spoken, that is the word of God. It is mentioned twice in the chapter, which I hope the brethren will take notice of, and see why it is so, why the matter appears just in this way so early in the history of Abraham, that the word of God should be spoken to him first; not that it was not spoken to others, but as to actual words used, it was spoken to him first. All that is in the chapter is to enlarge on the thought, and to show too how the thought is to be set out basically and enlarged on, and how it is prophetic in a great measure, and yet future; so that, as I said, I am free to take up Abraham as the subject, in the main.
While I began with Timothy, I want to go on to Abraham. He has a great place in Scripture, a unique place, and this should be of great concern, and, in measure, of enjoyment because he is our father. You will understand that I am speaking spiritually, and fully recognising that God is our Father. He was Abraham's Father too; but God is pleased to take up Abraham and use him in a fatherly sense, knowing too, that he will instruct us, as his children, as children in a sort of provisional way, but still called his children. With a view to that,
{458}
I would point out, and will amplify later, that we belong to the *New* Testament. Genesis particularly enlarges on the generations of certain persons, certain distinguished persons, beginning with Adam, even enlarging on the creation itself; earth's resources of vegetation and the like, are all attributed to creation. We read of the histories, or generations, of the heavens and the earth, when they were created.
Now I mention that, because it may be overlooked by us, and it is the function of ministry to do all possible to instruct the saints, until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God; and we have not yet arrived at that in any great measure, brethren. Though I have not been here much, I can only speak from my general knowledge of the gatherings universally, in saying that in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, as to the full-grown man, we have not advanced very much; whereas Ephesians has in mind that we should be no longer babes. Every one of us has been a babe, or if he has not, he will be a babe spiritually; but then Ephesians is aiming at much more than that, *the full grown man*, and that we should be no longer babes. It is not to discredit our having been babes, but to make it clear that we should be no longer babes. Many are content with the stage they have reached in the truth, but growth is the principal thought in mind, the growth of the saints, and so, as I said, Abraham, the most distinguished man in Genesis, is taken up in a most remarkable way. Mention is made of generations, such as of Adam, Noah, Isaac, and Jacob, but *not* of Abraham.
In saying that I would in no sense convey to anybody that Abraham is not the most distinguished man in Genesis, for I believe he is, and yet he is left out of the records of generations, he is not mentioned. I believe, dear brethren, that he is just in that sense exempted, as *we* all are. We are all exempted from
{459}
any earthly status or relations, as christians. To accustom ourselves to earthly relations or distinctions, even in the smallest way, is a discredit to us, it is a blemish; and yet we are all apt to do it in our business affairs, and in the smallest matters, or whatever else we may be in, we are apt to take on distinction. To do so, is really to take on a blemish, because we are a heavenly people, and there are no generations given in that sense in heaven. Each one has his own status there, those who have part in the resurrection from among the dead are equal to angels, we are told, and neither marry, nor are given in marriage. They are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection. This was the answer to the Sadducees in @Luke 20: 35, 36.
I just mention these things that we may lay hold of our heavenly calling. We are a heavenly people, and we do not need these natural distinctions; we are above them, we are superior to them, or ought to be, and so it was with Abraham. God distinguished him in the very fact that his generations are not given, whereas his sons¬ are. His two sons are Isaac and Ishmael, both their generations are given, but not Abraham's; as if God were to put His hand on him, and say, 'I have a greater dignity for you'. This is a great thing that I am dealing with, and that is, that we are heavenly, and so it is that in the New Testament. Abraham is brought before us. The eighth chapter of John is, you might say, a chapter of the deepest enmity to Christ. The man in @John 9 finds touches of the glory of Christ, the glory of the Son of God; perhaps he did not know it fully, but he had beautiful touches, and among them were his sufferings at the hands of the Jews. In chapter 8 the Lord says, "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad". That is His answer to the deep enmity of the Jews. "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad". It was a lovely thing to think of
{460}
Abraham, in those early days of the history of the saints, rejoicing to see Christ's day; he was beforehand in seeing Christ's day, and he rejoiced in it.
Now, that is why, with other things, I have read @Genesis 15, which I am calling Abraham's chapter, supremely. It is after certain other things had happened. It is after chapter 14; that is the chapter in which Melchizedek met him, and blessed him. Melchizedek blessed him, for he was greater than Abraham. It is quite right to make comparisons in these personalities. I do not mean the Deity, but persons who are distinguished by coming to the Lord Jesus; and Melchizedek was a type of the Lord Jesus; he was assimilated to Him, to the Son of God. It is said of him, "Without father, without mother, without genealogy; having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but assimilated to the Son of God, abides a priest continually". That is to present Christ to us, the real Melchizedek. He appears before this chapter, in which we are told that "the word of Jehovah came to Abram in a vision". I think that it is the first time we get a vision in Scripture; the word came to him in a vision after a certain period, and God said, "Fear not. Abram; I am thy shield, thy exceeding great reward". That is how Abraham is met, when the word is presented to him, and what I have in my mind is to encourage and interest everybody here, in the *word* of God, because of the light it always carries with it, the knowledge of God. It is a question of the *word* of God, and the word of God is really God Himself, no less than that. It is "living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. And there is not a creature unapparent before him; but all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do". @Hebrews 4: 12, 13. You may see there how the idea of
{461}
the word of God brings in God Himself; it is a question of *God Himself* and the *word* of God. Therefore, it is of supreme importance to us, especially in order to instruct our young people, so that they think of the word of God above the school books, and the teachers; above the principles of scientific men. Think of the word of God, it is God Himself, but it comes down to us, and it illuminates our souls and sets us in liberty, security, and assurance before Him. Hence the preachers are enjoined to preach the word, to preach the gospel, of course, but the gospel is the word; if it be anything, it must be the word of God. It is synonymous with the thing itself. The scripture I quoted, @Hebrews 4: 12, 13, runs on to God Himself; it is God Himself with whom we have to do.
Having said all that, I proceed to show how Abraham was taken up at this point, because it is early in his history, it is before the birth of Isaac and before the birth of Ishmael. God is bent on instructing Abraham, and Abraham was bent on being instructed, for he says to God, "How shall I know?". Are there any young people here who want to know things? How are you going to know things? It would take a good while to enlarge on the amount of knowledge that we have, but the *means* of knowledge that we have is the Holy Spirit, and this is one of the greatest thoughts that the Scriptures afford us, that the Holy Spirit is here to instruct the saints, so that we be no longer babes, for the assembly is not made up of babes, it is made up of grown men, not women, but *men*. It is made up of men, or persons who are converted, and who have the Holy Spirit, and understand the truth. The assembly is viewed also as a feminine thought, dear brethren, and God has His own way of changing the feminine idea from man and woman. The Scripture says, "There is no Jew nor Greek; there is no bondman nor freeman; there is no male and female; for ye are all one in
{462}
Christ Jesus". There are several things we know, and amongst them is, that there is no male and female in Christ Jesus. That is one of the things said in the epistle to the Galatians, and the epistle to the Galatians is Scripture. I know many questions will be asked; whether I could answer them is another thing, but I can quote Scripture, and this is according to the Authorised Version and the New Translation. The New Translation has the priority now, and it is quite right that it should have. The Authorised Version is entitled to its place in the public service. The New Translation is authorised from heaven; I have no hesitation in saying that. It is relied upon; our souls are to be built up in the fine distinctions it contains, so that we should be intelligent in everything. Abraham is intelligent; the Scriptures are full of him. The Lord Jesus speaks of a very distinguished man and says, "He also is a son of Abraham"; not a child but a son; and He speaks of a woman as "a daughter of Abraham". There are many other qualities besides intelligence that I could cite as exemplified in Abraham, but what I have in mind is to enlarge on the thought of the *word of God*; and that is what this chapter contains, the word of God. The word of Jehovah came to Abraham in a vision. It says twice, "the word of the Lord"; and he acquires many other features that I could mention, but Abraham says, "How shall I know?". I would like to hear all the young people here tonight ask God that question.
Journeying from Jerusalem to Gaza, down to Ethiopia, the eunuch met Philip the evangelist, not the apostle, and Philip says to him, "Understandest thou what thou readest?". That is the essential point. If the man is to be saved he should understand, and Philip says, "Understandest thou what thou readest? And he said, How can I, except some man should guide me?", @Acts 8: 30, 31. He did not acquire the knowledge at Jerusalem. I do not know
{463}
whom he had met there, doubtless he met distinguished people, Rabbis and the like, but he left them, not hearing of Jesus. How many have had experiences like that. People go about the world, and like to talk about their travels, and what they have seen and so forth, but the question is, What do they know about Christ? What do they know about Jesus? That is everything. Leave that out and all else is nothing. What of your travels, and all that you have seen and done? That is nothing. You must bring Christ in. The whole matter is a cipher without Christ, and that is just the eunuch's case. He says, "How can I, except some man should guide me?". There is plenty to show him. God is carrying out a great work amongst His people. The Lord has saved us from division. Everyone who is lost to us by unbelief and sin, is a reduction, and we do not want reduction in the numbers. God began with a large number, to show what He could do. He might have converted ten thousand, twenty thousand, one hundred thousand, but He did not. He converted enough to show what He could do through the gospel. He converted three thousand at one time. I am only speaking now of instances that are important to know, they should be part of our religious instruction and religious formation, because we are to know of these things. And so Abraham said, "How shall I know?". That is what he said to Jehovah, and Jehovah told him what he should do in order to know.
I will now endeavour to convey something as to knowledge and how you get it. Abraham was on this ground and he says, "How shall I know?". God had said, "I am Jehovah who brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldeans, to give thee this land to possess it. And he said, Lord Jehovah, how shall I know that I shall possess it?". He wanted to know. He wants to know what he is inheriting. Is there anyone here who does not want to know what he is to
{464}
inherit from his father? You may have a legacy, and you give up your job, because you have enough, but that is not what is in mind here. It is a question of the *inheritance of God*, and there is an inheritance for every soul in this room. If we do not know it, then we may know. Scripture is full of how we are to know, and then the next thing is to *do* something. Well, some may say, I thought the Lord did things, and so He does. Whether it is a matter of history or of present circumstances, you will find something in which God will instruct you; but He will instruct you as to what you are to *do*. Do not put it on others if God intimates that you are to do it, or nothing will be done, there will be no increase; because heaven and earth must be in accord, and what is to be in accord with heaven is to be in our souls. It is not in the world, in the politicians; it is in converted people. What is to be known, in accord with the mind of heaven, is in persons who are converted. That is what happened with Abraham here. "Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness". That is to say, he was set up in something that he *could* not, and *did* not do, but it was on the principle of believing -- He believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness; he is said to be in the reckoning of God, God has constituted him righteous.
But then there are other things, and it is a question of the word, as I have been saying. Abraham was to take some things, not buy them; certain creatures were required for this matter of instruction that Abraham needed. So God says to him, "Take me an heifer of three years old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtle-dove, and a young pigeon". The ages of the birds are not given, but the others are given; so it is a question of the age of these creatures. First the heifer, and the thought I had in mind, is that of
{465}
affection. And then we have the goat, three years old, and a ram; all these three years old; and I would say, beloved brethren, that if we are to advance in the truth, if we are to become Ephesians, this matter of age must come into mind. Heaven would be looking for you, as Abraham had to look for these creatures. We are to understand that he was a large holder of animals. Adam had named the animals; and so undoubtedly the names that Abraham used, and by which his flocks were known, were all known to him, but he would have to go out and get this heifer. He would have to go, or he could send someone, but it had to be done, or Abraham is not going to get anything. Things have to be done, and hence I would say to you young people, see to the things that are to be done. God has done His part. You have to do something, and God knows that you *can* do it, and He has pleasure in you; He has wrought in you, and He is now looking for your movements. Movement is involved; you have to go out and find this heifer, goat, and ram; you have to go to your flocks. It is a question of mind and intelligence, so as to have part in the service of God on Ephesian ground.
It goes on to say in the tenth verse, "And he took unto him all these". He was obedient, and that is where a difficulty lies often with young people, there is a lack in obedience. You may think you know better than your father or your elders, but you do not. You have to look out for these creatures; you must have them, you must find them and bring them forth. And so it says, "He took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid each piece one against another, but the birds divided he not". He had intelligence enough as to what he should do, and should not do, in the matter of the dividing of the birds; it is for each of us to understand. And it says in the next verse, "And when the fowls came
{466}
down upon the caresses. Abram drove them away". You understand, I want to speak to the young people, but the old want something too, they need the word preached to them. If you want to preach, preach the word. We all need it. That is the spirit of the whole chapter, the idea of the word of God, and the obligation put on everyone to get these creatures. Abraham did it. The next thing is that the devil is ready to interfere with what you are doing, whatever God is working in, or seeking to accomplish in us. "Satan came also", @Job 1: 6. If anything is being done under divine direction Satan also is there, you will always find it; and so it is, when something happens against you, you do not make headway. You have to see to that, and so it says "when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them away".
You will say, What can I do? The birds can fly in the air, they can swoop down on the ocean. What wings they have! What can I do now? I cannot scare them away. I could not get so high up as they. Therefore, what I am saying to you is what you may think impossible, but the impossible has to be done, and the real difficulty is that you are not doing it, and not progressing in the truth. But Abram progressed, he saw to it that the birds were scared away, and if they are scared away they are not damaging your soul. It does not say they came back, but he scared them away; that is, he did his part. Then it goes on to say, "And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him. And he said unto Abram". God is coming in again to say something. Abraham has done his part, he has provided the creatures and the birds, and then he has scared away the wicked birds, the devices of the devil that are about in all directions. Young people are being devoured by them. "Your adversary the
{467}
devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour". Unless there is watchfulness he will succeed. But he did not succeed with Abraham, hence Jehovah says to him, "Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years". Now there is a lot of history ahead. In Abraham's case it is a prophetic matter; four hundred years of future history is ahead, and Abraham is to be intelligent as to it all.
And so it goes on, "And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge, and afterwards shall they come out with great substance. And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace". That is to say, as we apply it to ourselves, this matter of inheritance and future greatness and glory, that "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him" (@1 Corinthians 2: 9), is a certainty, and a thing to be known and seen and felt. "God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God". You see what is open to us, even a measure of understanding of future prophetic history, because we are going to be raised with Abraham. God said to Abraham, "Thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age". Let us not forget burial, it has something to do with redemption. Christ died and was buried; that is what Scripture says. We are to be buried if we die; we are not to be strewn in the desert; we are to have a burial; the saints will do it, as they did to Stephen. We are of the same family as Stephen was, and devout men buried Stephen, and made great lamentation over him; showing there was affection for Stephen in the face of the wickedness of the Jews.
Abraham was to die and would be buried, but then there are four hundred years to go before the promise
{468}
is secured, but Abraham is to know it is secured. It is as secure as if it *had* happened. "And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces". We have to see that what God has been saying to Abraham refers to power; it is not simply future events to be realised sometime in the distant future, but there is power already available, actual power. A deep sleep fell upon Abram, a great darkness fell upon him, but then something happens. In the verse read, we are told, "when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces". A smoking furnace would mean that there is some substance; smoke arises from substance. We know that in steamers, and railway trains that use coal, there must be substance in coal, or it would not burn. But what is in mind here is that there is a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp; smoking refers to substance, and the light is the result of that. It is a question of redemption, and that is the secret of the knowledge that Abraham was to have, and did have. So the Lord says to the Sadducees, "Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God", @Matthew 22: 29. How much erring of that kind there is, and how great an increase towards apostasy! Apostasy is not very far off; there are many antichrists and the great apostasy is imminent.
So Abraham is brought into the light of power. That power is available to us, and the Scriptures are the very basis of it all. As to actual detail we must know the Scriptures. Every scripture is inspired of God and is profitable, for doctrine, for reproof, for instruction in righteousness; every scripture is given for that. Are we using them? Perhaps you are not, and if you are not, you are not intelligent, you are not growing in intelligence, but Abraham
{469}
was. And so he got more than he requested; at least he never thought of this, that we should look back on his history to be instructed as to the resurrection and the power of God. "I am the God of Abraham". How beautiful that was! The Lord understood that Abraham rejoiced to see His day, and he saw it and was glad. The Lord knew that before He told the Jews about it, but He did tell the Jews, "Abraham rejoiced to see my day". He was gladdened by the sight. And so the Lord says of Abraham: God is not the God of the dead but of the living; all believers live to Him. It is a question of faith, for life is the outcome of faith. God is the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob.
And so the thought here is to bring out the word of God, how it was presented to Abraham first, and undoubtedly marked his whole life, and reaches up to the present time. Abraham was the subject of the work of God, and subject to the light of God, and God was his God. He was the God of Isaac and Jacob, and so He is our God on the same principle as He was Abraham's. We believe God, and it is counted to us as righteousness, and so we are subjects of the work of God, and it is in mind to illuminate our souls, to bring us up in the truth, that we should be a witness to Christ at this closing moment, not days or years, but moments, because the end is so very near. God is preparing, and making every one of us ready for the very great event of which the apostle speaks, "For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout". That is a clear evidence of His power, and as I said, our chapter finishes, "in the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates". The whole matter is settled on the principle of covenant between God and Abraham.
{470}
REDUCTION AND REFINEMENT
@Judges 7: 1 - 8; @Matthew 18: 15 - 20; @Revelation 3: 7 - 11
What is in mind, dear brethren, is to call attention to the fact that God at times reduces His people in order that they may be usable, that He may accomplish His purposes. This has been His way from the outset, and it is brought forward now because it has application tonight. God has things to do and He intends to do them by persons who are wholly dependent on Him, and dependent, it may be, on Him because of their fewness, because of their weakness, for it is said of certain ones in earlier days, "out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens". So in this case of Gideon in the book of Judges, we have a remarkable illustration of war carried on for the defence of the truth, the defence of God's people, and Jehovah decided that they were too many to accomplish the work, because He wished to make room for Himself. And so He said to Gideon, "The people that are with thee are too many". As a matter of fact, history shows that in result, as the battle developed and increased, and was won by Israel, there were a greater number with Israel than there were at this particular time; there were more than thirty-two thousand, but that was the number at this particular time, and Jehovah decided and said that there were too many. And He said to Gideon that those who were fearful should depart, and leave mount Gilead and return to their tents. So they did, and you can understand, dear brethren, that those who returned would not be making any show of triumph, they would be humbled, and God intended that; that they should return, not a victorious people in war, but a humbled people, because they were fearful in war.
{471}
But then they were yet too many. God says to Gideon: "The people are yet too many; bring them down unto the water, and I will try them for thee". That is to say, the number must be reduced, because the victory must be God's, the work must be God's, the result must be God's, and whatever is to be done must be done by God. He will have it so. And so, dear brethren, He is with His people to wage their battles, to win their battles for them, but He wishes to have a certain number, He wishes to have a usable number. This is something which I believe has application to the present time, and therefore I have read it, and am speaking of it, and I want to continue the subject further in the gospel of Matthew. Matthew being the assembly gospel, as we have often said to one another, there is the same principle of reduction, and then we have the same principle in the book of Revelation. The same principle is there, although the idea of the assembly is retained, and that is just exactly what I want to enforce in what I have to say, that whatever reduction there may be made, in order that God should have a usable people, a people for His own use, a people that should glorify Him in what He does, He retains the idea of the assembly. This is the time of the assembly, the assembly period, and God is not giving up His thought at all; it is continuing. And so whatever happens, whether we are reduced in number, or increased in number, God will have the assembly maintained, so that His thought as to the dispensation may be realised.
Matthew is the evangelist that is selected to bring out this truth, but I have turned to the book of Judges, to bring out the type of it, a type of the situation which I believe is current at the present time amongst the saints, both here and in other parts of the world. That is to say, God is prospering His people in a material way, prospering them too in
{472}
numbers or largeness of meetings, and prospering them in other respects, all of which, and indeed each of which, would tend to shut Him out, whereas His thought is to come in, and be in, and stay with us, hence in Matthew the Lord says, "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world". So that we need not be without Him, and if He is not with us, we need not think that we can have recourse to some other means to accomplish our thoughts. God will retain His place with us, and He will reduce us to retain it, because He has designed to work Himself. He has come in, in Christ; He has the Man of His counsel, the Man according to His own heart, as David was, and He wishes to use Him, and He wishes to use those whom that Man would choose, and provide with gift to be used.
So in turning to Judges, it is just to bring out a type, and it is a striking type too; it is indeed brought into an anti-type in the second epistle to the Corinthians, an epistle that deals with church methods and manners and ways. And so I will just read a passage that intimates to us what is meant in this type in the book of Judges, and you will see when I read it, that it means reduction in a moral way if we are to be usable to God. The passage is @2 Corinthians 4: 7 - 14, "But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the surpassingness of the power may be of God, and not from us, every way afflicted, but not straitened; seeing no apparent issue, but our way not entirely shut up; persecuted, but not abandoned; cast down, but not destroyed; always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our body; for we who live are always delivered unto death on account of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh; so that death works in us, but life in you. And having the same spirit of faith, according to what is written, I have believed,
{473}
therefore have I spoken; we also believe, therefore also we speak; knowing that he who has raised the Lord Jesus shall raise us also with Jesus, and shall present us with you". Now that is what I understand to be the instruction of the type that I have read in the book of Judges. That is to say, the apostle deals with these types as we do. He was a minister as we are, only in a greater degree than any of us, in fact in a greater degree than any minister of Christ. And so he uses types, and he uses conveniently this type of Gideon. He does not mention Gideon, he does not mention his name, but he alludes to him to call attention to himself. No one in Scripture is allowed to call attention to himself more than Paul. I mean to say, no creature. The Lord Jesus, of course has a right to speak of Himself, "I Jesus". He has a right to do that, and a right as no other one has, and Paul was very near to Him in that sense. "I Paul", for instance, and "Paul the aged", and so forth. And so it is that he becomes an anti-type of this type in the book of Judges, and I commend this passage to you, dear brethren, so that you may have it in your mind, and get profit from it as we proceed. Paul is putting before us a reference to the book of Judges; and he is saying in this passage, that he had gone through that sort of thing, the exact sort of thing indicated in the book of Judges.
So there were thirty-two thousand of the people, and God says they are too many. Now you may question in your minds what I am alluding to, and I do not wish to be literal in any allusion I am making; I wish to convey the truth, dear brethren, without any sense of accusing anybody, or questioning any thing or person in the service of God, in this country or any other country. I would only bring out certain truths, and we are entitled to do that; we should, if we are serving the Lord, bring out
{474}
truth as we see it to be needed. And so it is, that God has prospered His people in many respects in a material way; and they are liberal too, and they are ready to lavish what they have on the promotion of God's interests, and God is pleased with that. In fact, in this type that I read, the number thirty-two thousand is not really as great as the number that was employed in the battle eventually. So that it was only a question of bringing out a principle at the beginning of the conflict. That was the point, that the people were too many for a certain purpose. God could do with less than there were, and God is saying to us now, He can do with less. If He has to do something, He can do with less than are in this hall. He can do with a smaller hall than this too, if need be. I am only just alluding to these things to show what is on one's mind, that God wants room for Himself, beloved brethren, and He is going to have it too. And if His things are to be done according to His mind, He *must* have it, and the day will come when we will all rejoice in the fact that God has been working in our time, and is working and will work until the assembly is completed, until every member of it is finished. It is the finishing time, and finishing people are needed too in the service. Therefore, it is a question for every one of us who is in the service, to see to finishing, to doing things well, as it is said of the Lord Jesus, "He hath done all things well". Whatever He did, He did well. And if things are to be finished according to God, there must be good service, there must be able service, there must be skilled service; and all these things are available. It is a question of applying ourselves to the matter, the matter of the work of God, and of finding the ways and means to acquire things according to God.
So with regard to Gideon, I may allude to earlier facts that are mentioned about him. When he comes
{475}
in early in chapter 6 he was threshing wheat, which was a difficult matter. It was in a certain place that was not very convenient for the purpose, but he was doing it, and he was doing it to hide the wheat from the Midianites. Without anybody but himself, he was doing that; he was threshing wheat. And Jehovah looked upon him, and He said to him, "Go in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel, ... thou shalt smite Midian as one man". And so I would say, dear brethren, let us take up what any one of us can do. If we see that certain things are to be done, and they are not being done, well, the business of the person that sees that, is to do them, and do what he can. That is to say, with one man; do what *one man* can do. And that is the point with Gideon. Hence you can understand how Jehovah would reduce the number from thirty-two thousand. There would be a great many Gideons in that sense, and God would have the number reduced. He would have *one man*. That was the principle that He had then in mind, and at the present time, there are things that He has in mind, and maybe it is that He is not reaching His designs and end, because we have too many, and too much. I am not saying it is so, I am only suggesting, dear brethren, without questioning, or accusing, or hinting anything of that kind; but there is such a thing as one man doing everything at a particular time, and that is what God said to Gideon. And as to God, and Christ, and the Spirit, one Man is the principle; that is to say only one Person in the Deity became Man, became incarnate, and He has undertaken the whole matter, thank God. No one else could do it initially except Himself, and He did it. He said, according to John, "It is finished". He did it Himself. But then in due time, others are taken on, and so it is that a large number here today have been taken on, amongst them myself, in my little way, and I thank God for it,
{476}
and thank God for others too, whom I know here, who are actively engaged in the Lord's service; they have been added to the real Gideon.
But then Gideon had his questions. They were very reasonable too, but he came to perceive that the Speaker was God, was God's angel. It is a great matter to learn to perceive God. There are certain circumstances in which God can be seen, dear brethren. No man has seen Him nor can see Him, in one sense, but still, in another sense, God can be seen. Gideon perceived it was God, no less, and he said to the Angel that he would like to present something to Him, he would like to offer something; as was said of the Lord Jesus as Priest, He must have somewhat to offer. And so it is, dear brethren, if we are to serve God, there must be something to offer. What have we to offer? Gideon had something to offer, and the Angel said to him that He would wait for him. This is God, beloved. God will wait for us, but He wants to have His work done in His own way, in His own way without any additions, or any human methods. And so it is with Gideon; the Angel waited on him, a very beautiful thought, just as Jehovah waited on Abraham, and as He is ready to wait on anyone here who essays to serve Him. God will wait for you, He will give you time to get ready, because there is the idea of readiness in the service of God, and God will give us time to get ready. And so the Angel waited. I cannot say just where He sat, or what He was doing, but He waited. Just as Jehovah and two angels in earlier days had waited on Abraham, till he prepared for them. They waited under a tree for him. So here the Angel waited, and Gideon brought his present, which is a very beautiful thought; and the Angel directed him as to that, because we must come under divine direction, if we are to do anything for God. So the Angel used His staff, nothing more than that. Just
{477}
as in the case of Moses, the staff was the thing. God says, "What is that in thy hand?". He says, "A staff", and so he had a staff, and many things were done by it. So here the Angel used His staff, and caused the fire to ascend, and to gather up what Gideon had brought to Him and presented. It went up to heaven. There must be a going up to heaven, beloved. And so it is that Jesus went up to heaven, before He really began to operate as to gathering. He went up to heaven and then sent down the Spirit. The Spirit was sent *down* from heaven, and hence the great gathering that has come about. There is a great gathering here tonight too, thank God; it is the work of the Spirit.
So to enlarge further on what I am saying, as entering into the type, the Angel said to him that he should offer a bullock, the second bullock that his father had; and he did. But he was to offer it at a certain place, and it is to be according to the "ordered manner", and that brings out the whole question, dear brethren, of how things are done, whether it be here, or elsewhere. *How* things are done -- whatever they be, whether it be preaching the word, or ministering in any way, or discipline, it is a question of how things are done, because God is jealous as to His own methods, and He will have them abided by. And so it was in the ordered place, so that Gideon is now on the way to be used, and he was used in a most remarkable way. He was used according to what I read in Paul's account, but used here in the sense that the ten thousand that were left, were brought down to the water, and God says, "I will try them for thee"; and the way was, that they must lap the water as a dog lapped it. That is a very humbling thing, that we have to do things as dogs do them, and yet it cannot be done otherwise, to be done rightly, at this point. And only three hundred succeeded, only three hundred
{478}
were admitted as succeeding in this simple method of lapping water with their hand to their mouth. I do not need to enlarge on that in detail, as no doubt every child here will know something about this remarkable story of Gideon, but the three hundred were there, and were victorious, and all the others had to go home. It is a very humbling thing to have to go home; first, because you are afraid of the battle, and secondly, because you do not know how to do what is required. It would be very much better at times if we did go home if things are not done properly, because God will have them done rightly. He has His own meaning in them, and He will have them done rightly, if they are to be done at all. And so these nine thousand seven hundred had to go home. They were disqualified because they were unable to lap the water as dogs do. There were only three hundred that could do it, and they did it, and God says to Gideon, 'I will save you with those; that is, those that do what I wish to be done, and know how to do it, I will save you by them'.
Well now, that is the simple outline of the facts here, only the further thought is the idea of the three hundred divided into three companies of one hundred, and they were to do everything that *Gideon* did; not as Jehovah said, but as Gideon did. He says, "Look on me". And that is the point, dear brethren, in these matters of assembly character; look to the Lord, see how He did them. And so it is, as we often quote, that a certain one says to the Lord, "Lord, teach us to pray". It is a very good thing that that brother, whoever he was, we are not told his name, did not say, 'Teach *me* to pray'. He wished all the others to be taught as well as himself. That is a liberal mind, that you do not want to keep things to yourself, or think you have something for ministry that nobody else has, that you have it secretly. This brother said to the Lord, "Teach *us*
{479}
to pray", and I suppose that is the great lesson, that we learn to pray; and it is the greatest matter at the present time, that we should pray. We noticed already today, in referring to Philippi, how Paul and Silas, in prayer, praised God. That is the idea of the service of God proceeding from glory to glory, even in prison, because it is done according to God. How precious it must have been in the eyes of God in that prison, that there were two men there, their feet fast in the stocks, who were praying, and who then praised God. That was something that was pleasing to God, and that is the point in all that I am saying, what is pleasing to God.
To return to the subject, the three hundred men were divided into three companies, and they were to go all round the camp. That is to say, the attack was to be *all round*. That is the idea of the ministry, that it is universal, whatever it is. Whatever we have had today, or whatever we are having now, must be universal. It must be fit to travel, to go abroad, and become a part of the instruction of the saints. And so the company of Midianites, however large it was, was encompassed, but encompassed by three hundred men only, and yet they were as grasshoppers on the earth for numbers. But in result, as I said, as the battle proceeded, there were others beside those three hundred; indeed very many more than the thirty-two thousand, because God has numbers too, and He can use them. Indeed we have in the book of Revelation the idea of God using numbers, a number of persons that was uncountable; the book of Revelation speaks of that, showing that God has numbers, and will have numbers, and especially quality in them. And that is what I have in my mind in a moment to bring forward, dear brethren, quality; that in all that I am saying, the assembly must be in view, and the quality suitable to it must be in view. And so it was that Gideon's three
{480}
hundred were men of quality, and the ways and means were a pitcher, an earthen pitcher, as Paul says, "We have this treasure in earthen vessels". That is to say, it is a question of what we are by the creative power of God, that we are to be used in that humble way, whatever the work is that is to be done. And so it is a question of pitchers and light in the pitchers, and then the voice of Gideon, who said to them, "Look on me ... as I do, so shall ye do". And that is the order of the moment, dear brethren, to have things done as the Lord has done them; the Spirit would teach us to do them, and the teaching of the Spirit is universal. The Lord Jesus says Himself of Him, that "*he* shall teach you all things", "he shall receive of mine and shall announce it to you", "he shall guide you into all the truth". Everything comes out subjectively by the Spirit here below; everything comes down from heaven, but works out down here by the Spirit, and in this and that one of us, whom God has fitted to carry on the work, but the eye must be on Christ Himself, as Gideon said to the three hundred men.
Well now I must pass on to Matthew. I have already remarked that Matthew is the assembly gospel, and there are good reasons for saying so. He carries out the Lord's instructions. These instructions were given in Galilee, not at Jerusalem. They were given in Galilee and the converts were to be baptised to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Then the Lord says, "Lo, I am with you alway", so that we can carry out something of Gideon's example, in having the Lord with us. He is never said to have gone up to heaven in Matthew. Now that may seem strange to some of you, but it is a point to be understood, that in that sense He remains down here. The Spirit remains too, but the Spirit is in heaven too, as well as remaining down here; that is to be understood.
{481}
These things are to be understood, as was said to a certain man, "Understandest thou what thou readest?". The question is understanding, not simply the letter of Scripture, but the spirit of Scripture -- the letter, of course, because the letter would not be written if it was not needed, but the spirit of Scripture is greatly needed. And so the word in @Matthew 28 is, "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world". A very precious and comforting thing, that the Lord is with us!
This comes out in the passage I read from chapter 18, in view of conditions that would reduce the brethren. That is to say a brother trespassing against another must lead to something being done about it by him; and if he refuses to do what he is told by the assembly then something must be done to meet that; that may mean reduction, and it does mean reduction. And so the Lord says the man who is trespassed against is to take the matter up with him alone, and ask him to judge himself; if he refuses, the Lord says, "Take with thee one or two besides". This divine principle is running down from the Old Testament, the book of Deuteronomy; two or three witnesses are needed to establish matters. When we come to dealing with moral things amongst the brethren we need two or three witnesses. It is a question of witnesses, witnesses as to facts. And so there is the thought of two or three witnesses. And the Lord says, "But if he will not listen to them, tell it to the assembly; and if also he will not listen to the assembly, let him be to thee as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer". So that is what happens, that the man is ostracised; ostracised at any rate by the man against whom he has trespassed. But then if the brethren are walking in fellowship really, and there are two or three there, or more, however many more walking in fellowship, they must abide by the principles which the Lord has so plainly
{482}
set down; and that is that a man must listen to the assembly or he must be ostracised.
It is a solemn matter, and it implies what I said, it implies some reduction; a very humbling reduction for him, for the man, but also for the brethren too, because we cannot afford to lose our brethren. If we love the brethren, we cannot afford to lose them, as reduced, as ostracised. We love our brethren, it is therefore a pain to us if we have to walk without them, but walk without them we must, unless they abide by the principles so plainly set down by the Lord. In the early days of the revival in which we have part, there was refusal to abide by these principles of two or three witnesses, and the fellowship; and hence a great many saints left us; they turned away, and, of course, there was a great reduction. God had His own meaning in that too. Out of that reduction came more light as to the assembly, and that is just what I mean, that in all that I have to say, the assembly must be in view. On the one hand, God must have rights. He must have liberty to do what He pleases, and on the other hand, He cannot be forced to walk with persons who will not abide by His principles, nor will the saints be forced to do so either. So that we are in that position, that the assembly is maintained, however few, and at the same time refined. The condition of the material out of which the assembly is formed is refined by the process. God has that way of doing things, and we can thank Him for it, because we are all profiting by it tonight, what God has done on this principle of reduction, even although it meant the loss of saints. But it has meant also the refinement of the material of the assembly, although the number has decreased. I mean to say the quality is increased, and the number has become decreased. So that we have to go on on those lines.
{483}
Matthew shows that the decrease arises out of a man trespassing, a trespasser who took no account of his trespassing; he had not submitted to the pleadings of his brother, and then secondly, to the pleadings of two or three of his brethren. On this account there is no other course, dear brethren, there must be reduction, because the persons involved are not fit for the fellowship. The reduction happens, but at the same time the refinement happens, and the assembly is formed more and more according to God's mind; that is the great point. And so in Matthew, the Lord says, "I am with you alway", and there are those that can go on, and they do go on. First, the Lord says after this occurrence, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven". Well, that is something. That is a great matter, dear brethren, that heaven is with us in what we are doing in the way of binding, but we must be sure that it is just done as it should be, according to the passage I read, according to the Lord's own words. It must be done as it should be. And then the next is, "Again I say unto you", the Lord says, "That if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven". "It shall be done for them". Notice that. The persons who have been asking, who have agreed, who are of one mind; for God attaches great importance to unity. This comes out especially in the book of Philippians, which is so full of human feelings and sympathies. The apostle says that they were with him from the very outset. They ministered to him, and were with him, they had fellowship with him in the gospel up to the very moment in which he was writing, from the very beginning, and in that book we have it greatly stressed that we are to be of one mind. Not only that we are to be of one mind about things, certain things, but to *think* the same things,
{484}
as well as to say them And so the Lord says further, as I said before, "Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven".
Well, you see what results we have, that we are never forced to be by ourselves, no one is ever forced to be alone. John indeed, John the evangelist, the prophet I should say, in the book of Revelation, was alone, but he was in prison, he was in the island called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus. He would be with the brethren otherwise, he would be ministering among them. So that there is such a thing as being alone, but there is no need for any of us to be alone, except one who is imprisoned, or one who is unable to be with the brethren for other good causes. If one is not able to be with the brethren, then he can be alone of course, but he should be with them whenever he can be. The eyes of heaven are on the brethren, and, dear brethren, we cannot go alone without our brethren. And so Matthew goes on to say, "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". The same thing is there, the persons are in mind. They are in mind in what is being done for them. So that we need not be afraid of being alone, heaven taking notice of us, and here in this city now we have many; and it is a glorious thing to look on the faces that I am looking at now, and to speak to such persons. It is a glorious thing, and one values it. And so one is encouraged at the work of God, I might say, universally, as far as I am acquainted with it. It is taking on the character that is in evidence here tonight, although perhaps in a lesser degree of numbers. And then, as I said, Matthew establishes us as to this matter of reduction, in the fact that we can have either two or three, and when it comes to the
{485}
two or three, they are gathered together. There is an assembly feature in the gathering together, and thus situated we may count on increase, and we always find it, and it is the increase of God, dear brethren.
Finally, in the passage in Revelation, I had the same thought in mind; that is to show how it works out in refinement, in quality, and on the other hand, it works out in the recognition of the assembly. The Lord says, "thee" and "thou". The word is to the angel of the assembly, but the angel as a representative of the assembly, and the angel is recognised in the pronouns "thee" and "thou", and such words as these; meaning that the Lord is taking account of us as the assembly. Wonderful word to be able to communicate, as I am communicating it now, and it is particularly so when He says, that they may know "that *I* have loved thee". That is not an individual, that is the assembly. What He has in His mind is the assembly, and He is causing it to be *known* that it is the assembly, and that He loved it, according to Ephesians. He "loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it". So you can see how these few passages work out what I have endeavoured to present to you; that is, the idea of refinement; on the one hand refinement in the work of God, affording liberty to God in the service in what He wants to do; and on the other hand affording refinement in the assembly itself, and the assembly itself being in evidence, both in Matthew, and in the book of Revelation.
That is all I had to say, and I commend it to the brethren in the name of the Lord.
{486}
"AS HE IS, SO ARE WE"
@1 John 4: 17; @John 13: 1; @Acts 4: 23
I refer to John's writings, feeling that they will commend themselves to us at this time, especially as conveying grace, as it is said, "The law was given by Moses, grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ", so that the principle of grace, and that in a lavish way, is in mind in John's writings. But what I would immediately speak of is two words in this passage, the words, "He" and "we" -- "As he is, so are we in this world". That is to say, the Lord links Himself up with us, in this sense, saying that as He is, so are we. So that our theme will, in this way, take on these words, "He" and "we". "As he is, so are we", but in this *world*. We are in this world; we are not viewed as in heaven, but He is. We are viewed on earth, and in spite of this, the word says, "As he is, so are we in this world". So it is "He" and "we". And these thoughts will enable me to enlarge somewhat on the other passages read, and particularly as to this matter of judgment. We have had it before us today, and yesterday, and it is the most solemn subject we can have; but this passage says, "That we may have boldness in the day of judgment: because as he is, so are we in this world". Thus we stand related to Him, and in this sense He is identified with us, and hence we have boldness in the day of judgment, whenever it comes. The judgment will come, of course, there is nothing more sure, for God has appointed a day in the which He will judge the world; that does not mean judgment in a punitive sense, but in the sense of rule and order, but He has also in mind to place Christ on the great white throne, a most terrible thought. But we can nestle under the Lord's wings in the light of this verse that I have read, "As he is,
{487}
so are we in this world"; and therefore we can have boldness in the day of judgment.
Now I proceed to enlarge a little, especially as to John, the apostle John, not John the baptist, but the apostle John, the same as in the book of the Revelation, who may be called the prophet John; one greatly trusted by the Lord, one confided in too, and not the least that He has confided in him to write the most precious things for us, especially the truths that are so impregnated with grace. And I am reminded of another scripture, similar to what I have read, but alas, in a negative sense, "He", that is the Lord Jesus, "came unto his own, and his own received him not". Well, you can contrast that, dear brethren, with other scriptures that I shall hope to speak of, that He was not received when He came into this world, for John presents Him as coming into this world; not as born in it, as Luke and Matthew speak of Him, but as having come, "the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us". So that we as christians understand that the Lord Jesus is God, and that He became something that He had not been before, but He became it in order to be with us; in order to work out, too, all that was needed for redemption, and for the accomplishment of God's purposes. So it is said, "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us". And then the next thing is, "and we". There we get the 'we', that is to say, the christian's 'we'.
I hope everyone in this audience is a christian. We would feel for you if you are not, although it is quite possible there are those who are not christians, but there is no need of your continuing thus, for this very meeting is intended to affect you, to affect you in the sense of grace, so that you may become one of the 'we', the 'we' that are linked up with Christ, no less than that, and linked up with Him *as He is*. It shows how wonderful His redemptive work
{488}
is, that it can be said, that as He is so are we in this world. Of course, it would be quite intelligible, too, if it were said, as He is, so shall we be in heaven, but the point is, and it is a great point, a great matter too, that we are this in this world; we are as He is, while we are in this world. He has ways and means of helping any one who is here in this audience, who is not a christian, to become one. Why should you not be a christian? Why should you remain as you are, with such an opening as this? Most of us here are christians; not only so, but we have the Holy Spirit; and added to that, and which is in keeping with it, we love one another. We do indeed. Perhaps there is not another company of persons in this whole country, of which that could be said. I am not saying there is not, because there are many whom we do not know; but there are very few relatively who love one another. It is out of keeping with the present conditions in the world, and with society in every way, with the social links, and industrial links, and political links; all these are not in keeping with the idea of loving one another, whereas the Lord Jesus says, "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves". That is, it is without discrimination amongst those who are really christians, that we have love one for another.
But then the Lord is the Leader in all this, and that is what I want to show according to @John 13. It is said there that the Lord Jesus, knowing He was going to the Father, "having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end". Well, you say, that would show that He is a Person to be attracted by, as one that will love people continually; but then it is not only that He loves them continually for a period, but He loves them in spite of all possible opposition, and loves them to the end of the period of opposition; whatever it was and however long,
{489}
He loved them to the end of it. And so it is a question of the Lord Jesus being understood as the Author of love. I do not say that God is not, because God is the Author of everything. God *is* love, beloved brethren. Well, that has to be understood, too, and in everything that I would say, I hope to be able to give, in some sense, what the meaning is. If it says, that God is love, it is not a material thought, it is a moral thought. He is other things besides love, so that it is not a restricted thought; but He is love, and so we are set at liberty at once, as we know Him. But then Christ is the image of the invisible God; He is God too, but He took a place of subjection to God voluntarily, coming here for His will He became flesh, we are told, and dwelt among us. John says, "And we have contemplated his glory", and what is that glory? It is "a glory as of an only-begotten with a father". That is what it was, meaning that He was equal with the Father. That is what the Jews persecuted Him for, because He "said that God was his own Father, making himself equal with God", but He *was* equal with God. He was God, and is God; He is the true God, beloved friends, "He is the true God and eternal life", @1 John 5: 20.
That is another thing, eternal life. That is something that is shared in by us, but not His Deity, His Godhead. Eternal life is communicable, and we can have it, and every believer has it. Every true believer has it, because it says again in the most wonderful language by John: "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". These are the conditions of redemption, the conditions of the gospel, but I am not attempting to preach the gospel now, but I do seek to unfold something of the meaning of terms, so that we might be in what they mean and possess the things, and be in the good of them, in the enjoyment
{490}
of them; and what is in mind is love, the love of God conveyed to us in Christ. John's epistle unfolds it to us, and tells us wonderful things about ourselves in our relation with Christ, and amongst them is the passage I have read, "As he is, so are we in this world". That is to say, He and we.
In @John 13 it says, "Having loved his own which were in the world". How we need such a word as that, dear brethren, when we consider the conditions of the world today -- the political, the social, and the industrial world, as I said, and all else that the world is made up of! John tells us that the whole world lies in the wicked one, an awful thought, but then it is a fact, and we should be aroused by it, as to the conditions of the time in which our lot is cast, so that we may be able to preserve ourselves, to keep ourselves in the love of God. So it is said, "Beloved, ... praying in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in the love of God, awaiting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life". So that there are things with us to be done, in order to keep rank in the position Scripture unfolds to us; there is the attitude we have to take up; and the point of such meetings as this, is that we *should* do so, that we should be instructed, and therefore come into the enjoyment of the blessings opened up to us.
What I am speaking of is love, and how the Lord Jesus loved His own which were in the world. What vicissitudes He had to go through, dear brethren, what He had to endure in all those years! I say *all*; three years and a half, perhaps, at the most, of His ministry; but what He endured with the disciples! What He endured in Himself, too, because He used to go to the mount of Olives at nights. He was without companionship; but He had the Father's companionship. Still, He went to the mount of Olives at night, and then came into the temple in the morning to teach, showing how important teaching
{491}
was in His mind. So it is today, the teaching goes on; some of us have been engaged in it for three days, and we have enjoyed it; and now we are here tonight finishing up this series of meetings. We think of them with pleasure, and feel, I am sure, that the Lord has been with us in them, and that we have grown in them, we have learned in them, we have been taught in them. As taught in them, perhaps, we shall be able to teach others also, because that is the idea; the divine idea is to unfold, to carry on, to perpetuate the thought of teaching. That is to say, the teaching of the truth, not only teaching, but the teaching of the truth. Christ is the truth, and the Spirit is the truth, and the Spirit is here Himself, and has been here for over nineteen hundred years. He has been here all the time, and He is here tonight, beloved. He is here to help us in what we say, and to help everyone here in what we are hearing; that is His business, so to speak. Wonderful! We are provided in this way at this present time, with such means of getting instruction and blessing in view of the conditions in the world.
I am urging these things as to what is *in the world*, that the Lord loved *His own which were in the world*, and that He loved them unto the end; and that in principle remains up to this very minute. Since Pentecost the same thing holds, the love that Christ had then. He has now; there is no change with Him. He is the same yesterday, and today, and for ever. So that the love He had then, nineteen hundred years ago, He has now. It goes on, and it will go on to the end; whatever may intervene. His love for us will go on. He will take on other things presently, that is to say, the millennial things, the things of Israel; and then again He will be taken up with eternal things. These are all very precious and wonderful to have in our minds, but He is going on with us now, dear brethren. He is going on with the
{492}
saints of this dispensation, and He loves us. Then as I said, there is the boldness that we have, because as He is, so are we in this world. We have this boldness in view of the judgment whatever it may be and we are immune, because we are covered up in Christ; as He is, so are we. It is a peculiar unfolding of the truth in John's gospel, the abstract idea. Things can be said in the abstract that are positively true; they may seem extravagant to some, as for instance, that he that "is born of God ... cannot sin", @1 John 3: 9. You may say that seems extravagant, but it is not; it is what is called abstract truth, and it is as true as anything can be; it is as true as that the sun is in the heavens. The word is that he that is born of God cannot sin; and so as it is said in chapter 4, verse 17, "as he is", that is, as Christ is, "so are we in this world". Seek, dear brethren, especially I say it to the young ones, seek to place yourselves alongside of Christ, and think of Him in that way, and take in yourself, in what it says there, that as He is, so are *you* in this world.
I am speaking about @John 13, and I want to keep on a little more to present the thought of love enduring, the enduring character of Christ's love. Whatever may happen, He loves to the end. He was going to the Father; He was going to die in the meantime. Think of that, dear brethren; one does not speak of it lightly, He was about to die, and before He died, He thought of His brethren, He thought of His own. He said to His enemies, "If therefore ye seek me, let these go their way". That is 'He' and 'we' again. The enemies did seek them, and we know that later Peter suffered martyrdom; in fact the Lord told him that he would. The Lord gave him light about the future, and He told him that he would get what he sought, and that is, that he wished to die for Christ. He says to the Lord, "I will lay down my life for thee", @John 13: 37.
{493}
Well, the Lord says, "The cock shall not crow till thou hast denied me thrice"; and that was so, but that did not set aside what was in the mind of the Lord as to Peter, that he was to die for Him. Peter asserted that he would die for Jesus, and he did. He laid down his life for Christ. The Lord says to him, "When thou wast young", and I would ask the young ones to think of this statement, "when thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest". How many young people are like that; what do they care for their parents, and for their neighbours, for their teachers? When they are young, they do their own wills, their own sweet wills, as they say. But then, the Lord says, "When thou shalt be old"; maybe you can do much now, you can take your own way now, but "when thou shalt be old". The time is coming when you may be old. David spoke of that. I was young, he says, but now I am old. Paul spoke of himself as being aged. John was old, too, he became an old man.
Many of us here tonight are old, and the question is what are we going to do, or what will others do to us? How shall we behave when we have to face things in the way of persecution? "When thou shalt be old", the Lord says, "thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee". *Another* shall gird thee. That would mean an officer, perhaps from the Government, an officer to arrest him, as many were arrested in the days of the martyrs; many were arrested and taken to the place of death. "When thou shalt be old, ... another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not". Well, it is a different matter when old age comes, and that is what I am speaking of, dear brethren, that the Lord loved Peter to the end. He loved him to the end. And that is what, as I said, this passage teaches, "having loved his own
{494}
which were in the world, he loved them unto the end".
I was speaking about the first chapter of John, as indicating something of what I am enlarging on. Amongst the other things that are in mind, is that His own did not receive Him; "his own received him not". But then there were those who did receive Him, and that is why that passage is so beautiful and full for us: "As many as received him". The question is whether we all *have* received Christ, because that is the test of the dispensation. "As many as received him, to them gave he the right to be", or to take the place of, "children of God". As I said before, that is what nearly all of us here are; not only are we children of God, but we have a right to take that place. Whatever others think, we have a right attached to our position. Then there are other things added to it, "who have been born, not of blood, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God". That makes the difference between those who did not receive Him, and those who did. Those who did receive Him have the right to take the place of children of God. Well now, those who have the right to take the place of children of God, if they have to say to Jesus, they admire Him. "We have contemplated his glory", says John. There is the 'we' again, as I said; "we have contemplated his glory". And what was it? "A glory as of an only-begotten with a father". What glory in this world can be compared with that glory? That is what the apostles saw, and they contemplated it, meaning that, as it were, they stood in awe of it, and yet enjoyed the thought; they worshipped, you might say, they were worshipful in the thought of the Father and the Son. "The Father loves the Son", as it says elsewhere, "and has given all things to be in his hand".
But then, the passage says that "we have contemplated his glory", and then it goes on to say that the
{495}
only-begotten Son *is* in the bosom of the Father. The bosom of the Father! He is in it, not He was in it, or will be, but *is* in it. He is in the bosom of the Father, no one else is there. You might say, Well, it is ours to take that place, because Scripture says, later in this gospel, that John was in the bosom of Jesus. You may think that what I am saying is contradictory to that, but it is not. The bosom of Jesus, in the sense in which John was in it, is not the bosom of the Father. The bosom of the Father belongs only to Jesus; He is the only-begotten Son; there is only one only-begotten Son. There are other sons of God, of course. We are all sons of God, every one of us who are christians. That is one of the things that is said in the book of Galatians: "Ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus". But then, that is not to say that we are all in the Father's bosom. Jesus is in the Father's bosom, and as in that bosom He declared the Father. No one could do that, but Jesus. And so I am speaking now of the glory of Christ. I am really endeavouring to convey to you, in what I have to say, something of the glory of Christ, and how we are brought into it, and how His love works out in us, and for us, till the end.
What I have quoted from @John 1 refers to His own place only. The only-begotten Son -- there is only one, and there is no only-begotten daughter; it is not a feminine thought, it is a masculine thought. It is a question of the Son of God, the only-begotten Son of God, and that He has that place, and that place is in the bosom of the Father; and that He is there *now*, not that He was or will be, but *is*. So that He is in the place of love, and we are in view in His mind because of having that love. He is the Dispenser of that love; He is the Administrator of that love, as I might say. The Father has given all things to be in His hand, and in that sense He is the Administrator
{496}
and the Distributor of the love of God, and we come into it; it is an administrative thought. Christ is the great Administrator of everything, but certainly of love. And so it is said that "having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end". *To the end*, as I said, means through every vicissitude that might have to be gone through; whatever happens, the love went on, and still goes on, and will go on, dear brethren. And I would encourage the brethren by insisting on this and stressing this, that our hearts may be encouraged with it at this present time, that love is continuing. It goes on, "having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end".
Passing on from that, I want to say something about @Acts 4. It is not a question of the love of Christ exactly, although in one sense it is; but it is a question of Peter and John, and Peter and John together. They have a peculiar place in the unfolding of the truth in the book of Acts. I would like to say that these are Peter and John chapters, in the book of Acts; they particularly fitted in, in their ministry, with one another. That is to say, Peter leading and John following, taking a second place. Unless we are ready to take a second place, we will hardly ever have a first place. But you may have a first place, by taking a second place. Apollos took a second place, we might say, and so did Barnabas. I want to say just a word about Barnabas, because he appears in this chapter, and it is said he was ennobled; he was named by the apostles, "Son of consolation". He is the son of consolation, he is a man that would console the saints, and a very comforting man he must have been, and was; and therefore he got a leading place in the ministry. As I said, unless we learn to take a second place, we shall never have a first place, but we shall have a first place as taking
{497}
the second place; Peter took the first place here, and John took the second -- Peter and John.
It says, "being let go". We may not suffer persecution much now, in fact we do not. Christians are not in any special way suffering persecution as of old, but persecution may come to us; and it is well to think of it, too, because we do not know what is ahead of us. Yet, we do know what is ahead of us, and that is that the Lord Jesus has promised to keep us out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. The Lord Jesus has promised that to us, and it is a great thing to lay hold of the promise. Well, as I was saying, Peter and John were let go; that is to say, they had been under custody. The officers came to them and arrested them, but they were let go. Perhaps we may expect, that under the government of God, if we are persecuted, we may be let go; many have been. During recent years, many young men have been inducted into the army, and were bound to serve; there was no option attached to it, and they suffered, but God has blessed them. There are many who are in the service of the Lord now, because they submitted to the government of God in what they were inducted into.
So we never can tell what may come, and it is well to have our minds made up as to consequences, and to make up our minds, too, that the Lord Jesus is involved. As Peter said he would lay down his life for Him, we may say the same; Peter said it, but the Lord questioned it, at least He pointed out that he would do something else; but then later he did actually do what he said he would do; he was actually martyred for Christ; and we may be martyred. I am not here to prophesy anything like suffering, because it is not my business, it is not my thought; but at the same time I do think it is well, dear brethren, for us to make up our minds as
{498}
to the actual conditions that exist at the present time, and to be ready for them; the Lord will not fail us. He will love us to the end. We will be more lovable in suffering than we are now, I am certain of that.
They were let go. That is what we read in @Acts 4; they were let go, and they went to their own. That is the way the passage should read. In the Authorised Version they went to their own company, and, of course, that was true, they were their own company, they were the apostles and the others that loved Jesus. They went to their own; it is the same word that is used in @John 1, and in @John 13, and it is to show that the disciples came into the thought of 'He and we'. He had suffered, and now they are suffering. They had been imprisoned, but had been let go, and we may count on God, dear brethren, if sufferings come, if persecutions come, that we will be let go and that God will have mercy on us; that is the thing to have in our minds, to learn to pray, and to count on God to answer our prayers that there will be the letting go. There has been this, in fact, during the past years to which I have alluded, but there may be more suffering. I am just urging now that the dear brethren will be simple about it, and yet face everything, face the conditions, not be blind to the conditions that are in the world; the Lord will love us right through them. At the same time the consequences may be more severe than we expect, and the Lord would have us to be ready. Peter and John were ready, and they rejoiced that they were suffering for Him; that was the state of things at the beginning, and one would love to see that state of things being revived, the idea of suffering for Christ. It is given to us, it says, to suffer, not only to believe on the Lord Jesus, but to suffer for His sake. And again, as the Lord said of Paul, "I will show him how great things he must suffer
{499}
for my name's sake". He did suffer and he was an elect vessel unto Jesus. And so, as I said, there are the possibilities that there may be suffering in the government of God, and it is our wisdom to be prepared, and to be ready to lay down our lives.
But then there are these great things that, "as he is, so are we in this world", and that He is loving us to the end, and that love will continue, too, eternally. And then, that there is love among ourselves; and one of the greatest things in a moral sense, is that in spite of the conditions in the world, there are those who actually love each other. I believe I may say freely that all in this whole company in this hall, large hall as it is, in general all love one another. I would ask anyone here who is not one of us, but a real christian, just to take note of this, that there are so many in this hall in Sydney who love one another. It is one of the greatest things that can be said, really, in a moral sense, that there are so many who love one another. It is so, whatever you may think, that there are those who love one another, and as many as you see here tonight, and I thank God for them. The fact is, it draws out one's heart to all the brethren, because their very love in itself makes them lovable. It makes them lovable to Christ, and lovable to every admirer of love, of persons who have love, and who love one another. So I would urge, dear brethren, in view of all that I have read and said at this time, that we should keep in mind the possibilities. The Lord would have us to be ready for any and every eventuality that the testimony may require or may bring upon us, so that we may glorify the Lord as His martyrs, because that is what is given to us, to be His martyrs, as Paul said of Stephen, "thy martyr, Stephen". One loves the thought.
And so, one commits all these things to the brethren, however imperfectly presented, that they may
{500}
be gathered up in our souls, and lead to the results that are in mind for us, and may lead to better conditions still than those that actually exist. What is in mind is that conditions among us may be *better and better*, that is the idea, and as it is said, too, "more and more". Do not ever assume that we are finished in this sense, that love finishes. It is a question of continual increase of love, love to God, love to Christ, and love to one another.
{501}
GOOD SOLDIERS OF JESUS CHRIST
@Revelation 15: 1 - 8
I have in mind to be brief at this meeting at the end of our series. At the same time I wish to consider the circumstances in which we are found, and to say something that will help in them, help the saints locally and all of us. This book from which I have read is well known to be peculiar, and it is regarded by some as a sealed book; the latter thought is wholly false, for it is not sealed, it is open. We have in it what is called a little opened book, meaning that what is in mind is not very cumbersome, not such as the world would regard as great, but which nevertheless comprises immense moral history. And this is in mind in what has been read, that the brethren may be on moral lines. So that, as we read, we may know how to discern, to judge. The apostle Paul says, "Do ye judge". That is, we are to judge of what is said and the import of it, and gain in strength in a moral sense, for we are surrounded with immoral conditions; immoral in the sense of infringement of divine rights, and we need certain features, especially wisdom, in dealing with them. At the same time moral power also, so that we are not fearful, we are not afraid when we are in the right, and we have to speak for what is right. And so the Lord says, "Fear not them which kill the body, ... but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell", @Matthew 10: 28. And then we have Jehovah's dealings with Abraham, who is called, the Scripture says, alone; "I called him alone, and blessed him", @Isaiah 51: 2. But He says to him, "Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward", @Genesis 15: 1. So that God furnishes us in this way as having to encounter what I am speaking of, that is to say the moral conditions, and what may grow out of them too, in the sense of
{502}
violence. Satan, as has often been remarked, has two weapons; the first is seduction, the other is violence. And so his names are given twofold in this book, and they both imply violence, murder.
It is encouraging to read this chapter in the midst of this book, we may say in the very midst of it, because it speaks of victory. And I am thinking of the word, "Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory" (@1 Corinthians 15: 59), without saying what the particular victory is, but God gives it to *us*. One of the greatest things for us, in a way, especially in warfare, is the assurance of victory as given to us by God. Now this chapter, as doubtless you have all noticed, speaks of victory, and poetry enters into it. "I saw as a glass sea mingled with fire, and those that had gained the victory over the beast, and over its image, and over the number of its name, standing upon the glass sea, having harps of God. And they sing the song of Moses bondman of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and wonderful are thy works, Lord God Almighty; righteous and true are thy ways, O King of nations. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name?" It is as if they were saying they are not fearing now, they are not in a slavish fear of God, they love God, and because of their love they are in victory. So it says, "Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and do homage before thee; for thy righteousnesses have been made manifest"; or, as it may read, 'Thy judgments are made manifest'. We see in that last statement, 'Thy judgments are made manifest', that judgment is a great feature of the book. And of a great system, it is said that God has judged *our* judgment (that is the judgment of the saints) upon her, and hence the importance of having a right judgment of all conditions; in fact one sometimes says he has a judgment about everybody that he
{503}
knows, and certainly a judgment about the systems that are current; and therefore of this one that I allude to, "God has judged your judgment upon her".
There is therefore the moral side in these matters, and it works out on moral principles, moral judgments as to persons and systems, and one may add nations and religious bodies too, because of the importance of the saints knowing things, and having a right judgment, "Judge ye what I say". So that it is important that each one of us should have a judgment, first about persons, then about systems, then about nations, and other such things. So that we are conversant with things, as having to do with them even in a judicial sense; we face things and fear not, as the word was to Abraham, "Fear not". That is to say, face them courageously. It was the one word to Abraham at that time in @Genesis 15, and the idea is in the great charge to Joshua, "Be thou strong and very courageous", @Joshua 1: 7. So that we may as well face things as evade them, because things will happen. God has spoken in a prophetic way in the history of the great revival that we are now having part in; what marked the brethren in the early days was prophecy, and that would mean not simply what we call prophetic ministry, but prophetic events, coming events, so that the prophetic map, as we may call it, was opened up to the brethren, and we can thus look into it and weigh what may be geographical or spiritual, whatever it may be, basing all on the outline of the truth in the prophetic scriptures.
Looking into this book, we are furnished at the very outset with certain weapons, and what are particularly in mind are the seven Spirits of God. These have to be understood in their connection; that is, it is a prophetic book, a book of symbols, but the Spirit of God is in mind. And the idea of seven would be to stress the full thought as expressive
{504}
of power, of power that can be divided and made immediately convenient to us at any time. For the Spirit of God is the Spirit of God; He is a divine Person, but He is indwelling the saints, and thus may detach this or that one, and use him at any time or in any place, according to His pleasure. And therefore the importance of being ready for any service that may be available, and there are many services; but particularly that we may know what is facing us, and what we are facing too, as regards political situations. Not that I am attempting to preach politics, far, far otherwise. It is not our business. Our commonwealth is in heaven, beloved. The word 'commonwealth' there means a system of things in which we live and move. "*Our* commonwealth has its existence in the heavens, from which also we await the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour, who shall transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory, according to the working of the power which he has even to subdue all things to himself". So that you can see how we are furnished, and how we need not be in any sense fearful of circumstances or any attempts to interfere with our life or our services to God.
And thus I have called attention to the seven Spirits of God. The Godhead is alluded to in @Revelation 1. John addresses himself to the assemblies in verse 4. "John to the seven assemblies which are in Asia: Grace to you, and peace, from him who is, and who was, and who is to come". The address is to the seven assemblies, showing how much the assembly is in mind in this book. They are written to by John; the Lord writes seven letters to the assemblies, showing how great the thought of the assembly is in this book, and the Lord is seen towards the end of the chapter, in the midst of the seven assemblies; that is to say, the seven assemblies are seen *before* the Lord is spoken of. This shows
{505}
how distinct the thought is, and how prominent it is, and how it should be in our minds dear brethren, as fortifying us for the conflict into which we have come, because we *have* come into it; and each one is to be in it intelligently as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. We are called to be good ones, meaning that we are not selfish, that we are thinking of Him who has called us into soldierhood.
As I said, the assembly is set out in this book, and then the Lord is seen *there*, in the midst of it. And so in these verses, as I said, "To the seven assemblies which are in Asia: Grace to you and peace from him who is, and who was, and who is to come, and from the seven Spirits which are before his throne; and from Jesus Christ". That is, the first reference is to God Himself. "Who is" is present, and "who was" is historical, and "who is to come" is prophetical. These are the three aspects in which God is presented to us in this book. And then the seven Spirits which are before his *throne*, that is to say the Spirit of God in this sevenfold sense is before His throne; it is a question of the throne and the authority of God, and the power to support it in His Spirit. And then "from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn from the dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth", and then the Lord Himself comes in for an ascription of praise by the assemblies. "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father, to him be the glory and the might to the ages of ages. Amen". I have read all that to keep the subject before us, and especially that the Spirit may be understood. We have many works on the Holy Spirit, many written works, and much ministry too, much current ministry on the Holy Spirit, but it is of the very greatest importance that we should be conversant with the truth of the Holy Spirit.
{506}
We should understand too, this sense in which He is seen in this book, that is to say, in a sevenfold character, as if He can be divided in His service, as it were, for He is wonderfully lowly, taking such a lowly place to serve us, having been here for all these centuries, and ready to attend to all matters, and if it be a question of conflict, to attend to all that relates to it; and that we should be in His hands as good soldiers of Jesus Christ. Now I stress that, dear brethren, especially to the young ones here. Pardon me for using that well-known phrase, the young ones, as if they are the only ones, but they are in the main what God is relying upon. He is taking away the old ones; He has a right to do so, and on their side they are able to say, "To depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better". We often say that, perhaps not always truly, or faithfully, but there is no doubt that the Lord is helping the elder brethren to be in liberty of soul, and to carry on and to be examples to the younger, so that the work may go on in the remnant. As we had it today, "Shear-Jashub" means a remnant shall return, and so the remnant will work out in the youth, the young men. "I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you". That is a word for youth, dear brethren. The word of Scripture is, "One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh". Well, the one that comes is usually the immediate one, the present one, and so I am speaking to you, and urging that each of us should be a good soldier of Jesus Christ, and endure hardships; however they may arise, endure them; be patient in them. "Be patient therefore, brethren", says James, "... for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh", @James 5: 7, 8.
What I am saying is an appeal to the youth in view of the conflict we have come into. I am not saying we are coming into it, we are in it. It is abroad on
{507}
the earth. Never has there been such a time of infidelity up till now, a direct attack on the truth of God, and the truth of the Scripture, and the truth of redemption, and the truth of the assembly. It is all around, and the apathy with which men regard the truth is appalling, and it is high time for the dear brethren, if they are not in it yet, to be in it, and to be consciously in it, and to be assured that they are not to fear. As I said before, Jehovah said to Abraham, "Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward". That is what God is. God is that to us all.
Well now I come to my scripture, that is @Revelation 15. The prophet John says, "And I saw another sign in heaven, great and marvellous, seven angels having the seven last plagues; for in them is filled up the wrath of God". A remarkable word: "filled up the wrath of God". That is to say God is saying He is ready; whatever men may do or think. God is not asleep; and I am using that word designedly, because the word is used as to God in @Psalm 78: 65. He "awoke as one out of sleep". God is not asleep. We know that the blessed Lord Jesus was once literally asleep, and was capable of sleep; He was a real Man, you know, as real as any of us, and we are to speak of Him with reverence, and yet we are to be sure that we are dealing with a real Man. The Lord Jesus is that, and He was asleep on the pillow in the time of storm; the disciples thought that He should be awake, as if He did not know, but He did know. Wherever anything of that kind arises, the truth is that the Lord would say, "I know". And that is a comforting word in every letter written to the assemblies, that the Lord says, "I know". Whatever others, or you, or I, or we may think, the Lord says, "I know"; He is assured of everything. And then He is awake too, in the sense
{508}
of the energy of love; it is a question of the energy of love.
And so love is greatly stressed in the Scriptures, and particularly in one chapter, in @1 Corinthians 13. This chapter enlarges on what love is, as over against other things. Faith, hope, love; these are three things grouped together. "The greater of these is love". Not the greatest, but the greater; that is to say, in that form, two elements are set over against one, and that one is love; it is the greater. They are the three greatest things, we might say, but "the greater of these is love"; that is, the other two taken together are less than love. And so if a man has not love, he is nothing. Whatever he may do, or give, or be in his own mind, he is nothing if he has not love. It is a very humbling thing that it is so, that if we have not love, we have not anything at all. That is the chapter that I have alluded to; it is a love chapter, and it is a chapter to stress what I am saying. So the word is here, "I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire: and them that had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass". Now I ask you, dear brethren, to weigh the things that are mentioned here, the specific things that are mentioned, and that these men that are alluded to are persons that have gotten the victory over them, things which are all hostile. "A sea of glass mingled with fire, and them that had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass". I need not enlarge on the idea of glass, it conveys the idea of transparency, which is one of the first features that are proper to christianity, that we are transparent, that we are bold in telling the truth, and in working out the truth in our lives, and in having to encounter these elements of the beast,
{509}
as it says here, "the beast, and ... his image, and ... his mark, and ... the number of his name". Take all these elements; take them one by one, or combine them, the saints alluded to here have gotten the victory over the whole thing, the whole matter. That is indeed what I mean to stress, and to leave the whole thing in your minds, and in your hearts, too, dear brethren, as to what our part is in it. That is we are to be strong and very courageous. "Stand still", as Moses said, "and see the salvation of Jehovah", and do not give way. We may oft-times defend right things, and condemn wrong things, and yet fail to maintain the judgment we have arrived at.
Now I venture to bring forward John himself in this book, the beloved apostle; he is not called that here, he is just a prophet here, he is never called an apostle in this book; he is a prophet. But in the first case we find him falling down as dead in the presence of the Lord Jesus, and it was right; the Lord did not reprove him for that, it was reverential. He saw the wonders in which He appears in the first chapter, and he fell down before the Lord as dead. The Lord did not reprove him for that. But in chapter 19: 10, he falls down to worship an angel; he is full of courage, and is used of God to assert victory for the saints, yet he falls down to worship an angel. That is to say, he fails in that in which he has overcome; and the angel himself before whom he fell has to reprove him; so that, dear brethren, we may defend things and condemn what is not right, and yet we may give way to the very thing we are condemning. And so it is, that in this chapter which I allude to. John falls down to worship an angel; that is to say, he is idolatrous. Think of that, that such a man as he, and such a vessel is used in this book; for the book is given to John. It is given to Christ by the Father, but the Lord gives it to John; "he ... signified it ... unto his servant John". And
{510}
John is found, as I said, in this wrong attitude for the moment, showing how easily we may give way; after having succeeded victoriously in maintaining what is right, we may momentarily give way to what is wrong, even the very thing that we have been condemning. I warn the dear brethren as to this, to stand firm in what is right. As Paul said, whatever you think of us, *you* do what is right. So the point is to be right in what we are dealing with, and not to give way, even for a moment. And so in the last chapter of the book we have the same thing. John falls down to worship the angel; he is again idolatrous. You can understand that it is very far from me to say anything against a great servant like John, but it is written for our learning. How easily we may give way for a moment, and do great damage in giving way when at first we hold firmly to the right. So that John is seen twice over in this book as idolatrous, and has to be reproved for it. But when he falls down before the Lord there is no reproof, he is in the presence of a divine Person. That is the great difference here, dear brethren, the difference between an angel and a divine Person; the worship of angels is idolatry, but not the worship of a divine Person. We are to worship God, we are to worship Christ, and I might add that the Spirit too is included in the subject of worship. We are to maintain in our souls a right estimate of the blessed Spirit of God, especially in the way in which He is seen in this book, in the sevenfold manner, the seven Spirits of God.
Well now, in what I am speaking of in chapter 15, it says "they sing". I am reading about overcoming. They have overcome all these elements, and we are in the very midst of all these elements. I am not going to speak in any unseemly way, I am not going to give any reason or cause for the enemy to speak reproachfully of what I am saying, dear brethren; but I am seeking now to give you the truth,
{511}
in a concealed, or I might say limited way, but yet to give it that you should have it before you and be ready for any emergency that might arise, to be strong and very courageous. And so the result is in verse 3, "they sing the song of Moses". That is to say, the brethren have a song -- It is not the Marseillaise, it is not any such thing, not any party matter at all; it is the song of Moses. "They sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb". That is to say, Moses is recognised according to his mediatorial position in the service of God, and they sing his song; it was a song of victory, possibly @Exodus 15, I suppose, but they sing it; and then the song of the Lamb. How wonderfully honoured he was as associated with the Lamb. That is what God would do for us; the assembly has the nearest place to Christ, the nearest place to God in the whole universe. So you see with Moses how he is honoured in that same sense, as with the Lamb; that his song is sung with the song of the Lamb. And so it is "the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb". And the song is this, "Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints". That is, all this is attributed to God; He is the King of saints. Or it may be the King of nations, but He is the King of saints anyway, which is a very suggestive thing for us all, because I am speaking to saints. I am not speaking to unconverted people, I am here to speak to the saints, and I am speaking to them in the sense that God is the King of saints. So that we are subject to God, but still we have a song -- These persons alluded to have a song, and it is a song of victory, it is the song of Moses, and it is the song of the Lamb.
And so it goes on in verse 4, "Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify they name? for thou only art holy, for all nations shall come and worship
{512}
before thee". Notice how the worship of God is brought in; it is insisted on because that is the idea of the book; it is a book of insistence on what is right; and this is quite right here, and insisted on as right, that "all nations shall come and worship before thee". Now as I said John failed in this very thing, and we are all apt to fail in this very thing. If he did, we are all apt to fail in a thing we have condemned, we are apt to fall in with it even for a moment, and do damage. But here there is nothing of that. It says, "Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy, for all nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest". That is to say God is glorified by the song here, because His judgments are made manifest. As I said at the beginning, it is so important that we should have a right judgment of everything. And that if God's judgments are made manifest, to stand by them; if it means conflict, stand by them; if we need to suffer, stand by them. They are the judgments of God; they go through; they go through into the lake of fire too. But here it is the seven last plagues of God that are aimed against western Europe, and inclusive of Australasia too, because Australasia is just the outcome of Europe, and the seven last plagues of God are aimed against the renunciation of christianity. It is an awful thing, what is coming in. It is all around us, not only here, but in Europe and America, it is all around; the renunciation of the truth of christianity. So that in one moment the Lord will take away His own, and then the whole matter will be just a shell of wickedness.
Now you may say, I am speaking strongly, and perhaps you say there is no need for it, but there is need for it, because God would have us to stand up about things, for His rights, and His services. And so here the thing is asserted to be right, for it says,
{513}
"For thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest". The thing is manifest, and therefore it is a question of standing up for these judgments of God, whatever they may be, and so the victory. That is the victory of these people -- dear people they are -- that are alluded to here. It says, "I saw ... a sea of glass mingled with fire, and them that had gotten the victory over the beast". We may say blessed be their name, because they are sufferers, and the Lamb is a Sufferer. The very title, Lamb, is related to suffering. And the song of the Lamb, was the song of a Sufferer. And so, dear brethren, I am just, as it were, calling upon you to stand up for the truth. I cannot very well do better than this tonight. I am just about to leave this city, and this country shortly, and I would seek to leave with and impress on the brethren the importance of standing up for what is right; whatever others may do, as Paul says, you do what is right.
And so the end is in verse 7, that "one of the four beasts" (or living creatures) "gave unto the seven angels seven golden vials full of the wrath of God, who liveth for ever and ever. And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his power; and no man was able to enter into the temple, till the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled". That is to say, the temple is closed until these terrible things happen; the service of God will be resumed in another world altogether; "that world and the resurrection". But the temple is seen as closed. I believe that is what is in mind; it is a prophetic matter, and the temple of God will be closed until these matters are fulfilled; and then God will take up other threads of service in what is called the millennial world; that world and the resurrection. God will do that; in the meantime He is continuing, and His temple is still open; we have
{514}
part in it; we are indeed ourselves, as christians, part of the temple of God. Paul says, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?" So that the temple is still open, but it will soon be closed, and that terrible shell of wickedness left in western Europe, to say nothing about the East. I am speaking now about the West because it is a question of the renunciation of christianity. That is what is coming, as Paul says to the Thessalonians, that the coming of the Lord will not be until there be an apostasy, and then the man of sin shall appear. That is all imminent, dear brethren; the Lord may come now, at any time and take us to be with Him. But then all this will happen. Is it not worth while to have it in mind and be ready for it? So that while the temple of God remains open, as it is open yet, be present in it, continue on in the service of God, and do what you can in His service, in the gospel and otherwise.
So I leave all this, dear brethren, with you in the Lord's name, that there may be a fulfilment of it in the youth, according to John's letter to the young men, "I write to you, young men", and then he says, "I have written to you", as if he said, I write to you today, but I wrote to you before. And it may be that things have come to us and we have forgotten them, and they have to be repeated; and that is how graciously John carries on with the young men. "I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. Love not the world, nor the things in the world ... because all that is in the world ... is not of the Father". So that we are set up in that way by John's exhortations, and then as I said, we have the warning of him even falling into idolatry, if even for a moment, after all his steadfastness and faithfulness in insisting on right in these wonderful pages of the book of Revelation.
{515}
THE NEED OF THE MOMENT
@2 Chronicles 1: 7 - 12
It is in the light in which this meeting is held that I ventured to read this scripture, remembering that the local assembly has proved her place in the service of ministry. In @1 Corinthians 1: 2 that assembly is addressed as "the assembly of God which is in Corinth", meaning that it is the local company that is in mind. Corinth being a city, a city in which the Lord appeared to Paul the apostle and said, "No one shall set upon thee to injure thee; because I have much people in this city", @Acts 18: 10. The Lord indicated, therefore, that He was singling out Corinth as a city in which He should have an assembly, and it should be large. There were gifts in that assembly according to the first chapter, and God had set them there; moreover, it is said in chapter 12, before the matter of gift is mentioned, that no one could say, "Lord Jesus", unless in the power of the Holy Spirit. Thus the assembly there was signalised by the presence of the Spirit in it, and the Spirit would make much of the Lord Jesus. He would say, "Lord Jesus", in those who were ministering. Then again, it is suggested in chapter 14 that if the whole assembly should come together in one place, room should be made for prophetic ministry, the prophets were to be free to speak, for God had set them in the assembly. The order in which the gifts were set there is apostles, prophets, teachers, and so on, so that the assembly was properly furnished for the exercise of ministry, and, of course, ministry was and is for the edifying of the body of Christ; clearly not to make much of any minister especially, but to edify the body of Christ, "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ", @Ephesians 4: 13.
{516}
Now in the light of all these facts, I ventured to read these verses in 2 Chronicles, because they furnish opportunity to call attention to a section of Scripture that is freighted with spiritual power, with spirituality, and with personality distinguished by God in His testimony. It is the beginning of the second book, the first book closing with an account of the end of David's reign. According to 1 Kings, David was enfeebled by age, but evidently in the closing chapters of the first book of Chronicles he has been strengthened specially by God, and we are reminded in this of God's special interest in those who minister the truth to the saints, as is said here, "thy great people"; not that the Spirit of God would eulogise the saints specially, but if He says "thy great people", He refers to them in an abstract sense; that is, as those who are born of God, redeemed by the blood of Christ, and indwelt by the Holy Spirit; they are, therefore, great.
David was evidently strengthened of God to speak to them at this juncture. The first book, as I said, gives us the closing ministry of David. He is there recorded as having died, and certain ones wrote his life, showing how important a minister he was. It is said, "Now David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel. And the time that he reigned over Israel was forty years: he reigned seven years in Hebron, and he reigned thirty-three years in Jerusalem. And he died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honour; and Solomon his son reigned in his stead. And the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of Samuel the seer, and in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the book of Gad the seer; with all his reign and his might, and the times that passed over him, and over Israel, and over all the kingdoms of the countries", @1 Chronicles 29: 26 - 30. Thus, according to the way Scripture presents the facts, he was the most distinguished
{517}
than up to that time who had reigned in Israel, and in his closing remarks recorded in @1 Chronicles 29, he speaks of God as the Head; it is a very remarkable thing that he should speak thus of God. We speak of Christ as the Head, which is right, of course, for He is Head of the body, the assembly; but David spoke of God as Head, and in this way enriched the remarkable address that he made to God in the sight of all the people. And so, as I said, the section affords great richness. Anyone who has read it, that is to say, the closing chapters of the first book and then the opening chapters of the second, which speak of Solomon, will know that what I say is true, that we are dealing with one of the richest sections of Scripture, and I believe that it is in keeping with the facts here tonight to say that we have recently come through a time marked by peculiar richness of fellowship and ministry.
So I am encouraged to refer to all this, that the dear brethren may be encouraged, especially all the young men who are here. I do not speak of the young women, because I am speaking rather for the moment of gift, having in mind the importance of gift. It is said in @Ephesians 4: 7, "But to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ". But then there are specific gifts to which I have already referred, that is to say, "some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints; with a view to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ". So that as I said, the young men are in mind in this word. There are old men here, of course, and David represents the old. He dies, for God has a right to His children and God is taking him even as He took Enoch. But David, representing the old men, was not jealous of his son. He knew from God Himself that Solomon was to reign
{518}
in his stead, and he had no jealousy in his heart towards him. That is a matter also that all young brethren should be concerned about, that they may not in any way be jealous about their elder brethren.
To confirm what I say, I refer now to the second book of Kings which presents to us the successor of Elijah, that is Elisha. It is said, Elisha poured water on the hands of Elijah (@2 Kings 3: 11), which would mean that he was not at all jealous of his great superior who was taken to heaven. He aspired to be like Elijah, but he was not jealous of him. He poured water on his hands, so as to make his ministry better, and that is the spirit that should lay hold of all the young men here; not to be jealous in the least degree of the elder, but if possible to render their ministry more effective in their old age, because old age has its advantages. It has its disadvantages, as most of us who are old know, but it has its advantages; that is to say, it has the advantage of experience, experience with the brethren, experience with God too, which would mark the twenty-four elders in the book of Revelation. That thought is taken from David. It was he who inaugurated the idea of twenty-four in the courses of the Levites and the priests and the workers of all kinds under his rule. They were divided into twenty-four courses in general, and that was to facilitate and to implement their service. It is a most important section in that sense, because it leads into the book of Revelation, which is the closing book of the New Testament, in which David has a peculiar place, the Lord Himself referring to him, speaking of Himself as He that has the key of David, showing what a place David had in the divine mind. In the end of that book the Lord says, "*I* am the root and offspring of David". That is to say, He was greater than David, as the root of David, but then He was the offspring of David, and therefore David comes in for a great place, as indicated
{519}
in what is said about him in this section of Scripture, in the books of Chronicles.
Now as to youthfulness. In the twenty-third chapter of the first book it says, "And David was old and full of days; and he made Solomon his son king over Israel. And he gathered together all the princes of Israel, with the priests and the Levites. And the Levites were numbered from thirty years old and upward; and their number, by their polls, man by man, was thirty-eight thousand. Of these, twenty-four thousand were to preside over the work of the house of Jehovah; and six thousand were officers and judges; and four thousand were doorkeepers; and four thousand praised Jehovah with the instruments which I made, said David, to praise therewith. And David divided them into courses according to the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari", @1 Chronicles 23: 1 - 6. These are features of David's government, David's service in Israel. He was an old man, and knew he was to be replaced by his son. Earlier he had had in his mind to build the house, and Nathan said to him, "Do all that is in thy heart; for God is with thee", @1 Chronicles 17: 2. But Nathan spoke too fast, for Jehovah intended to set up Solomon instead of David. David, hearing this, was quite subject, and now he is ready to make his son, Solomon, king in his stead. This is to say, we have David and Solomon together on the throne, showing that there is no thought of rivalry, which is one of the most baneful things that can be amongst us, especially in ministry. The old and the young are to serve together, and the young are to implement the service of the old in due course.
And so, dear brethren, I have been encouraged as I said, to read from this section, because it brings out David in this peculiar light, in this peculiar way in which God would honour him. He honoured him in a degree more than any before him, but Solomon
{520}
even more; that is to say, David had to take account of this, but yet he made Solomon his son king. "And David was old and full of days; and he made Solomon his son king over Israel". So that he and Solomon were on the throne together. It is to bring out the unjealous attitude of a spiritual man, and that is the point that is in one's mind. There are the elder brethren here, and we are thankful, too, for the young ones. I can see from where I am standing a great many faces of young men. There is a great need for them, and much room for them, and the elder ones are not at all jealous of them; they are making way for them. But, at the same time, the elder have to be supported, and that is how Elisha supported Elijah, in that he poured water on the hands of the prophet. He would implement his service by refreshing him, and that is the point that is in one's mind.
So we get now in this passage in the second book this wonderful prayer, as if God is being honoured by Solomon. He said to Solomon, "Ask what I shall give thee. And Solomon said to God, Thou hast shewn unto David my father great loving-kindness, and has made me king in his stead. Now, Jehovah Elohim, let thy word unto David my father be firm; for thou hast made me king over a people numerous as the dust of the earth. Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people; for who can judge this thy great people?". Now God is above and Solomon is below, but Solomon has it proposed to him by Jehovah that he should ask, and that is the point that I would make now, so as to make much of the opportunities of prayer. The need is great and wide, and the labourers are comparatively few, and there is therefore room; and God is ready to give. "Ask, and it shall be given you". And so here, Solomon made this remarkable prayer: "Give me now wisdom and
{521}
knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people; for who can judge, this thy great people? And God said to Solomon, Because this was in thy heart, and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of them that hate thee, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked for thyself wisdom and knowledge, that thou mayest judge my people, over whom I have made thee king, wisdom and knowledge are granted unto thee", @2 Chronicles 1: 10 - 12.
Now that is my advice in closing as to all these dear young brethren who are here. The thing is to ask of God whatever is needed, "ask of God, who gives to all freely and reproaches not" (@James 1: 5), because of the need. The first thing is to find what need there is, and then seek to meet it, and God will not fail to give us the gift that is required. "Desire earnestly the greater gifts", we are told. Why not have the greater gifts? God has them and has furnished them. I believe the Spirit has brought them all down here, and they are to be distributed as they are needed, and it is a question therefore of calculating what the need is, and then asking of God. Ask of God what will meet the need as you see it, and then be doing; that is the idea.
And so, as I was saying, God says, "Wisdom and knowledge are granted unto thee; and I will give thee riches and wealth and honour, such as none of the kings have had that have been before thee, neither shall any after thee have the like". A great opportunity is open to us. I have been in this country now for a considerable time, and I have seen great evidence of interest among the saints, more than I have ever seen before, and it is a great encouragement and stimulation. I am speaking, not to myself or the elder brethren, but to the younger ones, so that, dear brethren, as discerning the need that is evident, we may ask God for what will meet
{522}
the need, because a great work is opening up to us. I might mention South Africa, where I have been also, for the work of God is progressing in all these countries, to say nothing of Europe and America, but now I am just speaking of these southern countries. There is a great work in progress and there is a great need for workmen, and the Lord would thrust us into the field. I am not saying that we should give up our employment; I do not believe we should. I am rather hesitant about that. I have not done it myself, and I believe, generally, young men are safer at their employment, but they should seek to see what is needed and apply themselves to the work, and the Lord will give them understanding and what is needed in the way of gift and ability.
One was encouraged to speak in this admonitory way, dear brethren, to suggest something that I see is needed, and that is for the young men to get to God and find out by discernment, by prayer and watchfulness, what is really needed amongst the saints. There is a great people in these southern countries. Are they properly cared for? Is there enough ministry? Is there example, for that is, perhaps, the most needful thing of all, example for others as to what is right, and especially in the matter of discipline, how discipline is to be carried on; for it was the way of God, I believe, from the days of Enoch, the seventh from Adam, that there should be discipline. His name signifies discipline, and the thought that is before one is that we should seek to know how to carry on discipline. David knew how to do it. He was, as I said, a ruler. He reigned forty years, which is remarkable; and we are told where he reigned. We are told too, the number of children he had, and so forth; so we are to learn from example, from what we see in him. Now Solomon has replaced him. He is set on the throne,
{523}
and David has gone, the Lord having taken him, and Solomon elects to pray to God. God says, 'You had better ask, Solomon. Ask!' The Lord says in the gospels, "Ask, and it shall be given to you ... knock, and it shall be opened to you", @Luke 11: 9. In that wonderful chapter He says if we ask the Father He gives us the Holy Spirit. "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" Think of the magnitude of that gift! You may say, That is for young people; but it is a matter of the ability we should have for ministry, as well as for the young people. Young brothers and sisters, of course, need the Holy Spirit, and that is one of the first questions that should be asked of young people wishing to come into fellowship, 'Have you received the Holy Spirit?' But if you are to serve in the ministry, it is supremely important that we should ask, and be sure that we have the Holy Spirit, not merely as a theory but as a fact.
So at Ephesus, one of the greatest fields Paul laboured in, he said to the twelve men, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed? And they said to him, We did not even hear if the Holy Spirit was come", @Acts 19: 2. They say that they did not know. So we must be on our guard that we are not ignorant of what is needed in the service of God, and be sure that we have the Holy Spirit, with all the wealth that comes in in this connection. Jehovah says to Solomon, "Because this was in thy heart, and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of them that hate thee, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked for thyself wisdom and knowledge, that thou mayest judge my people, over whom I have made thee king: wisdom and knowledge are granted unto thee; and I will give thee riches and wealth and honour, such as
{524}
none of the kings have had that have been before thee, neither shall any after thee have the like".
So I close with these thoughts, dear brethren, and again refer to what I have said, that there is the need of ability for service, the need of instruction in discipline, and first how to discipline myself. That is the first thing to learn, how to discipline oneself, how to keep oneself right, and then to be an example to others. As Paul says to Timothy, "Faithful men such as shall be competent to instruct others also", @2 Timothy 2: 2. There is a need, not only of being instructed oneself, but of instructing others, that we may be able to impart something in the way of teaching or instruction to our younger brethren and sisters.
I now refer to the sisters, because they are needed, and one has often questioned why it is that we have no gift among the sisters. Philip the evangelist had four daughters who prophesied, and while I have often spoken of this I repeat it, as I feel it is necessary now to bring it forward, that there is very little, if any, gift among the sisters. Yet there was gift at the beginning, and the women are told in @1 Corinthians 11 what to do if they are praying or prophesying; they are to keep their heads covered. That is a remarkable chapter. Before we come to the truth of the Lord's supper we have the thought of headship. It says, that every woman praying or prophesying is to have her head covered. Well, one may say, that is nothing at all; but *it is something*. What God enjoins *is* something and cannot be ignored, and if we ignore it we shall never prophesy. What flows out from it is gift, and I am only just mentioning, I might say hesitatingly, the thought of sisters having gift; but why not? If they had it at the beginning why not now? I put that question, why not now? The Spirit of God is here, and I verily believe He has brought all the gifts with Him from heaven.
{525}
"Having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which ye behold and hear", @Acts 2: 33. It was a question of gift, and those persons were used to convict people, who recognised them as those who had knowledge. They enquired from the other apostles, as well as Peter, and they said, "What shall we do, brethren?" Peter is ready to tell them what to do.
So, dear brethren, I would urge all to get these matters well in hand, that is to say, the instruction that is needed in service that is open to you. "Whatever thy hand findeth to do, do with thy might" (@Ecclesiastes 9: 10), and the Lord will be with you.
{526}
"SIMPLICITY AS TO THE CHRIST"
@2 Corinthians 11: 2, 3; @Mark 4: 35, 36; @Mark 9: 8; @John 4: 6
What I have in mind is to speak of what is seen in the first scripture, namely, "simplicity as to the Christ". The word 'simplicity' has to be understood in its context, even as every word of Scripture has to be understood. We are not to add to Christ in our thoughts or ornament Him in any way according to man. The circumstances at Corinth called forth this expression of feeling from the apostle, for corrupting influences were at work there. In the first epistle the temple of God was in danger of being corrupted, the corruption implying destruction in a moral sense. And so here the apostle was concerned, because a corrupting element was affecting the minds of the saints in regard to Christ, which would result in something being added to Him in the minds of the saints, as if He was not to be regarded and spoken of and loved *as He was*.
The Lord has been treated indifferently throughout the history of the assembly. The danger the apostle had in mind soon became prevalent, the danger of adding to what scripture says of Him, as if Christ in Himself as presented in testimony was not just enough. Other things, and ideas, certain ornamentations according to man, became the fashion, and this has spread abroad throughout christendom, so that the true Christ has been largely lost to view. If the clergy were questioned as to Him, the answers would be varied and generally beside the mark, even as when the Lord raised the question as to what men were saying about Him; however respectful the answers may be, there will be few that are not largely short of the truth. It is unquestionably true that corruption is abroad, corruption of the minds of men, and of nominal christians, as to the truth of Christ. The danger has
{527}
always been current even in such a spiritual meeting as at Colosse, for it was a spiritual meeting. The apostle Paul could say that although he had not been there, he rejoiced in beholding their order. He did not need to write to them as to their public order. It was right there, and it was a joy to him having heard of the conditions among the saints. It was a faithful minister and one of the local men at Colosse who had been to the apostle and had given him an account of the conditions of the assembly, giving him certain satisfaction because the order of God marked them; they had much beside that that was of God, but they were in danger of admitting the thought that something could be added that had not been presented to them already in Christ. He was concerned about them and it was one of the principal burdens of the apostle to call to mind and point out the danger of anyone practising among them philosophy and vain deceit. That involved what is called the rudiments or elements of the world, and the same word is used to the Galatians in which the word despicable or beggarly is added: "beggarly elements". The Spirit of God pours contempt on these elements, and yet the proposal was that they should be added, as though the Christ who was presented in the gospel was not just the full Christ, but that something was needed additional to Him. That, dear brethren, is what I have in mind. That was in the apostle's mind when he said "I have espoused you unto one man". That Man was Christ without any human ornamentation, without any attempt to make Him different.
At Corinth there was a threefold presentation of Christ, the Son of God. He was preached among them, and Silvanus and Timotheus had part in the preaching at Corinth during those eighteen months in which the apostle laboured in that city, and it was the Son of God that was preached. The Son of God
{528}
is great enough and glorious enough to occupy every position in heaven, to occupy the heart of God without any ornamentation at all, and it is that Person that was preached, as the apostle says, "preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus)". There was a threefold presentation so that there could be no question that the Person presented to these people was the real Christ, and any lover of His would depict Him as His lover did in the Song of Songs. From His head right down to His feet, He is depicted as all glorious, and this was the One of whom this threefold testimony was presented to the Corinthians. It was the real Christ and Satan would spoil that. Eighteen months these three men laboured at least. Paul laboured throughout that period, and Silvanus and Timotheus certainly for part of it. It was a wonderful work of God. The Lord knew beforehand what the result would be and enjoined upon His servant not to fear, that no one would set upon him to harm him, and he laboured among them for a year and a half and presented a real Christ. There is antichrist, but there is only one Christ presented in the gospel, that glorious Person, the Son of God, who was revealed in Paul, and preached in a three-fold way by these great servants in Corinth.
The apostle says, "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ. But I fear lest by any means, as the serpent deceived Eve by his craft, so your thoughts should be corrupted from simplicity as to the Christ". The danger really in mind here was of a clerical nature. There were those who were being trusted among the Corinthians who would appear finally to be corrupters. The apostle says, 'My speech may be what you think it is, rough, uncultured, but not my knowledge'; that is what tells, what a man knows. What a man knows will come out whether it be in broken English or in a polished language; he will find means of
{529}
getting it out. He told some other christians, that he wanted them to understand his knowledge of the mystery of Christ. What a grasp he had of the knowledge of Christ, of God and of the mystery. He said in effect, 'They are men who will corrupt you. They want to add to Christ in your minds. I am combating them. That is what I am aiming at. I want you to have Christ *as He is*, presented to you. I have espoused you to Him'. He said, "I have espoused you unto one man". Satan would ruin that espousal. He would rob Christ of everything. He could not do anything against Him personally, but he would rob Him of the object of His affections, that is, the assembly. The apostle is saying in effect, that the Christ that he had espoused them to is the same when he wrote as He was then. He was lovable then and He is lovable now; He retains His *lovability* to us. Do not allow your minds to receive anything against the Christ who has been presented to you.
I want to show you through the gospels how this worked out in the Lord's lifetime here. The gospels confirm what we learn in the epistles. Education properly begins with the epistles. The epistles were written directly to meet the state in the brethren, and the conditions in certain localities. The gospels were written on a higher plane. The bearing of the gospels is universal extending even to our dispensation, but they afford confirmation in a most striking and living manner of the truth propounded in the epistles. The gospels are books that help us to graduate to spiritual maturity; that is, it is a question of going to them to verify by example what you have learnt in the epistles, and so in regard to this particular matter, the incident in @Mark 4 is striking in its example. It was at eventide, the day was over, and Mark being a levitical evangelist, would understand, that a day's work was a day's work. It is a
{530}
marvellous thought that He who made the day, worked it through. He worked through the whole day. In fact, what good is a day unless something is done in it. It is a blank if something is not done in it. There is, of course, the sabbath which comes in its place, but each day the work is done and the day is named. That is its purpose and God sets the example for us; for six days He laboured. Now here in @Mark 4 the day is finished. The crowd had been there and the disciples had had their part in what transpired; it was a day's work indeed. Even was come, and at the finish of the day, they row to the other side of the sea. Every day has its own character, so the Lord suggests that they should go to the other side, for there was other work to be done.
There was no question of a holiday with the Lord; there was the other side, and it says, "Having sent away the crowd, they take him with them". They understood when to draw the line, an important thing in service; we should know when to stop, when a piece of work is done. Things are to be finished, and it is well that every one serving, every christian should understand when a thing is finished. They had finished this piece of work and they had sent the crowd away. The multitude that listens may, in his mind, add to the glory of the speaker, but here the multitude is sent away, showing that they were learning what to do with them, and it says "they take him with them, as he was, in the ship". There is no attempt to alter anything; it is a true levitical touch; it is the Person Himself. There is no thought of adding to Him at all. He took His place in the likeness of men. He took an ordinary place among men. He was one of them in that sense, but sin apart. He took that public position of being in the ordinary way among men. He took His place there. He was not forced to do it. He took it as never
{531}
intending to ornament Himself, never intending to make Himself in any way attractive so that the natural man could appreciate Him. The disciples were learning this. They were saying virtually, 'We do not want anything different'. That is an immense lesson for every christian to learn. They took Him as He was in the ship, and so as to bring out what He was, we are told that He was asleep at the back of the ship. He was a real man. No doubt He took the opportunity to sleep at a moment when there was nothing else to do. It is important in service to get rest. No one can really take up service in a true levitical sense without a certain rest, a certain repose of mind. The disciples understood that. They saw it there in Jesus; He was asleep. Other work has to be done, and He would be fitted for all the work which would come to Him; He was preparing for it; a very important matter in the service of God. We are dealing with holy things; we are dealing with divine things, with the things of God. They cannot be handled lightly. The physical vessel has to be looked after and that is what you get here.
Now I go on to the third passage to show how all this was cumulative, that the disciples were quietly learning with Jesus alone with themselves. That is how the verse reads, "Jesus alone with themselves". Let us never leave that out, "with themselves". As becoming man, the thought is that He is to have others with Him. He is great enough to fill the universe, to fill eternity, but the divine intent was to come into the economy so as to develop a system of things full of men, replete with humanity according to God. How great a thing it is to be brought into this already; the word is *themselves*, that is, *ourselves*. They themselves or ourselves is a word of importance in the New Testament and I am increasingly fond of it. I would urge every young christian
{532}
here to clothe the brethren with divine thoughts. The father of the prodigal said, "Bring out the best robe and clothe him in it". In a certain sense that is the idea, that you learn to clothe the saints with the best robe, and the more they are clothed with it, the more lovable they are and the more you are likely to love them. Lovableness induces love. Think of the Lord's prophetic words in @Psalm 16: "I have a goodly heritage". He is referring to what He has among the saints. As to them, He says, speaking to God, "To the saints that are on the earth, and to the excellent, thou hast said, In them is all my delight". One has often compared them with the Father's words speaking from heaven, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight", meaning that that glorious Person is so attractive to heaven that the saints also should come in to that same delight, that same affection from heaven. The Lord says in @Psalm 16, "In them is all my delight". What is suggested to the young believer is that the right society is to be found among the people of God. What a heritage God has provided for us, suitable companionship in the saints. And so, as I said, we must never get away from the saints as seen here. "Jesus alone with themselves". But what of Jesus; a moment ago He had been transfigured before them; a magnificent scene had burst upon them; heaven itself came down in this Man and two men out of heaven were speaking with Jesus, and He transfigured. The Spirit of God leaves us with an impression of the transfiguration, saying of the garments of Jesus that they were "exceeding white as snow, such as fuller on earth could not whiten them". Matthew would impress upon us the majesty of the Person, that His countenance was as the sun. Luke says, "The fashion of his countenance became different".
{533}
Such was the scene which burst upon them, and suddenly it was withdrawn and they look round. Now that looking round is to be noticed. The word is, "And suddenly having looked around", as much as to say, 'Is all this gone? Are we not to retain this?' What a change of scenery, and Jesus alone. There is no Moses, no Elijah, no cloud with its brightness shining upon them, no voice. Has that gone for ever? No, it has not gone for ever; it was brought in momentarily to fill their souls with what is to be. We are to have part in that scene. We have had it today already. What a vision it was, and it was intended to convey to these men the power of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ. The scene of glory had gone, but the impression remained indelibly in their minds, for Peter as an old man, about to put off his tabernacle, described it with such beautiful language; it would remain upon his heart for ever, so that there was something that was not gone, and that is the thing, dear brethren, that God presents to us. The impression remains although the glory may disappear for the moment and that is to give character to our service here below. They were aroused, they were looking for something. I suppose their look around was akin to Peter's word as to the tabernacles. We are apt to look round too much. We may think to do better and go into the world. That is what Satan is telling you to do. He knows that if he gets you there, your flesh would be satisfied.
Now I am speaking of looking around; it is common to us to look around especially with such a vision of glory as we have just seen. They looked round and they saw no one, but the impression was there in their hearts to be made indelible by the Spirit, but as regards the outward scene, "Jesus alone". But what of Jesus; they never had seen Him transfigured before. It was that Jesus, that glorious
{534}
Jesus, now as it were apart, who came down from the mountain in outward appearance now as a Man and took His place in service. They looked round and they saw Jesus. It is the public Jesus, the Jesus of testimony, and as soon as He came down it was manifest even as when He was in the boat. He slept, but after He awoke He said, "Silence". Not one sentence, but *one word* from Him allayed all that storm. There was a great calm, and what did they say about Him? They said, 'What manner of man is this?' There is no question of the clothes He wore, no clerical garb would make Him different. 'What manner of man is this?' "Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?" It is a question of the power, not only the word. It is the power that tells. There is no need for frills in relation to the testimony of God, no need for stained glass windows, no need for choirs, not a bit of need for them. It is a question of the power, and not the garb, in which Christ appears. It is the power that tells. His word was the power.
Now to finish I want to point out in John's gospel how this is seen in relation to the Lord's Person, how in His loveliness as a wearied man, for that is what is said of Him, He sat wearied with His journey. He was a real man. He felt tired and He sat thus as He was. It was with no attempt to conceal His tiredness. He was a real Person. The scripture says, "The Father loves the Son". A beautiful statement that is. Of course the Father loves the Son, but the Spirit of God says He loves the Son. "The Father loves the Son". The Corinthians had had Him presented to them and they had been espoused to Him, and now the Spirit of God says, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in His hand". That is to bring out the constitution of the economy of love. The preference is on the part of the Father. John the baptist says.
{535}
"He ... is preferred before me". The Father has preferential love and Jesus came in for preferential love. He is before all. The Father prefers Him. He has the first place in love, one in whom the Father has infinite confidence. He has put all things into His hands. Now that is the setting of this passage, and the Lord knows it well, infinitely so. He never lost view of His service and no one stresses it more than John, who at the same time stresses His Deity. He is seen here moving about, going through Samaria to Galilee, and He is weary in the way. Let our hearts be touched, dear brethren. He is not asleep here. He is asleep on the lake where there is nothing to do, but there is something to do here. A poor destitute, despicable person comes out at the sixth hour of the day. The Lord is weary with the journey, but He is not turning aside from work, and the work came to Him. It had come to Him, and in this very chapter He says to His servants, "I have food to eat which ye do not know". The Lord has to say to us sometimes, that He is going on with something that we do not know of. He says, "My food is that I should do the will of him that has sent me, and that I should finish his work". He was doing it. Although He was wearied with the journey, He was not wearied with the work. Someone sings, 'Have in Thy service rest'. The Lord knew that. What rest He had in that work as He discoursed to that poor sinner who came to know Him as a Saviour.
So He became the evangelist. What rest He has in that way. He says, "Lift up your eyes, and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest ... others have laboured, and ye have entered into their labours". They had to be reminded of it. One needed to go into the city to buy bread, but they all went, and as we are told in @John 8, "Jesus was left alone". It is Jesus alone here with the woman so as to disclose to her the love of God and make her an
{536}
evangelist. In the presence of all this He says to her, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". This instance is to bring out what is there, not simply a person who can perform miracles, but One who is God. That is something that one would point out, dear brethren, in regard to the gospel of John. His ministry is to bring us into the presence of the Deity and it does. That woman was in the presence of Deity. To the outward observer He was a weary man, asking for a drink of water, but He said, "If thou knewest". I should like to know if the suggestion attaching to this is very attractive to you. What does she say? I should like to know. Zacchaeus wanted to know and the Lord valued Him. But the Lord says, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is"; that is, He suggested the presence of the Deity, and that is what God is helping us in. In the knowledge of His Deity we do not want to add to Him. He is too great to be added to, but the education in these passages is to put the thought of it in our souls. We are brought into the presence of Deity, for we are in the presence of One who is God.
Well, that was what I intended to bring before you hoping that the Lord would help us to go on quietly learning more of this One. May God bless it to us.
