{1}
*Pages 1 to 111-"The Person of Christ and the Spirit". Meetings in Washington, U.S.A., 1949. (Volume 179)*.
THE PERSON OF CHRIST AND THE SPIRIT (1)
@John 1: 1 - 18; @1 John 1: 1 - 4
J.T. The thought in mind at this time is to look into the gospel of John, not as a whole, but the earlier chapters, beginning with chapter 1 and running on through chapter 7. In order to make as clear as possible what is in mind it may be said that the first chapter of John contemplates the *Person* of the Lord Jesus. It is in mind that we should compare this chapter with the first epistle of John; not that we should read the whole epistle, but have it in our minds, because the feeling is that the brethren all need to be grounded in the gospel of John just now. It is a time when we need to recognise the authority of the Scriptures, and John affords us instruction as to that. In chapter 1 of John's gospel we read, "In the beginning was the Word". Now while everybody is familiar with that statement, perhaps we shall see presently that we are not so familiar with its import as we had thought, and that we need to compare it with other scriptures that bear on the sonship of Christ, on His Person. John says, by the Spirit, in the first chapter, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God ... . All things received being through him, and without him not one thing received being which has received being". And then it says, "In him was life", and that is the thought we have before us. Now comparing that with @1 John 1: 1 - 4, we read. "That which was from the beginning"; not *He* which was from the beginning, but, "That which was from the beginning".
{2}
These verses in John's epistle are read so that the brethren may have the facts before them. The pronoun here is in the neuter; it is not the personal pronoun as in John's gospel, for it refers to a thing; that is, to the eternal life. Now the brethren will not misunderstand me, but while the Person is in mind, that is to say, "the eternal life" refers to Christ, yet eternal life is not a Person. Some years past, there were certain who regarded eternal life as a Person; they spoke of the personality of eternal life, which was not accurate. Although the Person is in mind, yet the idea in John's epistle is eternal life, whereas in chapter 1 of John's gospel it is the *Word*, the *Logos*, a divine Person. Although in manhood, nevertheless He is a divine eternal Person. The epistle says, "That which was from the beginning", meaning the beginning of Christ down here, whereas of "the beginning" in John l, we cannot say when it was; it says simply "the beginning". "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". It is a Person that is in mind, an eternal Person, and He is going to be spoken of in the gospel of John. But there was more to be said, and the three epistles had to be written to make clear that it was the eternal life that was in mind, that the saints should understand that this was eternal life, and that this life was *in* Christ; "this life is in his Son". That Person could be seen and heard and handled here below. I suggest all that for the brethren to think over. It has been gone over many times, but I think we are still somewhat cloudy as to these great subjects, and the distinction between John's gospel and John's epistles.
J.S.Sr. Is @Genesis 1 the beginning of operations?
J.T. Just so, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth", that is a question of God's operations, but in John it says, "In the beginning was the Word", without any question of operations.
{3}
S.McC. Have you something specific in mind in saying that there is something about the beginning in @John 1 that we may not be so clear about, although we have thought we were fairly clear about it?
J.T. Well, just what we have remarked, that the first chapter of Genesis is a question of operations, the operations of God, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". In John's gospel it is not that, but "In the beginning was the Word". It is not what He is doing, but that *He is* there. And then He was with God, and He was God. After that we have the operations brought in, "all things were made by him".
S.McC. That would help us in that while through grace we have part *with Him* in many things there is a uniqueness about Christ, the Person of Christ, and about His sonship too, that we need to give greater attention to, do you think?
J.T. I do, and therefore the order is as already remarked, "In the beginning was the Word", the *Logos*; that is to say, the Person through whom God's mind is known to us. Whatever God may have to say is made known through that Person, that is to say, the Logos. That is the first thing, and then the second is that "the Word was with God", the Logos was with God; then that He "was God", which brings out that the Lord Jesus is God Himself. There are not two Gods, or three Gods; there is only one God, and He is that God, and the Father is that God, and the Spirit is that God. There is one God but there are three Persons.
J.H.P. I was wondering whether you had in mind that we should appreciate more the glorious Person of Christ as set forth in the first verse or two of the gospel as distinct from His operations, and our knowing Him through His operations?
J.T. We should proceed on these lines, which is the reason for suggesting the first eighteen verses of
{4}
John's gospel. I would add another word to further clarify the position as to the Spirit and the place that we hope He shall have in our conversations. In chapter 7 it is said, "For the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified". That is to say, what we have primarily in mind now is the question of eternal life which is basic, and it refers to what is down here because, as we see in chapter 6 the bread comes down from heaven; whereas chapter 7 speaks of Jesus being glorified, and what happens as a consequence after that. When Christ goes to heaven, that is to say when He is glorified, then the Spirit comes; and that is the point to make clear. It is an important matter in the minds of the brethren generally throughout the world at the present time, and I am not at all leaving that out, but my thought for the moment is that the brethren need the thought of the Lord's sonship, the Person of Christ Himself, and then to understand something of eternal life in that Person. The first epistle of John opens up thoughts as to *the* eternal life. When we come to chapter 7 we shall consider the Spirit specially, although we shall have occasion to speak of Him before, in many respects; but chapter 7 distinctly speaks of Him as here because Jesus is glorified. Moreover in chapter 6 the Lord speaks of "ascending up where he was before". "What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?" We shall have to connect that with the scripture in chapter 7 as to Christ glorified; the receiving of the Spirit stands in that relation; whereas the thought of eternal life stands in relation to the Holy Spirit down here, and to Christ down here as He was in incarnation, and for forty days after His resurrection which is alluded to in John's epistle.
S.J.H. Is the thought that John's gospel shows that it necessitates a divine Person, such a One as we have referred to, that we might have eternal life,
{5}
but when we come to the epistle there is something further, "that ye may know that ye have eternal life".
J.T. That is the idea exactly. First that ye might have it; "God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal". That is the gospel, but the epistle was written, "that ye may know that ye have eternal life", which is a very important point. How many know that? How many know it consciously? We are told in the epistle, "He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself", which alludes to the Spirit, that it is not a question of testimony by the evangelist, or of the gospel, but that the Spirit of God Himself is in the christian.
E.A.L. In @Genesis 24 we read, "And she had said to the servant, Who is the man that is walking in the fields to meet us? And the servant said, That is my master!". The word *that* there, implies that she had the knowledge of Isaac through the operations of the servant, the Spirit typically. Would that help in bringing out what has just been said?
J.T. That is, the Spirit is the witness.
E.A.L. Yes, and He gives the bride the knowledge of the Lord Jesus, typified in Isaac. Thus He comes into this.
J.T. Very good, and that brings up another question that is burning with us, that is, that we must recognise the authority of all Scripture. Every Scripture is inspired of God. There are those who have somewhat reduced the level of the Old Testament, but the Lord intends, I believe, at this present time to remind us that the Scripture cannot be broken, it is one whole.
A.R. We get the same idea in @Romans 8, the Spirit witnesses with our spirit that we are the children of God.
J.T. Yes, just so, witnesses *with our* spirit.
{6}
A.N.W. The Lord touches that point in His statement in @John 7, that "he that believes on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water". He takes the pains to say, "as the scripture has said".
J.T. That is good, I am glad you mentioned that, because it brings up the whole question as to the importance of the Old Testament scriptures in that the Lord Himself quotes them there, and yet you could hardly show exactly the part from which He quoted; we cannot say definitely, and yet we have His word, which is enough. What we are saying tests us as to our faith, because things are on the basis of faith and that is what John is aiming at, believing, and believing what the Lord Jesus has said. His words are authoritative, also the Scriptures.
R.P. In @John 17, speaking of eternal life, Jesus says to the Father, "That they should know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent". Does not eternal life involve the knowledge of divine Persons?
J.T. You will remember that the same thought is found in the epistle of John where John says, "He is the true God and eternal life". That "He" is Christ. So that the Father is called the true God in @John 17, and the Son is called the true God in chapter 5 of John's epistle.
H.B. "Ye search the scriptures, for ye think that in them ye have life eternal, and they it is which bear witness concerning me". That would relate to the Scriptures you speak of. The Lord gives full credit to those.
J.T. That is of prime importance at the present time, because even though it may not be said or formally asserted, there are many who think that the Old Testament is on a lower level than the New, whereas it is not.
{7}
T.N.W. In @Acts 17 we read that the Bereans searched the Scriptures daily. They would be the Old Testament scriptures, would they not?
J.T. Just so, and if you look at the beginning of Acts where the account is given of the introduction of christianity you will find a constant allusion to the Scriptures.
S.J.H. One would like to ask whether *Old Testament* is a scriptural title? Has not the enemy used this title and said, It is old?
J.T. Perhaps so. It is not a testament in the ordinary sense in which the word is used; it is a question of testimony; the word 'testament' is based on the idea of testimony. So that if we use the term, it means that we have a testimony in the Old Testament and that that testimony is to Christ; "and they are they which testify of me". @John 5: 39. "And having begun from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself", @Luke 24: 27.
S.M. In @Acts 17 we read, "And according to Paul's custom he went in among them, and on three sabbaths reasoned with them from the scriptures, opening and laying down that the Christ must have suffered".
J.T. "Opening and laying down", just so; the opening up of things and then the laying them down with authority; that is the idea, the way we should read the Scriptures. A brother opens up something from his Bible, but then he is laying it down by the Spirit, and thus it is authoritative. I hope we have something of that here now.
Rem. When the apostles went with the Lord through the cornfields, the Pharisees criticised; they wanted to bring in bondage, and the scripture quoted by the Lord was from the Old Testament, "Have ye not read", suggests that the Old Testament is
{8}
there to give the brethren liberty, especially in connection with addressing the Spirit.
J.T. Yes. It does too, it does give liberty. It is wonderful really how liberty is coming in amongst the brethren on this very point, because the Lord is really resentful that we have been neglectful in this matter.
V.C.L. Peter refers to the Spirit of Christ in the prophets. He refers to the prophets and what they testified, he speaks of the Spirit of Christ that was in them, testifying to the sufferings of Christ, and the glory after these. Would that not help our minds to see the true value of the prophetic word in the Old Testament?
J.T. Showing that it is the full divine thought of the Spirit of Christ which was in them. It is remarkable.
A.B. Would the apostle Peter in @2 Peter 1: 21 be referring to the whole scope of Scripture, when he says that "holy men of God spake under the power of the Holy Spirit"?
J.T. Just so. There were no Scriptures when the book of Acts was written except the Old Testament. The Spirit of God began immediately to quote the Old Testament to confirm what had happened.
A.B. The Lord says in @Luke 16, "If they hear not Moses and the prophets, not even if one rise from among the dead will they be persuaded".
L.L.P. The Lord said, as recorded in @Luke 24: 25, "O senseless and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken!". What you are stressing is helpful, because the Lord speaks, in verse 44 of the same chapter, about Moses and the prophets and the Psalms. It seems to make it unmistakably the Old Testament scriptures.
J.T. Quite so. The whole of @Luke 24 confirms what we have been saying, and I thought in referring to chapter 7 of John that that should be one thing
{9}
in our minds. But we do not want to be diverted from chapter 1. We read the eighteen verses which bring out the idea of the only-begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father having declared the Father.
A.I. Do you distinguish between @John 1 where it says, "*He* was in the beginning", and the epistle where it says, "That which was from the beginning"?
J.T. Yes, because the pronoun in the epistle is the neuter pronoun "that"; whereas in the first chapter of the gospel it is the personal pronoun "*He*"; it is the Person that is in mind, "In the beginning was the *Word*". It is not some thought about Him, it is the *Word* Himself. You cannot say what beginning that was, but we should let it have its full scope with us; it is "the beginning". "The Word was with God", that is a further thought, and then, "the Word was God". What can we get greater than that?
A.R. In John's epistle it is in relation to the incarnation.
J.T. It is the incarnation, it is the beginning of Christ as here in flesh, to be handled and seen; and what was seen was eternal life, it was there with the evidence.
W.P. @John 1: 14 says, "And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us". The beginning of the epistle would refer to the Word becoming flesh.
J.T. It is the same thing exactly historically, and we contemplate His glory.
Ques. Do I understand that the epistles were written before the gospel?
J.T. It is generally so understood. Probably one of the last scriptures written was the gospel of John.
A.N.W. Does not @Genesis 1 agree with verse 3 of our chapter? "All things received being through him".
J.T. Quite so; it is very remarkable; not one thing that was made, was made without Christ.
{10}
A.R. @John 1: 2 is not in relation to anything at all.
J.T. We are not told anything about it. We do well just to meditate upon it and leave it, and let it have its full place in our minds, I say, in our minds, because with the Word, it is a question of the mind, not of the affections.
S.J.H. Is there a suggestion of counsel in it? Would not the very name 'Word' indicate that something is going to be conveyed?
J.T. That is the idea. The *Logos* as I understand from others, means what God *has* said or communicated, or *may* say, which covers the whole thing, the divine mind; not simply the affections, but the whole mind of God.
L.H.B. Does it carry with it the thought of authority? You mentioned that earlier.
J.T. It would indeed, it is God's authority.
B.W. Does the *Word* as used in reference to Christ here have any link with the Old Testament Scriptures? Has it any reference to His speaking in the Old Testament times?
J.T. Well, it might have, I would not deny that. "In the beginning"; that is the great idea; the greatest idea we can have as to the mind.
F.N.W. The hymn was changed from, 'Thou art the everlasting Word' to 'Thou art the blest incarnate Word' (`11:1).
J.T. Well, it is rightly changed, 'Thou art the blest incarnate Word', states the truth of the whole matter.
R.P. Would you say that Paul supports that when he says, "And *he* is before all", in @Colossians 1, as he meditates on the glory of Christ's Person? Would that antedate @Genesis 1? He says, "And *he* is before all, and all things subsist together by him".
{11}
J.T. "By him" is instrumental. That confirms what we are saying.
S.McC. Is the thought in naming Him *the Word* to keep before us in these last days that, while the Person has come into a subordinate position which the revelation of God required, yet that Person is none less than God; He is on equality with God, and He is God, and He was God?
J.T. That is what one thought we ought to see very clearly, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God", that is, association between divine Persons. Then "the Word was God". There are not two Gods, but the Word has the same place as God Himself, in fact He is God.
Ques. Does that go back before time?
J.T. Oh, it must be eternity. You cannot make a beginning to Christ as to His Person. In the beginning He *was*. The word *beginning* does not refer to Him at all, as to His Person. He is a divine eternal Person. He is God.
S.McC. As John's gospel is about to open up to us the economy of love in which divine Persons are to be viewed, it is important that at the start we should get this word before our minds as to the Person of Christ, is it not?
J.T. That is what I had in mind.
A.N.W. So that as you said the *Logos*, the Word, is to be in our minds. So far as I recall it is not referred to outside the verses we have read in this gospel and in the opening verses of Luke. Does John then proceed to engage our affections with that Person?
J.T. Well, no doubt he does, but it is really a question of the mind.
A.N.W. I was thinking how important it is to hold that Person rightly in our minds, now presented as in love.
{12}
H.B. Is this title not mentioned in @Revelation 19? It says there that His name is called The Word of God.
J.T. Yes, it is the same word.
E.G.McA. Would not this first verse stamp as a lie all the statements made by men who say that Christ emanated from the Father, and all that kind of thing that is in the creeds?
J.T. Quite so. The creeds are all full of error. But we are dealing with the real facts as to the Lord's Person, and we cannot say too much in impressing the brethren, that we believe on the Lord Jesus Christ as God; He is God.
G.H. In @Revelation 22 the Lord says, "*I* am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end". What is the thought there?
J.T. Well, it is simply what we are saying. The Alpha and the Omega refers to the Greek language, the beginning of it and the end of it. That is, Christ is that, He is the beginning and the end, but personally He has no beginning and no end. That is our God; and to refer again to the question of love, that is the God we love. I think now we had better keep to the question of mind, that our minds are to become intelligent, because our minds are not nearly active enough. There is the power of the Spirit, the Spirit has come in to act on our minds. Nobody can deal with the points set out by men; they have not the truth; but it is our business to have the truth and to insist on the truth. It is a question of the mind. God has given us a mind that we should know the truth, "Ye shall know the truth", the Lord says, "and the truth shall set you free".
J.H.P. So that these first two verses should be kept in mind whenever we are reading the gospel of John.
{13}
J.T. That is what I am thinking. These eighteen verses are wonderful verses; we come now to verse 14, to what the Lord became, "The Word became flesh", speaking to us of the ability of a divine Person to change. The Word became something that He had not been before, not that He personally is something else, because He says, "Before Abraham was, I am". There is no change in Him, personally, but He has become something else. Why should He not? A divine Person can do that; He can become something else, and that something is flesh; hence He has taken flesh; "the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us and we have contemplated his glory". Well, there it is in these first fourteen verses; let us go in for that.
L.L.P. God says to Moses in his moment of hesitancy, "I AM THAT I AM", @Exodus 3: 14. Would that have any bearing on it?
J.T. That is Exodus coming into John, but it does not come up to John. That is Jehovah saying that He is what He is, and of course we revel in that thought, but when we come to John's gospel we get a divine Person formally stating that in the beginning He was, and He was with God, "the Word was with God, and the Word was God". That is a greater statement than that in Exodus.
Rem. The greatness of the Person is emphasised in the opening verses of the first chapter of Hebrews, as well as here. The writer of that book also seems to have the greatness of the Person in mind. He says, "God having spoken in many parts and in many ways formerly to the fathers in the prophets, at the end of these days has spoken to us in the person of the Son, whom he has established heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds; who being the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance, and upholding all things by the word of his power, having made by himself the purification of
{14}
sins, set himself down on the right hand of the greatness on high".
J.T. We are reading Paul in the epistle to the Hebrews, as he is no doubt the author, and he is dealing with instrumentality, that is to say, God has an instrument that He is using, and that instrument is the Son; it says, "God ... has spoken to us in the person of the Son". It is God Himself that is acting, but God in Son.
S.J.H. Is it important to keep those names in the right setting? It does not say, In the beginning was the Word and the Word was the Son; it says, "The Word was God".
J.T. Just so. We do get the Son in Hebrews, but it is not on the same level really as what we get in John l, because in Hebrews it is a question of instrumentality as regards what God is doing. He touches on the idea of the Son, that the Son is the instrument through which things are done, but it is God Himself that is doing the thing, though as the Son. He is doing them as the Son.
A.D. It is all in relation to how God is speaking, is it not, the different ones whom God has used in speaking?
J.T. That is right. He has spoken by the prophets, and now He is speaking "in the person of the Son". It brings out the greatness of the Speaker.
A.R. In @John 1 you do not get the incarnation until verse 14?
J.T. Exactly. Verse 14 is the beginning, "And the Word became flesh", that is the beginning of things. That of course leads up to John's epistle.
A.R. So you really get sonship in verse 14 for the first time?
J.T. It says, "And we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father", and then it goes on to speak of the only-begotten Son. It is a question of the sonship of Christ.
{15}
A.R. Which helps us to understand the idea of the incarnation, does it not? What was before that we do not know.
E.P. In the contemplation of the greatness of the Lord Jesus here, we are to hold the other divine Persons equally in our minds. Does the stressing of the greatness of Christ here as the Word help us as to this?
J.T. Well, of course, "the Word was God", and therefore "God" as being all three Persons; the three Persons are included in that. It is not the Father, it is God, "the Word was God".
W.W.M. In speaking of our minds, have we to remember that there is such a thing as an uncreated sphere; and that the operations in Genesis in the creation come from One in the uncreated sphere?
J.T. Very good, the word confirms that; He is gone up beyond all the heavens; that is, into an uncreated sphere.
Ques. How should we understand verse 4 of John l, "In him was life, and the life was the light of men"?
J.T. It is what is called a reciprocal proposition, that is to say, you can say the life was the light of men, or you can say the light of men was the life. It is to show that it is a question of men, not of angels, nor of any other beings. The life refers to men, and we are the men. That is to say, in Christ was light for men, and that light was life, and it is for men, which of course includes women; it is a question of the human race. That is a wonderful thing that we may dwell upon, that God selected men for the working out of all His thoughts.
Ques. He refers to the men later in the gospel, does He not, "the men whom thou gavest me"?
J.T. Quite so, but that is more a matter of development in men, that they are not children. But the word *men* by itself includes the whole race.
{16}
S.McC. It has been said that we are limited to the terms of the economy; but while we are governed by the light of the economy, would not this scripture remind us that while the Lord Jesus and the Spirit are in the economy in a subordinate way, there is personally a greatness about Them that we are not to forget?
J.T. We should ever remember the word 'mystery'; "the mystery of piety is great". We hardly know what that means, I feel it for myself that I know so little about mystery, "Behold, I tell you a mystery", Paul says. We should be mysterious persons; the world does not understand us at all. We know so much as we do because we are selected by God to have this knowledge, the knowledge of Himself. And so Paul says, I want you to know how much I know about mystery. That is what he says to the Ephesians. Well, I say, I do not know what Paul knew but I would like to. That is what I think we should have before us, this idea of mystery.
Rem. In that connection our minds should help us. It speaks of the mind of the Spirit.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. "By whom also he made the worlds", @Hebrews 1: 2. How are we to understand that?
J.T. Well, that refers to instrumentality; that is to say, it is God that is doing it, but it is really God in the economy, and God in the economy is using one of the Persons or two of Them. Certainly in @Hebrews 1 it is the Son.
W.McK. What is the distinction between what we are reading here, "the Word was God", and @1 John 5, "He is the true God"?
J.T. We have just been saying that the same expression is found in @John 17. The Father is said to be the true God there, but the Son is said to be the true God in John's epistle. Well, we have to accept that, it shows the mystery of the thing. I
{17}
think we should understand the thought of mystery; we should be humble about it, and be ready for mystery, and for inscrutability. It says, "the mystery of piety [or godliness] is great. God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit, has appeared to angels, has been preached among the nations, has been believed on in the world, has been received up in glory". Well, these are wonderful things; they are a mystery, but they are known to piety. What do I know about them? That is what everyone should ask himself.
J.H.P. Would you say something on the sentence, "the Word was with God"? You have spoken of "the Word was God".
J.T. Well, it is just to bring out the society, so to speak, the social feeling of the association between the Father and the Son, if we are to bring the economy into it. He was with God. 'With' is a peculiar preposition; this Person called the Word or the *Logos* was with God, that is the idea of association of the Persons. The word 'association' is the only one I can use to make it clear what existed between these Persons. But then the Spirit of God does not stop at that. He says, "The Word was God". In the Roman economy, as I understand, there were three emperors at one time all on the same level, all of the same importance. If one said anything the others said it. Well, that is used just as an illustration of what we are saying as to Deity, that the three Persons are equal, They are equal actually in Their abstract relations.
A.D. Would that bring in the thought of unity, "the Word was with God"?
J.T. The word unity is not great enough.
A.N.W. I was thinking of the expression used by Mr. Darby, 'Distinctiveness of personality'.
J.T. We might say of ourselves that we are united or of one mind about things, but you cannot very
{18}
well say that about divine Persons. The matter is too great for that.
F.N.W. Would it be more in order to connect the word unity with the economies into which God may have entered, whether in creation, or in the present economy? We are speaking now of the association before any economy was entered upon.
J.T. Yes, and it is all abstract, it is a question of dealing with matters abstractly.
S.McC. So that the prepositions in these first eighteen verses are really unique, are they not? The prepositions are divinely selected. You said years ago in regard to the controversy in connection with our Lord's sonship that the prepositions in these eighteen verses were like a sword guarding the Person of Christ, and the preposition '*with*' to which you have been referring involves what you have been saying-association.
J.T. That is so.
A.N.W. And is not the excellence of wisdom seen in the fact that it says, "In the beginning was the Word", not, In the beginning was the Son?
J.T. Just so.
S.J.H. Do we understand then that there are three divine Persons known as the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, yet there is one God?
J.T. Paul says, "Yet to us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things, and *we* for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and *we* by him". We might add the Spirit, but the Spirit is not mentioned there; though in truth He is there. Therefore there is nothing in that to militate against what we are saying.
S.J.H. In thinking of the Father then, it would not include the three Persons?
J.T. Oh, no; the Father is distinct as one Person, "one God, the Father". The Father there is viewed as God, but not as three Persons. God is entitled
{19}
to that name and that is the way John generally uses the word *Father*.
Ques. Would it be right to say that these terms have their significance only in view of the incarnation?
J.T. Just so; the incarnation makes it all very simple. God is pleased to make it simple for us, and yet we are feeling the need of learning the mysteries so as to understand inscrutability, to get some idea of inscrutability.
Ques. When the Lord says, "I and the Father are one", is that in relation to His operations here in the economy?
J.T. Quite so, because what is in mind is what is being done.
V.C.L. Does not the use of certain terms such as the word 'beginning' in verse 1 show the extraordinary grace of the Spirit of God to encourage us to understand as much as we can with our minds?
J.T. That is right, and the Spirit of God is here this afternoon just to help us on these lines, and if we are kept in His mind we shall get help, because we are dealing with the greatest things, and we are to see how we can take them into our minds, being humble about it, and getting to God about it. Prayer is a great thing. Luke would go with John in regard to that, for Luke is constantly alluding to prayer; he says of the Lord, that He prayed all night.
R.P. Would you say a little more as to the prepositions our brother referred to?
J.T. You tell them, Mr. McC., about those prepositions.
S.McC. I am just thinking of what you yourself had drawn attention to in that article, *The Names of Divine Persons*, which was a means of help to the whole assembly. You pointed out that the preposition 'with' in verse 1 involved equality, 'alongside of'; whereas the preposition 'in' in verse 18, "in the
{20}
bosom of the Father", indicates that the position was arrived at by motion towards, and this alludes to the Lord in manhood, not in the pre-incarnate conditions of Deity.
R.P. That is very beautiful.
J.T. Yes, it is very beautiful, and we should like to see the sisters coming into all this because it is for them; they belong to the race, designated 'man', the kind of people that the revelation is for, "In him was life, and the life was the light of men", including women and children, whatever they are, they are all included in it. The sisters here today are here to learn and to get in the truth with the brothers and be like them as far as they may be according to divine directions.
J.K.P. Mr. Darby's note to verse 2 refers to, 'such a one as that'. Is that to emphasise His Person and that He was eternal? Can you say anything more to help us in the matter of the control of our minds as giving them over to the contemplation of so great a Person?
J.T. Well, I think the word *Logos* is what is in mind. Not anyone of us here perhaps knows much about Greek; but it is clear that what we have been speaking of is clearing up our minds as to this question. When we sit down to the Lord's supper, we want our affections to be active, but the mind is active even there; it is 'For the calling of Me to mind', the Lord says. So that we should have our minds taken up with these things, and so should be able to speak accurately as to them.
J.S.Sr. Is that why the first operation was, "Let there be light"?
J.T. Well, that is first, the idea of the day, that things are to be clear. And so in John's epistle, we are told that God is in the light, and that "if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another".
{21}
A.A.T. We have been talking about abstract things, but is it not difficult for our minds to take in abstract things?
J.T. I do not think so, if we accustom our minds to it. It is a question of how you have used your mind and how I have used mine. Then we were talking just now about sisters, are they using their minds? Because God has given them minds too, and they are to be used. It is very striking that the Lord's supper is said to be 'for the calling of Me to mind'; that is what the Lord said. The same word is used as regards the bread *and* the cup.
E.P. Is it your thought that the great teaching involved in these first three verses underlies all the teaching in this gospel?
J.T. That is right, those three wonderful verses.
{22}
THE PERSON OF CHRIST AND THE SPIRIT (2)
@John 3: 1 - 21, 35, 36
J.T. What is in mind now is to look into the matter of new birth. We are therefore treating of the operational side of the truth. We did not treat of that in our consideration of chapter 1, because we were speaking of the Person of the Lord Jesus as set before us there by the Spirit. There is no doubt that the Lord has been with us in this great matter, the greatest matter, we might say, that we could have before us. Now we are undertaking to look into what we may call the operations of the three Persons of the Godhead. The Spirit, specially, is alluded to in the operation of new birth; then the Father Himself, and the Son in verses 35 and 36, the Father having given all to be in the hands of the Son, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand. He that believes on the Son has life eternal, and he that is not subject to the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him". In this section, as has been remarked, the subject in the main is eternal life, new birth leading up to it. Yet we have the idea of the Son of man being in heaven, so that we are still speaking of that line and the operational services rendered to us from there, but when we come to the real subject of eternal life, that is to say, formation brought forward in it, we have to see what comes down from heaven, the operations in relation to new birth and eternal life having to do with what is on the earth. This will require much inquiry and perhaps questioning, but what has been remarked I am sure is right, that new birth leading up to eternal life, and eternal life itself, have to do with the operations of the Spirit as here. When we come to chapter 7 it is the glorification of the Son of God
{23}
so that the Spirit might come down formally, but that is not said here.
S.J.H. Does the thought of the wind blowing where it listeth give an indication of the sovereignty of a divine Person?
J.T. Certainly, the sovereignty of the Spirit of God.
A.R. Does verse 2 of @Genesis 1 suggest the idea of the operations of the Spirit? It is said that He hovered over the face of the deep.
J.T. Well, yes, hovering over the face of the deep, though there is not much there in the sense of operations. These are already stated in the fact that in the beginning God created the heavens and the earth; that is the great operational thought of God.
S.McC. Is there something in the fact that this matter of new birth comes up with a man that should have known better? He was hindered intellectually in his apprehension of the truth, and therefore the necessity for emphasising the Spirit's sovereign action in the new birth.
J.T. Not only that, but he evidently was not a studious man, he was ignorant, really inexcusably ignorant, and I believe that has a great application at the present time. Why should we be ignorant when things are made so plain, and there is so much ministry, large volumes of the *Collected Writings* and all that? They are available to us, why do we not read them?
S.McC. The Lord referred to him as the teacher of Israel.
J.T. He was the teacher of Israel, and the Lord says, "Thou ... knowest not these things!" He was ignorant really of the truth; he should have known the book of Ezekiel.
C.A.M. In that connection would you say that the work of God had caused him at least to appreciate another teacher in coming to the Lord?
{24}
J.T. Yes, but it is a poor affair that he does not know more than he does. We all are exposed to that sort of thing, we should know what is current, and we should not be saying things that are not right. Not that I am saying a word against Nicodemus beyond what should be said, but he was not like Nathanael, who was a quick learner and did not miss anything; the Lord credited him with it too.
W.S. Luke in the opening of his gospel refers to himself, when he says, "It has seemed good to *me* also, accurately acquainted from the origin with all things".
J.T. That is very good. Now to get at the real point of the new birth here is of first rate importance. Whether the brethren understand it or not is a question, because it is the Spirit's operation in a peculiar way. It says that the wind blows where it will; the wind is used as a figure, we have to understand that things are happening that are not always intelligible. The Lord says, "Thou ... canst not tell". That was not said of Nicodemus only, because in this matter nobody can tell; it is the sovereign action of the Spirit. You cannot just tell exactly what it means, but still it is there.
Ques. Would that fit in with the thought you were expressing this morning of mystery? "Thou ... canst not tell".
J.T. Well, it does.
S.McC. The Lord said to Nicodemus, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that which we know, and we bear witness of that which we have seen, and ye receive not our witness". The Lord is speaking in the dignity of His own intelligence, not as identified with the Jews. There was a matter that had been laid before them, and the Lord says, You do not receive the witness.
J.T. And I suppose the Lord means there, that He is not simply accusing Nicodemus, but the class
{25}
that he represented, the Pharisees. He belonged to a characteristic class, as it were.
S.McC. The Lord introduces a class that does know. He says, "We".
E.A.L. We would like to hear more about the new birth. Our natural birth is a birth which has an end in death, while new birth entering into eternal life has no end in death.
J.T. That is good; only I would not link on what does not end in death so much with new birth. The full thought is eternal life, not new birth, if we are speaking of what does not end in death.
E.A.L. I had in mind what the Lord said in @John 17, "And this is the eternal life, that they should know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent".
J.T. Well, that is a question of knowing, but there is more than merely knowing about what does not end in death. That is in chapter 10. The Lord says there, in speaking of the sheep, "My Father who has given them to me is greater than all, and no one can seize out of the hand of my Father". That is the security we have as in the hands of the Father and the Son. The idea conveyed in *new birth* is better expressed by "born anew", born *entirely afresh*, from the *top*, really. That is to say, an entirely different origin altogether from natural birth.
A.N.W. Judging by the meaning of that word "anew", which the Lord used, its import should have prevented Nicodemus from making such a suggestion as that a man return to his mother's womb. It is *born anew* from an entirely new source, it deals with the source as new entirely.
J.T. Yes, therefore the subject is very clearly opened up, "There was a man from among the Pharisees, his name Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews; he came to him by night, and said to him, Rabbi,
{26}
we know that thou art come a teacher from God, for none can do these signs that thou doest unless God be with him". Well, that is so far so good, but then the Lord says to him, "Verily, verily", an expression which occurs about twenty-four times in John's gospel, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except any one", not simply a man, but any one; "Except any one be born anew he cannot see the kingdom of God". The point the Lord is making is what a man can see, and then what a man can enter into, whether he can see the kingdom of God, and whether he can enter into it. That is what I feel should guide our minds now; it is a question of the kingdom of God and what the operations here have in mind in that relation.
Ques. Was Nicodemus a subject of new birth?
J.T. What he said was very vague, and shallow. Even in chapter 19 his part is not very brilliant. He and Joseph of Arimathaea are linked together there. Then in chapter 7 he said a word of defence for the Lord, but at the same time there is a lack in him. Over against him Nathanael learned quickly, he took things up and learned them quickly. We should not be ever learning and never coming to the knowledge of the truth.
J.H.P. Would you say a word as to the expression, "Except anyone be born anew, he cannot see the kingdom of God"?
J.T. Why does the Lord allude to that? It is a question of the moral sway of God in these circumstances; that God has to say to all these matters. You must listen to what He has to say; I think that is what is meant without going into it too much. The Lord just touches on it, as if He would say, 'Nicodemus, you need to see the kingdom of God, and you need to enter into the kingdom of God too'. I think the Lord meant that he really was a subject of the work of God, but a very poor one, a very
{27}
poor learner; and we might say that we are all in that class, very poor learners.
V.C.L. Would it be in your mind that, with the place the Spirit is gaining in our hearts, this matter of new birth and seeing and entering the kingdom should be much clearer than it has been before?
J.T. I would say that; much clearer, because we are very hazy; not that I want to be critical of the dear brethren, because I am including myself; we are very hazy about things, and yet there is wonderful instruction available to us. It is remarkable the amount of ministry that the Lord is giving and has been giving all through these times of the revival up till now. There is a great need of those who can lead, who know what to do and what to say, great need everywhere, so that the brethren should not be hazy about things.
Rem. Paul says to Timothy, "Think of what I say, for the Lord will give thee understanding in all things".
J.T. Just so, "the Lord will give thee understanding". We are to think on these things, we are to consider them and to consider the ministers, as to whether they are able to say what is right.
V.C.L. Is there any point in the fact that Nicodemus is referring to the Lord's own signs, and the Lord immediately turns his mind to the Spirit's operations?
J.T. Well, the Lord opened up the whole matter, a wonderful opening up of things in relation to the sovereign action of the Spirit; that is what this chapter is. The Lord said to Nicodemus, "The wind blows where it will, and thou hearest its voice, but knowest not whence it comes and where it goes: thus is every one that is born of the Spirit". Now there are references to three matters; being born of the Spirit and then seeing and entering into the kingdom of God. Then, "Nicodemus answered and
{28}
said to him. How can these things be?" He was alluding to nature, of course. Jesus answered and said to him, "Thou"; the 'thou' is emphatic, "Thou art the teacher of Israel and knowest not these things! Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that which we know, and we bear witness of that which we have seen, and ye receive not our witness. If I have said the earthly things to you, and ye believe not, how, if I say the heavenly things to you, will ye believe?" The Lord here is not dealing only with Nicodemus, He is dealing with his class, the kind of people he is linked with. Now, Nicodemus must think over this matter of heavenly things, and consider what it means, and we can very well do the same. Then in verse 13, "And no one has gone up into heaven, save he who came down out of heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, thus must the Son of man be lifted up, that everyone who believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal". So that God has reached His great point in eternal life already, in this verse. At the same time it is a question of the Son of man going up into heaven, and being in heaven, and what could Nicodemus say about that? What can we say about it, because it is a mysterious thing, it is a mystery, that the Lord should be in heaven as the Son of man, and yet He is here on earth.
S.J.H. Would not the fact that the wind has blown our way accelerate our ability to learn more quickly? These wonderful things as to the Holy Spirit and the current ministry, have come our way, and they are really ours. The wind blows where it will, and many have not heard it, apparently, but we have, and one delights in it, that it is a sovereign matter of the Spirit of God.
J.T. Now we have to just touch on things and move on. It says, "And no one has gone up into
{29}
heaven, save he who came down out of heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven". That is a mysterious thing that the Lord could say that of Himself. We have to understand that there is mystery attached to His Person. He could say that He was the Son of man in heaven and yet He was here on earth, talking to Nicodemus.
S.McC. In that connection it has been said questioningly sometimes in regard to this matter of addressing the Spirit. How can we address the Spirit, a Person within us? Is that not putting limits on a divine Person? We cannot limit Him to just what He is as in us.
J.T. Just so; and so when the Lord was here, you could not speak of Him or to Him as you would speak to an ordinary man, because you could not fathom what was there. The same is true now, the presence of the Spirit of God is unfathomable, we cannot understand it. People around us do not understand what we are talking about, they are outside of it; but we have light and I am sure that the Lord is pleased to see us here this afternoon and all interested.
A.R. The Spirit of God is here objectively and subjectively at the same time, is He not?
J.T. Well, quite so; He can be viewed objectively, as you can speak of anybody objectively at a distance from you. You can apprehend Him and speak of Him in that objective way.
R.P. Would you say something as to "that which is born of the Spirit is spirit"?
J.T. It would show that there is a wonderful character of operations going on here on earth just now. Presently it will cease when the dispensation ceases, but there is something going on in the assembly now that we can name as of the Spirit, of which we can say that it is *spirit*. "That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the
{30}
Spirit is spirit". We can name it. We might say that the word 'spirit' applies to nearly everybody in this room.
F.N.W. In the preceding chapter the Lord did not trust Himself to them; but does this matter of spirit, "that which is born of the Spirit is spirit", establish a trustworthy base upon which these other things can be built?
J.T. The Lord could not trust them, because the idea of spirit was not there; there was just ignorance as to all that was going on, but Nicodemus was not like that, there was something in him that the Lord could address as spirit. I believe He appreciated Nicodemus in that sense. So that he is seen again in chapter 7, and he goes right through to chapter 19.
F.C. Do you think he was hindered because he was not ready to leave the Sanhedrim, he was not ready to leave his religious position?
J.T. Just so, but still there was something in him. He represents a class of people who are not against us or the truth; indeed there is something in them that indicates that God is working with them, and we have to be very patient with them, so that they may come to light at last. Nicodemus did come into the light at last, in chapter 19.
A.B. Elisha asks for a double portion of Elijah's spirit, I wondered whether that would bear on what has been said about the Spirit being within us and alongside of us?
J.T. Elisha wanted to get a good supply of the spirit of Elijah, and Elijah said, "If thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so to thee". You have to be alert to get this.
Ques. The Lord speaks first of seeing, then of entering into the kingdom of God. Would that suggest movement in intelligence?
{31}
J.T. Seeing is of course an action of the eye, and entering is an action of the mind. Unless one is born anew he has no sight at all, he does not see anything. But then he must be born of water and of Spirit to enter into the kingdom of God. There are the two things, water and Spirit. Born of water is a sort of negative or cleansing idea and of the Spirit is a positive idea, meaning that new birth has taken place and there is the sense of being in spirit, as the Lord says, "that which is born of the Spirit is spirit". That is what we want to get at, whether we are all in this concrete thing here today. It is the idea of the Spirit given to this one and that one. Perhaps everybody here today has the Spirit, but if not he may be born anew. We are therefore dealing with positive things this afternoon.
S.McC. Does "That which is born of the Spirit is spirit", involve a change of heart? I was thinking of your allusion to @Ezekiel 36.
J.T. The word there is "I will give you a new heart". It is to that the Lord alludes when He says to Nicodemus, "Thou art the teacher of Israel and knowest not these things!" Nicodemus ought to have known these things.
G.W. Do you think Nathanael as having come from Cana of Galilee would be characterised by having witnessed the glory the Lord had displayed in that place? It says at the end of the gospel that Nathanael was of Cana and that is where the Lord manifested His glory. I am endeavouring to link it on with what you said about Nathanael as a quick learner, and connecting it with the glory and the Spirit's operations.
J.T. Nathanael became an apostle, you know, he became an apostle in the Lord's ministry, he became quite a distinguished man, but Nicodemus did not. The need for those who lead is very great. Nathanael
{32}
began to lead; he was one of the seven that went with Peter going to fish, but he became a useful man afterwards. The Lord said to Nicodemus, "We speak that which we know", and the point is that we should get to know things and convey them to others, because there is so much need of teaching.
J.H.P. Is there the thought of each divine Person operating sovereignly in this chapter? First the Spirit, as typified in the wind, and then in verse 13, "he who came down out of heaven", and then in verse 16, "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son". Is there a progressive suggestion in that way?
J.T. That is right. The three divine Persons are seen operating here. We are dealing with the operational side now, and the point is that eternal life comes into view. The Lord Himself speaks of it but He says, *God*; that "God so loved the world". In saying that, He is speaking about eternal life.
Ques. What is the difference between being born of the Spirit, and the Spirit coming upon them in @Acts 19?
J.T. The Spirit coming upon us, is when we get sealed. It is when you get the Spirit that the Spirit comes upon you. Nicodemus had not got thus far clearly.
Ques. Would you preach about being born of the Spirit in the gospel?
J.T. I would say that in some sense you must, I would put it to people who were listening to the truth. You must see to it that you are born anew. It is a good question to raise with people, are they born again? But with that you want to be sure they have the Spirit too; you want to raise the question. Are you sealed with the Spirit?
Rem. Paul says, in @Acts 19, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit?"
{33}
J.T. Just so, and they said they did not know the Spirit was there at all; they did not know the Spirit was being given.
J.H.P. Is it significant that the reference to life eternal comes after all three divine Persons have been referred to as operating?
J.T. I think, on the whole that it is the objective presentation of the subject of eternal life in this section. When we come to chapter 6 we get the subjective side of things, because it is a question of what comes down from heaven; "the bread of God is he who comes down out of heaven". Here we have the actual operations of the three Persons in the objective sense. We have to go to chapter 6 to get the real thought of eternal life as down here in the sense of the bread of God coming down from heaven.
S.M. The question of believing enters in here, does it not? "He that believes".
J.T. Yes. The principle running through John's gospel is faith, "Why do you not believe me?" the Lord says. We are prone to be just literal in our conversations, and remarks, and questions.
L.L.P. Would the point of believing be stressed by the fact that in the passage read there is a penalty for unbelief?
J.T. In verses 35 and 36, you mean. "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand. He that believes on the Son has life eternal, and he that is not subject to the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him". It is a terrible thing that comes out there, and it is in connection with things being given into the hands of the Son by the Father. This question comes up, that a man may not be subject to the Son and hence not have eternal life at all, and in that case the wrath of God abides on him, one of the most solemn things in the whole book.
{34}
V.C.L. Is it right to say that those who are born again shall surely receive the Holy Spirit from the Father, because of this being the Spirit's dispensation?
J.T. Quite so. Some say, that there will be people who are the subjects of the work of God in the present period, who will not get the Spirit at all, and will not come into the assembly, I do not think that is so. While the Spirit is here every person who is the subject of the work of God will come into the assembly. It is a very comforting thought.
{35}
THE PERSON OF CHRIST AND THE SPIRIT (3)
@John 4: 1 - 30
J.T. We finished yesterday with an allusion to verses 35 and 36 of chapter 3, and there can be no doubt that chapter 4 opens up the position of the Son's appointment to all things as set forth there. Here the feminine side of humanity comes into view, so that we have to consider how the feminine side is worked out in relation to eternal life and also in relation to the service of God. The operational side is, of course, in view still, and will be throughout, the subjects being taken up in perfect order. Now speaking of the feminine side, we have had it already in chapter 2, but it is taken up here clearly in relation to the vessel. The Lord is seen here as having all things given into His hands, as it says in chapter 3, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand. He that believes on the Son has life eternal, and he that is not subject to the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him". So that now the Person who is the great Operator in the economy is before us, and that is the Son. The mind travels to @Genesis 1 in view of all that has happened, and the area in which the happenings occurred, that is, the expanse; the immense expanse that God has opened up as the sphere of His operations. The Operator there was God; as it says, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". Now He has an appointed One in the Son, the Son is the Operator now, and the Father loves Him.
F.N.W. Has He that unique place as being in the bosom of the Father?
J.T. That is what you get in chapter l, and chapter 3 says, "The Father loves the Son".
A.N.W. Then coming out into operation the Spirit elects to call Him Lord. The chapter opens
{36}
with the title 'Lord' which is quite unusual. "When therefore the Lord knew".
Ques. Is this woman material for the operations?
J.T. Exactly; she is an example of the material and how it is formed, and then she begins to operate herself, she moves herself. So that the Lord is seen here as administering. We may use the word 'administration' as well as operation in connection with the term 'Lord'.
F.N.W. "My Father worketh hitherto and I work", what is involved in that?
J.T. That is chapter 5 which we shall not touch by itself. The allusion is to the fact that the Father had been operating from the first of Genesis, but that the Son is now operating. That chapter opens up how the Father and Son are operating together, but here the Son is operating by Himself as appointed, as being the Administrator, the One whom the Father loves; a very precious thought.
S.McC. Would the fact that a woman comes into view in chapter 4 immediately following this formal statement of the economy in the end of chapter 3, suggest in principle that one of the prime thoughts in the operations of the economy is the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. Hence the thought runs through the book in certain women, culminating in Mary Magdalene, the one who recognises that the Lord is her Teacher. So the Lord proceeds here carefully, because it is a careful operation. The Lord pursues the subject until He comes to the matter of her husband. "Go, call thy husband". Of course the wife normally should be at the call of her husband, but in this case the husband is at the call of the wife. That is a thing to be noticed by wives and husbands, as to how we move together in the economy.
Ques. In chapter 3: 36, where it speaks of being subject to the Son, Mr. Darby says, 'It is the
{37}
obedience of submission to His Person'. Would that feature be set out in this woman?
J.T. I think so; it is a subject that runs through the gospel. The Son is seen there as loved by the Father, and anyone who is not subject to the Son is subject to eternal judgment.
J.S.Sr. Are the Son's movements to be noted here? "He must needs go through Samaria".
J.T. You mean the Lord's movements. That *need* would undoubtedly bear on the fact that this woman comes into evidence, because it is a question of the material that the Lord had in mind to bring about for the assembly.
S.M. Does it magnify the operations, in that the branches run over the wall?
J.T. Very good, that is from @Genesis 49. Joseph's branches run over the wall. In the woman's mind the wall stood between the Samaritans and the Jews, but then the Lord as the true Joseph is here and the branches run over the wall.
Ques. As this conversation goes on, there is exposure brought about in this woman; I suppose making room for the work of God?
J.T. It was to clear out the dross. The Lord works to clear out dross wherever it is, and the dross is everywhere; but then the service of the Lord is to clear it away, and she gives evidence of clearance by leaving her water-pot and going her way into the city to the men, showing that she was not afraid of them now morally; she could evangelise them. Before this it would have been quite different; for she had had five husbands.
E.P. Was this woman previously a subject of the work of the Spirit?
J.T. I do not think she is so seen; she is just in her natural state. She is a Samaritan and the Lord a Jew, but she is not long in being adjusted and that brings out this wonderful material, that a woman
{38}
should leave her water-pot and go her way into the city and come to the men, and say, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?". The fact that He could tell her everything that she had ever done was the evidence of it; He is the Christ.
J.K. Is there any thought in her coming to draw water, that she feels her need?
J.T. Well, she is in need, but it is just a natural need such as you might find with anybody, and the Lord was pleased to open a conversation with her. It says, "And he must needs pass through Samaria. He comes therefore to a city of Samaria called Sychar, near to the land which Jacob gave to his son Joseph". That is the historical position, and of course history has a great deal to do with the testimony. This matter extends back to the days of Jacob, when Jacob gave something to his son Joseph. But who is the Son now, and who is Jacob now? It is God, and the Son is Christ, and the material to be operated upon is the woman, just an ordinary woman, but a woman who has had five husbands, and therefore a very poor affair, a poor corrupt affair; yet the Lord is undertaking to make her material for the assembly. Following on this, we get a Mary Magdalene in chapter 24.
H.B. Would you say that Jesus sitting "as he was" stands in contrast to all that was seen in the woman?
J.T. That is true. He does not make any show. He does not make any pretence at all. He is just as He was, a tired Man. Fancy that, the Lord of glory, just a tired Man in the service of God!
J.K.P. Notwithstanding what enters into the history of this woman, does this chapter stand out in contrast to chapter 3, showing how the work of God comes forward rapidly in this person?
{39}
J.T. It is the converse of chapter 3 really, because it is the subjective side, whereas chapter 3 is the objective side, the Father's work; the Father's work in love. It is a question there of the love of God, not the love of Christ exactly, or the love of the Spirit, but the love of God, "God so loved"; that is chapter 3; it is the great objective thought in God. The difficulty with this woman was serious indeed, but the Lord bottomed the thing quickly, and brought out the greatest matter as a result; namely, the worship of God. So that we may look for the greatest things where difficulties arise, because God has great things in His mind for us and He wants us to be ready for them. This woman is the material ready for what God is doing, and she is yielding, undoubtedly under the guiding hand of the Spirit. She brings up the question of worship, a very unlikely subject for her to speak of, but the Lord does not say a word against it. He only says, "Go, call thy husband", as much as to say, this matter is so great your husband should be in it; what you are doing, he should be doing, otherwise there is something wrong.
L.L.P. Would the scripture, "where sin abounded grace has over-abounded", be fulfilled in her case?
J.T. Well, sin abounded in this woman as it does in everybody really, "for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God". However sin abounded particularly with her, the Lord knew it, and He proceeded to undo everything. He was here to undo the works of the devil.
A.R. The woman says, "Sir, I see that thou art a prophet", showing how quickly she learned.
J.T. The thought of prophetic ministry came before us specially about twenty-five years ago and God has greatly blessed it. It was of God that the saints should take in the idea of prophetic ministry and have meetings for that purpose; they have been
{40}
greatly blessed of God; they bring out the action of God, the divine action in prophetic service, because God would work on prophetic lines. There is so much to be known, even future events entering into it.
A.A.T. Why does the Lord introduce the thought of eternal life with her?
J.T. Because that is the main subject in John, and He returns to it when the time comes for it. But then she had introduced the question of divine service, a matter that an ordinary woman would not bring up. He does not say, You should not speak of that; He takes her on at once. The Father, He says, seeks worshippers. She had talked about worship, but the Lord says, The Father seeks worshippers, and He seeks them to worship Him in spirit and in truth.
V.C.L. Would you say a word as to why in this section which is the sphere of the Son's operations, we get the word *water*, or an allied term used about twenty-four times in the verses read? Is there something significant for us to understand as to the freedom of the Spirit where the Son is made way for?
J.T. Very good. John has his own way of emphasising things and we do well to observe them, as with this question of water. Now it says, in verse 6, "It was about the sixth hour. A woman comes out of Samaria to draw water. Jesus says to her, Give me to drink", as much as to say, I am in need too, I am in need of water; you give Me to drink. But then it says further, "For his disciples had gone away into the city that they might buy provisions". Why did they all go? Why should they all need to go to buy provisions? Well, they did and left Him alone, a most extraordinary thing, "The Samaritan woman therefore says to him, How dost thou being a Jew, ask to drink of me who am a Samaritan woman? for Jews have no intercourse with Samaritans",
{41}
as if the Lord did not know, "Jesus answered and said to her, If thou knewest the gift of God". Do you know anything about that? That is in effect what the Lord says. She had seemed to know everything so far; she knew about the difference between the Samaritans and the Jews, but then the Lord says, "If thou knewest the gift of God", do you know anything about that? that is the next thing.
G.H. Would that bring out the Lord's skilfulness in the way He approached the woman? "Give me to drink".
J.T. That is right.
Ques. Is there anything in the fact that Abraham's servant approached Rebecca similarly?
J.T. In @Genesis 24, you mean. That brings up the whole burning subject, because that man, Abraham's servant, was a type of the Spirit of God Himself. Abraham's servant was very particular as to what he should do about this matter of water.
Ques. Would you say that it is the desire of all three divine Persons, at the present time especially, to be refreshed in this way, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit?
J.T. That is right.
A.N.W. It is striking that in view of His asking for a drink the Lord should say, "The Father seeketh". The economy seems to bring all three Persons into it.
J.T. So the Lord says, "If thou knewest the gift of God"; a marvellous thing! It is said in Romans to be eternal life; "the gift of God is eternal life".
E.A.L. This woman does not seem to be personalised in this chapter at all. There seem to be thirteen mentions of *woman*; the Lord uses it just once, after she confesses that He was a prophet. The other references to His speaking to her are all impersonal. Would you help us in that?
{42}
J.T. You mean it is impersonal because her name is not mentioned? But the word *woman* is the point. The Lord used it in addressing His mother in chapter 2. He used the very same word, woman. It is a very noble word, it is next to man.
E.A.L. He does not call her 'woman' until she confesses that He is a prophet.
J.T. Just so, then He recognises her as a woman, a very noble word that she is entitled to. Of course, the whole matter the Lord is working out hinges on the fact that she is a woman.
E.A.L. When the men of the city return they speak of her as *the* woman; they heard her confess the Lord, they got help through her.
J.T. She was completely changed. She left her water-pot, giving up her calling altogether, and going out to the men. Well, now, the Lord says, You can be used. He had already said, I am the Christ. He says to her, so to speak, You say, When the Christ comes He will tell us all things, but I am He! "I who speak to thee am he". Wonderful! It is a question of operations, the Christ as the great Operator of God, *the* Christ, and she is coming to that, she is coming into His operations.
J.VanS. Is that what the Lord had in mind in saying, "If thou knewest the gift of God"? He at once refers to who He is, and then to what He would be able to give, living water.
J.T. Did she know it, though? "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is". It is marvellous that He should bring that in! The greatest things are brought in, and she has to do with them.
J.H.P. Is it significant that these remarks as to the refreshment of a divine Person are addressed to a woman?
J.T. It is marvellous that He does not object to her bringing up the matter of worship, though to answer it the whole moral question must be brought
{43}
up. Persons go to places which have a steeple, that they call places of worship, yet they have no right on moral lines to have any part in the worship of God.
R.P. I would like some help on the feminine side of the service of God.
J.T. In result, the feminine side is represented in all christians, in all the saints, and the masculine side is represented in Christ alone. In full result that is the position, "His wife has made herself ready", and it is man and woman; the Man is Christ and the woman is the assembly. That is what is in the mind of God, and in the Lord's mind in this chapter. The feminine side is in the saints who form the assembly, and the masculine side is in Himself as Man, "For God is one, and the mediator of God and men one, the man Christ Jesus", @1 Timothy 2: 5.
Ques. Going back to God's operations in Genesis, woman became the counterpart of man, so in that way the assembly is the counterpart of Christ, would you say?
J.T. Quite so; that is what the Lord is aiming at here. But that is especially Paul's line, while John is operating in connection with it, bringing out the kind of material that forms it. That is what John has in mind; so that we have Mary Magdalene in chapter 20, and the Samaritan woman here, and the Lord's own mother in chapter 2; and several others too, including Mary of Bethany, in this most wonderful book.
S.McC. Had you anything special in mind in connection with the bearing of eternal life on the feminine side?
J.T. I think it is just what comes out here, that it is a question of *living* water, what He would give. She could give an ordinary drink of water, but what could He give! "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou
{44}
wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". That is the great point to have in mind. This matter of living water comes up in the book of Revelation. Here the water springs up, but in chapter 6 we shall see the idea of eternal life in the sustenance of it is in the bread that comes down. It comes down from heaven, and the bread is Christ.
A.N.W. Is that not the point in @John 3? I think you were saying that it is His being given in @John 3: 16, but the water springs up and it is on the feminine subjective side in @John 4.
J.T. That is right. It springs up here.
S.J.H. Why is the word *become* put in verse 14? "Shall become in him".
J.T. It suggests the possibility of change. John the evangelist says, "I became in the Spirit"; and it is said of the Lord Jesus in chapter 1 that the Word became flesh, showing the possibility of change. So here the water changes, it becomes *a fountain*. "The water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life". There is some marvellous mysterious effect brought about in that something becomes something different in a person. The water springs up into eternal life, showing that here the great thought of eternal life has an upward movement; but in chapter 6 it is not an upward movement but a downward movement, the Son of man came down from heaven and gives His life, His flesh for the life of the world.
J.K.P. These operations seem to commence with the idea of the sixth hour; and then the Lord goes on to mention that "the hour is coming and now is". Is that linked on with the urgency of coming into what is current in the Spirit's operations at this present time?
J.T. Just so. We were talking of geography in verse 5, but this is a matter of time. The question
{45}
of time and the question of geography both come into this chapter, and all that is of great importance.
E.P. Would you say that eternal life as presented here is essential and basic to the enjoyment of the full Christian position?
J.T. It is basic just as new birth is basic to eternal life. Here eternal life is basic to the true Christian position and basic to the service of God.
S.McC. We must have the Spirit to enjoy eternal life.
J.T. I would certainly say that. The water here is the Spirit, and it becomes a fountain; it is springing up into everlasting life.
Ques. May I ask a little more about the matter of refreshment? The sixth hour was mentioned just now, which was the hour that the Lord entered upon the darkness that came upon the whole land. It was just at this hour that the Lord says to the woman, "Give me to drink". Is there some connection, would you say?
J.T. There must be. You are talking about the Lord's death and it is a question of time as we were saying, and of how God uses time. He made it, and He was the first to use it. And so the Lord's supper came in in time, on the first day of the week when the disciples came together to break bread. With anyone wanting to break bread today, the moral question must come up, as to whether she or he is fit to break bread. The Lord brought it up with this woman.
V.C.L. The woman says, "Sir, I see that thou art a prophet". Would that indicate that she has been born anew and therefore sees the kingdom of God? And then when she says at the end, "Is not he the Christ?" would that suggest that she has been born of water and of Spirit and has entered the kingdom?
J.T. Well, you might say that.
{46}
Ques. You were speaking just now in connection with persons being fit to break bread. As we know, no one should break bread who has not the Spirit. How would you detect that a person has the Spirit, especially young children?
J.T. First of all, I would say, do they like to be with the older brethren, or do they congregate by themselves, which is a baneful thing for children. I would say if they want to be with the older brethren, that is a good sign that they are fit to break bread; but if they associate only with the younger people it would be questionable, because they ought to know that the older brethren are likely to have the truth. It is not good to see young people flocking together and ignoring the older brothers and sisters.
Rem. I think that is very helpful, and one would especially look for it during special meetings such as these, that the young people should keep with the older brethren.
J.T. I would say that. It is a baneful thing to see them flocking together, nothing good comes out of it, laughing and talking, that is all, whereas they ought to keep with the older brethren.
B.W. We had the thought last night of discernment. Would that be seen in this woman that she discerned that the Lord was a prophet? And she discerned that she should leave her water-pot.
J.T. Very good, like Abigail. David said to her, "Blessed be thy discernment". Abigail was a discerner. She was a type of the assembly.
A.MacD. Would you say that discernment was seen in Rebecca too? She said, "Drink, my lord!" she discerned who was there.
J.T. Exactly, and she said, 'I will give your camels drink too', a great idea. Think of a girl like that ready to water ten camels; how much water they
{47}
would drink! But then we are in @John 4, and the point here is that the Lord has the water. The woman has ordinary water and has a water vessel to carry it, but she left that behind her. The Lord had living water, and He calls it "the water that I shall give him", because the Giver is the Lord Himself. Who can define what that water is? because it changes by some action of the Lord's when it enters into the person of the believer. It becomes in him a fountain of water springing up into everlasting life. That is a mysterious thing, and that happens in all of us.
E.A.L. You have helped us to see that we cannot limit the scope of the types, as in @Genesis 24 and the types of the Spirit there. Things change and develop, do they not?
J.T. Quite so. The question of wells comes in that chapter too, because Isaac was coming and going from the well Beer-lahai-roi. He was coming and going, as if he had plenty of leisure for Rebecca when she was coming to him. That suggests a wonderful matter; it needs leisure for that. If we are thinking of Christ as Head of the assembly, well, He has leisure for that, He is ready for us. The Lord says, I have time, I am coming and going from the well. It was that particular well at which Sarah's servant was found. She got benefit from that well, and the Lord is figuratively seen there, and here comes Rebecca. Well, that is wonderful! The Lord is ready for her.
S.M. David's mighty men broke through when David longed for a drink.
J.T. Quite so. They discerned the longing of David's heart. He was once a boy at that place-at Hebron, and they discerned his longings and broke through and got the drink, but he poured it out for a drink offering.
{48}
Ques. It says that this water springs up into everlasting life. That would be in the renewed man, would it not? It would not spring up in everybody.
J.T. It springs up in a meeting like this. Those of us who have come together form an area in which the Spirit of God can operate, and He is doing it at this present time. He is springing up, morally, in our minds.
W.P. This fountain is not only for our enjoyment but for God's enjoyment, is it not?
J.T. Indeed it is. God is working out everything for His own pleasure and His thoughts are to be consummated in the seventh day of the creation; that is to say, the millennium. That is God's day. God is going to have a wonderful time in the millennium.
W.W. And that is why the thought is brought in that God is seeking worshippers?
J.T. Exactly. The Lord says, "God is a spirit". He never said that to anybody before. In chapter 1, the word says, "No one has seen God at any time". Now the Lord says here, that "God is a spirit", and that the Father is seeking those who can worship Him in spirit and in truth. Are we among these worshippers? Are we all in the area of everlasting life? Because it is to be known right here on the earth where the brethren are together. We may have wonderful times, even touching what is in heaven.
A.R. It says, "The Father seeks such as his worshippers", but it does not say, God seeks them. It says, "God is a spirit; and they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth". There is a difference, is there not?
J.T. It says, "The Father seeks such as his worshippers". The *such*; who are they? What are these people? They are persons who worship in spirit and in truth. That is to say, it is your spirit, your own spirit, but then there is truth attached to it. You
{49}
have the Spirit, but then you must have the idea of truth. The Father seeks worshippers on those lines.
J.S.Sr. The *such* applies to living persons, does it not?
J.T. It does, indeed. You add the idea of persons or vessels.
A.A.T. Does the Father have the first place in the economy?
J.T. Oh, surely. That is the order, you could not reverse the order. When you are baptising a person you could not reverse the order of @Matthew 28. The order is the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Spirit; you could not reverse that order and say the name of the Spirit, and of the Son, and of the Father. Morally it must be done that way.
A.R. Does 'God' in this chapter include the three Persons in the Godhead?
J.T. I think so. It says, "God is a spirit", that includes the three Persons.
A.R. The One who is seeking worshippers is the Father.
J.T. The Father is specified, but then it does not say, the Father is a spirit, it says, "God is a spirit", "The Father seeks such as his worshippers".
Ques. "But the hour is coming and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father". What time is that?
J.T. Now. It is the present time. It has been so far approximately two thousand years. The time will cease presently, but the *now* is the present time; that is to say, we are in it, a wonderful time.
A.R. The fact that we worship *God* as God, which includes the three divine Persons, ought to help us in regard to worshipping the Spirit by Himself, do you think?
J.T. Yes.
{50}
B.W. So that the truth regarding the Spirit would enhance the service of God, would it not?
J.T. It would. The expression, "in spirit and in truth", refers to your own spirit; that is to say, you are spiritual, and you are characterised by the truth.
A.N.W. In contrast to the materialistic worship around and the false religion of Samaria.
J.T. Yes, the spiritualistic materialism that enters into man's worship.
A.D. Would you help us as to, "we have both access by one Spirit to the Father"?
J.T. The access, the instrumentality of the access is Christ Himself, it is "through him". But the movement is by the Spirit; for "through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father". The word *both* refers to Jew and gentile, as if God intended that there should be both Jew and gentile in the assembly.
{51}
THE PERSON OF CHRIST AND THE SPIRIT (4)
@John 6: 27 - 58, 66 - 71
J.T. The last verses read are suggested because they bear so much as to their teaching on the whole chapter, and they are intended to appeal to us here and now as to whether we hold on to the truth or leave it. "From that time" it says, "many of his disciples went away back and walked no more with him. Jesus therefore said to the twelve, Will ye also go away?" Peter's reply is, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal". So it is in regard to this appeal that these final verses are read, because they should come home to us as to continuance in the truth. They are addressed to the twelve, and Judas is in mind as the traitor, showing how we are to be challenged by the truth in this sense. It is a very long chapter, 71 verses, but the words of eternal life govern the whole chapter.
J.S.Sr. This side is the eating rather than drinking, is it not?
J.T. Yes, the idea too of the bread of life coming down.
S.McC. In the course of these meetings you have stressed more than once the thought of eternal life in @John 6 as connected with what comes down. Would you open out a little more what is on your mind in connection with the coming down?
J.T. I think it ought to be borne in mind that eternal life in the main is for the earth. It is linked up with heaven, of course, hence the fourth chapter makes much of the water of life springing up, so that we have to keep the two thoughts in mind so as to have right balance. Eternal life is really here where death is, but at the same time there is the power to raise us up, however long we may have to
{52}
wait. The last day will see it consummated; that we are to be raised up. The bread of life is to maintain us in life here where the testimony is, hence the first verse that we read; "Work not for the food which perishes, but for the food which abides unto life eternal, which the Son of man shall give to you; for him has the Father sealed, even God". It is a question of food or sustenance where the testimony is, and we are not to be making the natural everything, but what abides unto life eternal.
C.A.M. I was wondering whether it would be right to connect the thought of the springing up, in chapter 4, with the words 'abide' and 'dwell' that so constantly occur in this passage; as to whether we reach a sort of objective in that way as to eternal life?
J.T. Just so, it abides, it goes through, because the millennial world will be a world of men as we are in flesh and blood, but then there has to be some change in order to condition us for eternity; and therefore the idea of continuance and of abiding, that death will not overtake us as a penalty, that we are to be raised up. There is a certainty as to it; we are to be raised up at the last day.
A.N.W. The Lord speaks of the Spirit in the chapter as quickening, "It is the Spirit which quickens". He has to say, "The flesh profits nothing". Would you say where the Spirit comes in in this matter? Is it that He comes into every apprehension we may have of this and every other feature of the truth?
J.T. The question therefore is whether the Lord Jesus Himself comes along for us to change us, or whether the Spirit has a part in it too, and we may say, both are true. @Romans 8 would say that the Spirit quickens, so that He too has a part in it.
A.N.W. "Shall quicken your mortal bodies", you mean.
{53}
J.T. Yes. Quickening our mortal bodies because of the Spirit which dwells in us. That would, of course, solve the question of eternity, and when we say eternity we must include eternal life; though eternal life in itself is more limited in thought. It has a peculiar application to the millennial day, in that God has a way of keeping men and women and children alive on this earth in that day. There will be ultimately new heavens and a new earth, "wherein dwells righteousness", according to 2 Peter, and he says we await that. But in the meantime God will have His way as to things. The course of time evidently is divided up into seven periods, and we are coming on to the seventh day which is, I think, the millennial day. We are living within the period of testimony, the assembly has part in that. But in the last day God will raise *us* up; we come into that according to the promise; we come into the idea of being raised up even if we have to wait for the last day. At the same time there will be a life here on earth in the millennial day in which God will have His way and show that He can keep men alive on the earth without dying. I do not believe the millennium will be marked by death at all, although a man may live one hundred years and yet die, but in general the idea in the millennium is eternal life.
S.McC. As to the millennium, do you regard it as quickly coming, or will there be a gradual development or change in things?
J.T. If we look at the prophetic side, I believe there will be a gradual change. But we have a complete idea as to the thing. The Lord Himself will not be here until the falling away happens, and I believe that will happen as soon as the assembly is taken to heaven. But then God will carry on His earthly thoughts as to Israel, His final thoughts, so that all Israel shall be saved; all Israel, meaning
{54}
the whole twelve tribes. The whole divine ideal will be realised in the millennial day. It will be a wonderful day, marked out to show the devil and his upholders what God can do in spite of conditions. He can in general abolish death and keep men and women and children alive on the earth, because children are alluded to in the millennial day, and old men and old women too. The Lord is saying here that the Father will draw all that shall come to Him; the Father therefore will act in relation to the Lord. There will be a means of dealing with death and keeping men, as such, alive on the earth. That will be a triumph for God. John intends to show that.
R.B.P. Would you say that the rapture and the resurrection are synchronous?
J.T. Well, they are for us, but what the Lord is going on to say here goes beyond that. That is, I believe the millennial day is in mind, but we come into something special; Israel is not, though Israel is in God's purpose, "beloved for the fathers sakes", @Romans 11: 28. Things happen to them because of the fathers, but not so to us.
E.P. In relation to your references to @Isaiah 65: 20 and death as referred to there, do you mean that that is not what will generally obtain in the millennium? It says there that "the youth shall die a hundred years old". Are you saying that that will not generally obtain?
J.T. That is a sinner, that if a sinner arises, death will lay hold of him, but generally it is a question of life, and eternal life applies to that period. Eternal life applies to us too, but we are special; it applies in a peculiar way to us, because it leads into the assembly.
Ques. Will the millennial day be just confined to Israel?
{55}
J.T. No, there will be nations as well, and the nations shall walk in the light of the heavenly city.
S.J.H. When the Lord said to Nicodemus, "If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not"; would that include eternal life?
J.T. That is a question, but I do not believe He means eternal life, because He is going to speak of eternal life in the full sense of it. He is going to speak of it as applicable to the assembly, and that does not mean it is earthly. He speaks of springing up; the fourth chapter shows that the water that the Lord Jesus gives shall spring up into eternal life; "The water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life". So that we have to be cautious and see that we are saying what is true in the Scriptures; they are so broad; "Thy commandment is exceeding broad", said the psalmist (@Psalm 119: 96). Sometimes it is wider than at others, so to speak. But when we come to the assembly we come to the specialty; it is the heavenly side of things and eternal life leads to that. But at the same time eternal life leads to the millennium, which is the broadest sense, including the nations, "And the nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it". @Revelation 21: 24.
F.N.W. The definition of the assembly side of eternal life has come down to us from Mr. Darby, I believe. He spoke of the out-of-the-world, heavenly condition of relationship and being, in which eternal life consists.
J.T. That is right; that is what I would call the present application of eternal life, but it has a wider sense when we come to the millennial day, because the nations will be included as well, the nations shall walk in the light of the heavenly city. The heavenly city is the assembly, but it is in the heavenly place.
S.McC. In regard to what you said a moment ago as to the resurrection and what occurs in regard
{56}
to ourselves as of the assembly, do you look for another operation of resurrection power in regard of Israel following the rapture and before the millennium?
J.T. I think that is the truth. There will be the application of the idea according to this chapter in the last day. That is not the assembly day, it is the millennial day; the last day is a very extended idea, it is not a literal day, it is a question of a period of time.
A.N.W. Does not @Matthew 25 support your statement that the nations shall come into eternal life? The nations are brought into it there. The paragraph begins with the Son of man coming in His glory, and "all the nations shall be gathered before him". The section closes with the words, "Then shall he answer them saying, Verily I say to you, Inasmuch as ye have not done it to one of these least, neither have ye done it to me. And these shall go away into eternal punishment, and the righteous into life eternal".
J.T. "Into life eternal", that is very good; it clarifies the whole position, that eternal life is the thing they go into. The righteous go into it, whereas it says, in chapter 3, as to the persons who die not subject to the Son, that the wrath of God abides on them. The righteous have their own place and they go, not to heaven, but into eternal life.
R.B.P. Then the reference to the last day in @John 11 would primarily refer to Israel?
J.T. That is right, that was what they knew; that is the thing they were all thinking about, what Israel would come into.
A.R. Would the two resurrections be seen in @Revelation 20? "The rest of the dead did not live till the thousand years had been completed. This is the first resurrection. Blessed and holy he who has part in the first resurrection: over these the second
{57}
death has no power; but they shall be priests of God and of the Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years".
J.T. So that the first resurrection is an extended period, just as we were saying; it is a day, as it were; many things happen in it. You cannot say that it is a question of a physical day, but a period of time in which things happen. It is classified there as the first resurrection, and blessed are they who have part in that.
G.H. It says in John's epistle, "*We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren". Would that really be eternal life, do you think?
J.T. That would be what we are enjoying this afternoon, perhaps between the meetings too. It is a question of life functioning as we are together in the Spirit, but that is not the full thought, that is only in principle.
S.McC. In regard to the general teaching in this chapter as to eating the flesh and drinking the blood of the Son of man, is it to prepare us now spiritually and constitutionally in relation to this great thought of change?
J.T. I was thinking of that. We are quite entitled to take on prophetic subjects as they did at the beginning of the revival in 1825 and 1827 when they had meetings in Dublin to look into the prophetic word. That was quite right, and it opened up the spiritual map to us. But we are not confined to the spiritual map in this day; we are thinking primarily and almost altogether of the assembly, of our coming into that, and of the service of God, as to our having part in that, carrying on the divine ideas right into the millennium. As engaged with these thoughts we are in our own period. The apostle Paul said, that this salvation is sent to the gentiles and they will receive it. The Jews rejected it, but the gentiles
{58}
would receive it, and we are the gentiles who have received it; we are coming into the heavenly part.
S.McC. So that the teaching of this chapter involves the acceptance in our souls of the termination of a certain condition of things, does it not?
J.T. Well, both things are applicable in this chapter. It is very long and very comprehensive in its contents too, but what we are dealing with now is the prime thought of the assembly, and how this chapter deals with the assembly, and how we may come into the truth of it through the teaching of this chapter.
S.McC. I was thinking of the importance of the teaching to which you are alluding in this chapter, as bearing on the acceptance of it in our souls. It is hard, but as coming into the assembly we have to accept the termination of a certain condition of things, have we not?
J.T. Yes, quite, but I think the Lord's listeners were turning away because of the things He was saying. They could not follow them, but the question is whether we can follow them and make them good. I may say, I should like to go in for all that, and be truly in the assembly. But am I equal to it?
A.A.T. You used the expression, *the present period*. How do you cover that period, I mean when does it start?
J.T. It is the period of the assembly. It started from the time the salvation of God was sent to the gentiles, from that time in the book of Acts.
A.N.W. That is a period which would not appear on the prophetic map you were speaking of.
J.T. No, I would say in a certain way it may, but strictly speaking it is a period by itself that began not exactly at Pentecost, but when the salvation of God was transferred to the gentiles. At first it was according to Ephesians, that we *both* might have access, that is, Jew and gentile, but we would
{59}
not say that now. The apostle Paul would not say it if he were here. What is in mind now is the gentiles; there is hardly a Jew in the fellowship. There are one or two here now, and we thank God for them, but there are hardly more than a few. The bulk of the saints are gentiles, and God is going on with them. It is the time of the gentiles; "until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled", @Luke 21: 24.
S.M. Would that be like the day that the Lord has made?
J.T. "This is the day that Jehovah hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in it", @Psalm 118: 24.
C.A.M. Referring to the change of condition in this chapter, it has connection with this flesh and blood condition, has it not? The Lord's flesh and the Lord's blood are separated, which involves a change in the condition of things that we are in at the moment. As to ourselves, does not the eternal life as it is dwelt on here involve our entering in some spiritual sense beyond our present flesh and blood condition?
J.T. Well, quite so. Peter for instance was in an ecstasy, he got into that condition; he was outside the reckonings of flesh and blood. That was common in the beginning, but it is not common now as it was then. A wonderful thing that it was so.
C.A.M. Does not the idea of being in an out-of-the-world condition involve something of that?
J.T. Yes, but it is not an ecstasy, an out-of-the-world condition is a condition that is suitable to us now, in this meeting for instance, or any meeting at all, such as that for the breaking of bread, or the ministry of the truth; it is an out-of-the-world condition, and the world has no part in it at all. Our attitude is out of the world and that means we are rejected of the world in a moral sense. We are still in flesh and blood, of course, but at the same time we are not moving on that line at all; we have
{60}
an access to heavenly things, to assembly things, and the more spiritual we are the more we shall enjoy them. It is a question of spirituality, not of literal ecstasy, but of the power of the Spirit in our inmost souls; and the more of us there are together the more it is enjoyed. So that we may say we have enjoyed eternal life this afternoon. We mean it just in a limited way, but it is there; that is to say, the Spirit of God is free amongst us.
H.B. When it is said of Enoch, that he was not, that is a moral idea, is it not?
J.T. Quite so, it means he was taken; God took him, it says. They missed him, I suppose. The neighbours there might miss him and ask, What has become of Enoch? Well, God had taken him. That is the fact the Spirit of God records. But before he was taken or translated "he has the testimony that he had pleased God", @Hebrews 11: 5. That is the moral side of it, that is the reason he was translated. What can we say today about Enoch or Elijah? We do not know. They are somewhere in the heavenly regions, but we cannot say more than that. Sleeping saints are there too, but not all; some of those that slept arose and came into the holy city, after the Lord's resurrection. How many arose we cannot tell, but they entered into the holy city and appeared to many. What has become of them? We cannot say. God has not been pleased to tell us, but it was true. The point morally is to seek to please God. He is looking for people who seek to please Him.
J.E.P. With regard to the out-of-the-world conditions, the Lord introduces in this chapter the names of all the divine Persons, suggesting to us, would you say, a realm in which divine operations are going forward in a practical way, and we come into that?
J.T. Yes, I think so; it is a practical time, and we are called to be practical and simple.
{61}
A.N.W. When He that restrains, and that which restrains are gone, things will move rapidly enough; surely they will move very rapidly when these restraining powers and persons are gone.
J.T. Quite.
S.M. This current exercise about the unions seems to be a special test to us in connection with working for food. The Lord says here, "Work not for the food which perishes". That is the test to us now; is it not?
J.T. That is the whole subject, with these unions, it is a question of the food. They are materialistic, but we are to learn to get out of that; we do not belong to that system of things at all.
S.M. We want to please God.
J.T. There is an out-of-the-world, heavenly condition of relationship and being in which eternal life consists. Well, we have part in that, and certainly it is not a question of food and raiment. It is a question of spiritual power and enjoyment implying the fellowship that we come into; the fellowship of the Spirit, it is called.
V.C.L. Verse 35 reads, "And Jesus said to them, I am the bread of life: he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst at any time". Would you say a word as to the difference between the not hungering and the not thirsting?
J.T. It is just a question of the word, either thirst or hunger would have the same force; it is a question of what is eternal, of what never happens, that we never thirst and we never hunger. Surely that is enough for us, we get that relief in coming to Christ, because it is coming to Him now, it is not simply that He comes to us and takes us to heaven, which He will do, but our coming to Him, involving fellowship.
{62}
V.C.L. And does believing on Him involve the Holy Spirit for us?
J.T. Well, it does; the Spirit would come in to support that faith. But then the idea is faith whether we do believe, whether we are living in a faith condition. The millennium will not be a faith condition, it will be a condition of sight, but we are living in a faith condition now, so that the end of John's gospel says, "Blessed they who have not seen and have believed".
E.A.L. When they said to the Lord, "What should we do that we may work the works of God?" He answers, "This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom *he* has sent".
J.T. That is the work of God, just so, to believe. We are living in a faith condition, whereas the millennium will be a sight condition.
A.R. So we should all be satisfied christians, should we not?
J.T. Quite so, never thirsting. We are all made to drink into one Spirit.
J.H.P. Would you say a word about the drawing of the Father?
J.T. That is the time we are in, the time of this drawing. We are in what is called the expanse. God called the expanse Heaven, and that is the area or region in which He is operating and we are in that now. It is a period of faith for us. The Old Testament was not that and the millennium will not be that, but for us it is a question of whether we are living by faith or by sight.
Ques. Is the period of faith, then, in some degree greater than the period of sight?
J.T. Oh, it is, clearly, that is what the Lord is saying here, that blessedness lies in those who believe without seeing.
{63}
L.L.P. Would the dignitaries of chapter 11 of Hebrews have reached beyond their dispensation; that is, do they belong to ours?
J.T. They anticipated our dispensation. The word *faith* governs all that section. They cannot be perfect without us; that is what the apostle says, "that they without us should not be made perfect". That shows the greatness of ourselves; that is of the assembly.
G.H. Do you mean that the expanse in @Genesis 1 is like the period of faith?
J.T. No, that is not the idea, but it corresponds, it is the same idea as the expanse. He called the expanse Heavens. That was the area of God's operations then, but it is a question of what He is doing now; He is gathering out the assembly; that is what He is doing. Earlier than this, He was gathering out Israel, and many other things He was doing in the Old Testament times.
E.A.L. Would you say then that prophecy in ministry is an expansive idea, always expanding, so that we shall always be learning?
J.T. That is the idea. The word here is. "And they shall be all taught of God". That peculiarly applies to ourselves now.
S.McC. In connection with this food, He speaks of the bread of life, the bread from heaven, and of eating the flesh and drinking the blood of the Son of man. What distinction do you make in regard to these suggestions of food?
J.T. It is a question of appropriation; eating is just a question of appropriation, but it is a most vivid feature or picture of it. Are we appropriating what is within our reach? This chapter shows what is within our reach, and the greatest matter is the flesh of Christ and the blood of Christ. That is not the Lord's supper; the Lord distinguishes that from His Supper, although it bears on it.
{64}
E.P. Does eating the flesh of the Son of man and drinking His blood go beyond the type of the manna?
J.T. Certainly. It says, "Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness and died"; but then the Son of man has come in and He must be greater than everything else and every other person.
S.McC. Would the bread from heaven have the positive side more in mind, but the flesh of the Son of man more the negative side; that is, the ending of a certain condition of things?
J.T. I think the word *heaven* must have some weight there, bread from heaven shows the character of it, but then the flesh of Christ and the blood of Christ is a matter of literality, it involves that the Lord actually died. We are to appropriate it in the negative sense to separate us from the world.
A.N.W. In that way, would it not negate such an idea as that in verse 42 for instance, which might be in any mind? "And they said, Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we have known?".
J.T. That was all they had in their minds, that He was no different from anybody else, whereas we are dealing now with the spiritual side of things, and when the Lord speaks about His flesh being bread we have to see that it is a question of spiritual food which we appropriate for sustenance. Eating is simply a figure of appropriation, appropriating something that the Lord Jesus has provided for us in coming down from heaven and dying.
A.A.T. Is there something in it being said that it is the flesh of the Son of man?
J.T. We have often spoken about the use of that title in Ezekiel, that it is a question of the Lord's relations with man, and not simply with the Jews. If the Jews are to come into it at all they have to take the ground of being men; God will allow that
{65}
they shall come into the period that refers to the Son of man, the Son of man's period.
A.R. In regard to this matter of appropriation of the flesh and the blood, it is after He is dead, is it not? So that it is important to realise that we appropriate a dead Christ.
J.T. It has often been said that what is before us in the Lord's supper is a dead Christ. We come later in the service to a living Christ, gone up into heaven. "And has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus".
S.McC. What is the force of verse 54, "He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life eternal, and I will raise him up at the last day"?
J.T. That means that you appropriate for two things; you appropriate for support in the sense of strength, and then you appropriate what satisfies you morally; that is, you are not dissatisfied, complaining; you are free; you are fully satisfied.
S.McC. How does eternal life come into that?
J.T. That is the point, that there is satisfaction in the sense of strength, the bread to strengthen man's heart, but then wine is to make his heart glad.
B.W. Would you say a person that is satisfied with divine things is in the good of eternal life?
J.T. Just so, he has means, he is not a theorist. You do not look at your bank book to satisfy yourself. You have food to satisfy you without anything else, the food the Lord supplies for you, and it is no less than Himself. His own body; that is to say He has died for us, as Paul says, He "loved me and gave himself for me".
W.W. We might be like the disciples on the line of unbelief, and saying, "This is an hard saying". His own disciples said that.
{66}
J.T. Just so, but Peter gives the answer, as if he were the great answerer of questions as to the Lord. He said, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal". That is what I was trying to say in the beginning, that we are dealing with words, not simply with paragraphs but the actual words, and they are words of life, words of eternal life.
S.McC. In verse 57, the Lord Jesus says, "As the living Father has sent me and I live on account of the Father, *he* also who eats me shall live also on account of me". Does the eating Him there refer to the appropriation of Christ as He now is?
J.T. I think the truth is advancing in this chapter; it is 'higher and higher yet', and when we come to the Father and the Son, and how the Father suggests the Son as food, I mean the life of Christ and the death of Christ, if the Father speaks about that we are on a higher level. They are acting together, and we are coming into what the action is; "he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life eternal". And then verse 57, "As the living Father has sent me and *I* live on account of the Father, *he* also who eats me shall live also on account of me". That is a higher thought, that is my position now, not simply that I am in fellowship, but I eat Christ; the Father gives me that food. The Lord says, "I live on account of the Father", and we live on account of Christ. That is the word, "on account of". The Lord says, "As the living Father has sent me and I live on account of the Father, *he* also who eats me shall live also on account of me". Notice "the living Father", it is a remarkable thought; not simply 'the Father', but "the living Father" and then "on account of". So that I am living on account of Christ or by virtue of the fact that He has supplied this food for me. It is the very highest level, you might say, as to eating.
{67}
S.McC. What you have said is very helpful. It involves Christ in glory, does it not?
J.T. Just so; coming down to where we are and providing food for us in that living way, "The living Father", I do not know that I ever noticed it more than I do now, that it is the title, "living Father".
R.P. Say a little more as to it.
J.T. Well, I do not know what to say; there it is, just one of the things that enter into this long chapter that is so precious, because it is a leading up, it is a steady leading up to the higher level in @John 6. There are seventy-one verses about this great subject so that we should be entirely here on account of the Father, here in life as living people by the Father's power.
V.C.L. In verse 32, it says, "My Father gives you the true bread out of heaven", but in verse 58, "This is the bread which has come down out of heaven", as though it would be something further.
J.T. It is further. It is a further thought in the chapter; this matter of the living Father and living on account of the Father, all that wording is what we might call 'higher and higher yet'. The chapter ascends as we go to the very highest level short of the assembly and the heavenly side of the truth. So that there is no difference at all between the heavens and the earth in that sense, we go out of the earthly side into the heavenly; our place is heaven. He has raised us up together and made us to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ.
W.S. Does Mr. Darby's note help in that connection? It reads, as to the expression "on account of", the sense is, 'by reason of what the Father is and His living, that I live by reason of His being and living'.
J.T. Very good, showing the high level we are on now.
{68}
S.McC. What you said a little while ago, helps as to the heavenly bearing of eternal life in John's gospel, while it is for the earth. Is there not a distinctive heavenly touch in John's gospel in relation to eternal life?
J.T. There is a heavenly touch; that is why it is brought in, I think, in chapter 3, as to "the Son of man who is in heaven"; the Son of man, mark, not the Son of God, but the Son of man. His real manhood is implied, and that He is in heaven. It is a mysterious thing.
S.McC. So that eternal life as we enjoy it now in the assembly is really on a much higher plane and level than it will be in the millennium.
J.T. That is just the truth. It is on a higher level than it will be in the millennium. The millennium is part of the division of time, you might say, the seventh day; it is the last day here in this chapter. As linked with the first of Genesis it belongs to the great period of divine operations in the expanse.
J.H.P. Is the high level that you speak of seen in the last sentence of verse 58, "he that eats this bread shall live for ever"?
J.T. Quite so, "He that eats this bread".
A.A.T. In an afternoon like this, do we touch heaven?
J.T. We do touch heaven, because the Spirit of God is here, and if He is amongst us, He brings everything with Him. You cannot add to or subtract from a divine Person; He brings everything with Him. If the Lord was here, He would bring everything with Him, and so with the Father. Divine Persons take you to finality and totality. When we come to the eternal state of things, they will all be there, and there abidingly, eternally, and we shall be there too.
{69}
J.K.P. There is a distinct contrast in verse 58 between the old dispensation in which it says your fathers ate and died, and this special dispensation to which I understand you are referring now, in which death is not introduced at all morally. It is a question of living for ever.
J.T. Quite so, we touch that too in some little degree; it is always a small degree, we may, say, but it is wonderful that it can be touched. Take Peter; he was in an ecstasy; he was waiting for a meal, and he said in effect, I will go upstairs and pray, and as he did so he became in an ecstasy. Well, it is wonderful that that could have happened. That is the beginning of the dispensation we are in now. It has nearly ended, but that is what was at the beginning; so that we have to watch and see the possibilities.
E.P. You mean that we touch eternal conditions and that is what really gives character to eternal life here.
J.T. That is so, and the assembly is no less than that, it is no less than the place where we enjoy eternal conditions. It is never an earthly thing, it is a heavenly thing, the house of God is heavenly.
S.McC. So that in the assembly properly speaking death does not exist; it is a deathless state of things?
J.T. Just so, deathless. That is a fine expression; we used it years ago. We have come into a deathless condition spiritually.
E.P. "And everyone who lives and believes on me shall never die", @John 11: 26. Is that our outlook?
J.T. That is the idea exactly, "never die".
A.D. So the Lord says later on in chapter 17, "I am no longer in the world, and these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep them in thy name which thou hast given me, that they may be one as we".
{70}
J.T. @John 17 is a wonderful chapter, one of the most wonderful, it is the Lord's prayer, not the one that you get in Matthew. @John 17 is the Lord's own prayer.
S.J.H. Do I understand you to say the title "living Father" is peculiar to our dispensation?
J.T. I do not know where else it is, I am not sure that it is elsewhere; it just comes in here with a peculiar touch to emphasise the Father; He is the living Father. He is the living God too, but this gives an added touch to what is said.
{71}
THE PERSON OF CHRIST AND THE SPIRIT (5)
@John 7: 37 - 39; @Revelation 1: 9 - 20; @Revelation 3: 7 - 13
J.T. Our subject now is not to be based simply on the scriptures read; our subject is the Spirit of God Himself in view of what has come to the attention of the brethren for some months past, that there might be a clarification of it in our minds, and a readiness to give the Holy Spirit His place as a divine Person, as equal with the Father and with the Son. And so many scriptures will doubtless come before us in this inquiry. However, certain things that are outstanding ought to be remarked, and one is that the Old Testament has the same value as the New Testament. The value of the Old Testament is that it is Scripture, and the Scripture says itself, "Every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be complete, fully fitted to every good work", @2 Timothy 3: 16, 17. The Old Testament therefore should come into view a little, particularly the first chapter of the Bible, that is the first of Genesis, and then some passages in the book of Ezekiel where a great deal is said about the Spirit of God, and of speaking to Him, and of His speaking to others. In the New Testament, in the book of Acts, in the section referring to the introduction of the gentiles, we have the Spirit speaking to Peter, although it does not say definitely at first that the Spirit spoke to him, but clearly the voice is the Spirit's voice, the context shows it, that the Spirit is speaking to Peter, and Peter speaks to the Spirit. That is a point that we ought to be clear about. Moreover it is said in the book of Revelation, in chapter 14, that a voice is heard from heaven, "Blessed the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth". That voice clearly bears
{72}
on the Spirit, because the Spirit answers immediately as if the voice were to Him, "Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours". These are only illustrations of what may be said as to the blessed Spirit of God as an Object of conversation on our part; that is, to be conversed with. In type @Genesis 24 is very clear that the chief servant of Abraham is a type of the Holy Spirit, and that he conversed with Rebecca, that is to say, the Holy Spirit in type conversed with Rebecca who is a type of the assembly. Well, many other passages might be introduced, but I believe what is said is enough now to have in our minds, so that the Spirit may have His full place with us. He has it among the saints in general, so far as I can hear, particularly in this country, and in Australasia, and in the British Isles, and so far as I know on the continent of Europe too, and in the West Indies. The general thought of conversing with the Spirit is laid hold of and practised and enjoyed. The brethren are speaking of having great enjoyment in the fellowship that they have with the blessed Spirit of God, and why should they not have, because the Spirit of God can help us, and does help us? He adds His help to our weaknesses.
J.S.Sr. Would @Matthew 5: 17 help us in connection with establishing the Old and New Testaments on the same basis? "Think not that I am come to make void the law or the prophets; I am not come to make void, but to fulfil".
J.T. Very good.
Rem. It has been said sometimes that Paul did not say much about the Spirit on the line on which we are now speaking, but one has noticed how he does give place to the Spirit in this way. Just to mention one instance in @Isaiah 6, it says, "I heard the voice of the Lord saying, ... Go, and thou shalt say unto this people". When Paul quotes that in @Acts 28, he says, "Well spoke the Holy
{73}
Spirit", suggesting thus that the Holy Spirit is speaking today and Paul is making much of that?
J.T. Quite so; you get many instances of that kind, where the Holy Spirit is used to convey the scriptures of the Old Testament, as for instance in @Hebrews 10.
S.McC. Is it not interesting that in the section read in @John 7 the matter as to the Spirit comes up in relation to Jesus teaching in the temple? Much has been made in the recovery of the truth in our day as to the temple and teaching in that light. In verse 14, "Jesus went up into the temple and taught". He is teaching in the temple. We get letters from all parts enquiring as to this matter of the Spirit, but do you not think it is important that the brethren should see the gain of enquiring as to it in relation to the temple?
J.T. I would refer to @Luke 2 in regard to that, as to Simeon; he came by the Spirit into the temple, he is a man in Jerusalem, a characteristic man in Jerusalem and he came by the Spirit into the temple; and when he came Mary and Joseph brought in the Lord Jesus, and he took the Lord Jesus into his arms and blessed them. He blessed *them*.
A.R. Is not this matter of speaking to the Spirit as seen in @Acts 10, worth reading? It says in verse 13, "And there was a voice to him, Rise, Peter, slay and eat. And Peter said, In no wise, Lord; for I have never eaten anything common or unclean. And there was a voice again the second time to him, What God has cleansed, do not *thou* make common". Then it goes on to say in verse 19, "But as Peter continued pondering over the vision, the Spirit said to him, Behold, three men seek thee; but rise up, go down, and go with them, nothing doubting, because *I* have sent them". That clearly shows there was a conversation going on between the Spirit and Peter.
{74}
J.T. I would say that clearly.
S.McC. It is rather interesting that in @John 7 we have not a direct text quoted, but the Lord says, "He that believes on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water".
J.T. The Lord leaves it open, and He is saying in effect to us this afternoon, Why do you not study your Bibles, and see if you can find that scripture? I think we can; I believe we have not far to go. In @Genesis 24, Isaac was coming and going from the well. There are many wells in Genesis, and there we begin with the thought of rivers; and there are other such scriptures to indicate that the idea of rivers is important in the Old Testament, and they are alluded to in this chapter; the Lord Himself stressing for our benefit, that the Scriptures have said so and so, and that if we look into them we shall find that it is so. The Lord did not mean anything else but that the Scriptures were findable.
Rem. The footnote on the word 'believe' indicates that it is 'characteristically believing', "He that believes", is characteristic. Is that state necessary in order to reach the great truth as to addressing the Spirit?
J.T. Just so. It is, as it were, round about the Spirit, the Spirit is the centre of things, the centre of the inquiry. The subject is the Spirit really, "But this he said concerning the Spirit".
J.H.P. Does not the expression "Jesus stood and cried", suggest how urgent a matter this is, and how we should move quickly as to it?
J.T. Yes. These phrases are so unusual that the Lord should be seen standing and crying. You find it in some other instances, but not many. I am glad you mentioned it; it is very urgent.
S.J.H. Would you say, that the last, the great day, was very empty actually, but the Lord is bringing
{75}
in at the last, in the great day, these very choice things?
J.T. He has something great to bring in, the word *great* is not to be overlooked, the Lord has something great to say Himself as to what He had in His mind. He had said already that "the scripture has said", but He Himself had something great to say. He had what we are engaged with this afternoon, and what has been engaging us for months past, and do not we all regard it as great?
S.J.H. I was thinking of that, and the fact of urgency being mentioned; it is the last day, and as we think to be near the end, the choicest things are coming out.
S.McC. It is very interesting, that in the climax of the revival in Nehemiah the culminating points of the first choir in chapter 12 are the fountain gate and the water gate, eastward. Does that not fit in with the present moment in the truth?
J.T. I think the Lord would say that is right, and I would follow what I believe the Lord would say, that there is much in that suggestion as to these gates. Linking on with @Genesis 24, the idea of water there is very prominent, and Isaac was occupied with it really, he was coming and going to the well Beer-lahai-roi, occupied with it at that particular time.
A.R. The revival took place in Ezra and Nehemiah in the days of the feast of tabernacles, and the same idea is in this chapter. It is the feast of tabernacles, like the end of the dispensation, is it not?
J.T. Yes, quite so, the feast of tabernacles is the last of the feasts.
A.R. I was wondering if it fits in with what you were saying yesterday about the seventh day?
J.T. It does.
{76}
L.L.P. Would you attach any importance to the fact that some of the most outstanding women in the Scriptures got their start at wells?
J.T. I believe you are right. We have been looking at that in New York; the types of the assembly in the whole Bible, beginning at the first of Genesis with Adam and Eve, and it is remarkable how many women are seen at wells, identified with water.
L.L.P. Yes. Leah and Rebecca; and Moses, too, met his wife Zipporah at a well. He served her, and his father-in-law was a man that was able to link on and give his daughter a right start and a right link. And then with Rebecca, the servant tested her at the well, as to whether she fitted in with what he required.
J.T. In the fourth of John, there is another.
A.N.W. Would Achsah be on that line?
J.H.P. Rachel was connected with a well, and she was a shepherdess.
J.T. A shepherdess, quite so. Jacob rolled away the stone from the well as soon as she came to light.
A.B. In the end of @John 4 which we did not read, the Lord would seem to make it urgent to the disciples that the reaping time is here. I wondered whether in the last twenty years we have perhaps had the reaping in relation to the Father, and then later to the Son, and whether this might not be the last field to be reaped.
J.T. The field of the Spirit, very good. I hope we all understand that. Now you have to say a little more because it is all so vast.
A.B. I just wondered whether this field in relation to the Spirit might not be the last field to be reaped, and therefore it is an urgent matter.
J.T. I think it is very urgent; and another thing I am reminded of, the order in which these great subjects have come out. We had eternal life before most of us were in the field at all, and we have been
{77}
engaged with it for a long time. Then after that we had the sonship of Christ; we used to speak of the eternal Son, but that has been set aside, for the sonship of Christ refers to Him in manhood, not in the eternal state at all, but in manhood. So that we may say the first field is eternal life, and the second field is the sonship of Christ, and now this third field is the Spirit of God, and we want to get the full bearing of that this afternoon.
A.N.W. If we could only be gleaners! The word was to the gleaner to go to no other field, but glean where the reapers are.
J.T. The field of Boaz.
W.P. In relation to the urgency of the matter, is it not interesting that three of the types in the Old Testament were seen in peculiar activity? Rebecca was one, and Achsah was another, and Abigail was another. Do they help us to see the urgency with which matters are to be taken on?
J.T. They do.
A.R. Do you think the urgency of this matter of the Spirit is in view of the rapture?
J.T. I think so.
Ques. Regarding the order of @Genesis 26 following chapter 24, which brings to light the assembly, in chapter 26 the wells are dug, suggesting that that is the way the truth has come out today, like the new well that was dug, would you say?
J.T. Quite so; and Isaac named that well the Broadways; so that things are enlarged in chapter 26. The wells that Abraham had dug were closed up, the Philistines had done that, but Isaac was opening them up again, and in his services God helps him to get to the Broadways. There is plenty of liberty now in this new well that is opened up. And then another thing in that chapter is that the Philistines came to see Isaac and he sent them away; he had moral power to send them away, and they went away in
{78}
peace from him. The idea in our meetings is to promote peace, not strife, but peace.
E.T. Is this expression, "out of his belly", linked up with the idea of assimilation? It is not out of his head, it is out of his belly.
J.T. Well, quite so. It comes from the inwards where nourishment is yielded, and where the strength comes from; that is what the idea is I think, that there is something coming out in power. It is not that we are weaklings. It is the believer that is alluded to here; "he that believes"; he is in power, he is not a weakling, he did not come just yesterday. In fact he is like Ittai the Gittite, he was going with David anyway. David says, 'You came to us but yesterday'; but he says, 'I want to be with you'. He had power.
Ques. Does the fact that the Lord speaks of the Spirit on the last day suggest that there is something lacking, and that the Spirit is intended to supply that?
J.T. The whole position amongst the Jews at that time was empty. What was there? And so in the second of Acts it was as the feast of Pentecost was running its course, that the Spirit came in at that point, the mighty voice from heaven was heard, and it was like unto the hard breathing of God, so as to announce the wonderful fact that the dispensation was inaugurated.
S.McC. Do you think that we need to be like Ezekiel, amenable to leadership in relation to the truth? In the latter part of Ezekiel, he is led in, he is led around, he is led without, but the last feature of movement is in chapter 47, "And he brought me back to the door of the house; and behold, waters issued". The last feature of turning and movement is connected with what suggests the Spirit.
J.T. Those rivers undoubtedly suggest the very thing that is in mind here in @John 7; the very thing
{79}
that we did not know, but that the Lord meant to convey. I believe it is suggested in Ezekiel, in the waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed over; what can we get more than that to illustrate the idea of rivers flowing out?
B.W. Would @1 Corinthians 2 have a bearing on that, communicating spiritual things by spiritual means? The communicating there is expounding, and I was thinking of what comes to light in a time like this and the authority of it.
J.T. "Spiritual means"; that means that we are able to converse profitably, and I might say intelligently. I do not believe that readings of this type especially marked the beginning of christianity, but they are much in evidence now; the revival has brought them out. These are conversational meetings, and this conversational ministry is mentioned in @Acts 20. We are in the time of conversational ministry, and it means that the persons who take part in these readings have intelligence and are able to communicate with one another, as it says in the next to the last chapter of the Old Testament, "Then they that feared Jehovah spoke often one to another; and Jehovah observed it, and heard".
B.W. It goes on to say in that scripture in Corinthians, "But the natural man does not receive the things of the Spirit of God, for they are folly to him; and he cannot know them because they are spiritually discerned".
J.T. That is a good passage to govern our readings as we call them.
L.W. Is there a suggestion as to the activity of the Spirit in verse 20 of @Exodus 23? "Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee to the place that I have prepared. Be careful in his presence, and hearken unto his voice: do not provoke him, for he will not forgive your transgressions; for my name is in him. But if
{80}
thou shalt diligently hearken unto his voice, and do all that I shall say, then I will be an enemy to thine enemies, and an adversary to thine adversaries".
J.T. That is an allusion undoubtedly to the Spirit; I think, however, that it is an Angel; the Spirit is kept more or less out of view, the Angel is in mind. He has to be regarded; they have to be careful in his presence, because he is not empty handed. I think it has direct application to the exact time that it was written, but its application typically is to what we are going through now, only that the Spirit is keeping Himself out of view, as it were, because it is an Angel that is in mind.
S.J.H. In reference to the rivers, would it be right to take the view that the recovery will be so complete that we shall get back to the thought of God in the four rivers that came out of Eden?
J.T. That helps. Why do we not think of these things? The Lord would say to us, 'You are enquiring about @John 7, but when I spoke about rivers of living water, why did you not think about those rivers in Genesis and Ezekiel?' So that the Scriptures are full of what the Lord had in mind.
F.N.W. You were referring to @Genesis 26, and there is a well dug at the end of that chapter following the ones that are named. Is it indicated that that might be Isaac's well, not one of Abraham's that is re-dug? Do you feel that the help we are receiving as to the Holy Spirit now is distinctive to this time, or is it a re-digging of what was known in the apostles days?
J.T. I do not know whether I could show from the Scriptures that it was known then, although I think what Peter says would indicate that he knew, for the Spirit was speaking and he spoke to Him, I think that is the truth.
E.A.L. Stephen was called a man full of faith and the Holy Spirit, and he says, "O stiffnecked and
{81}
uncircumcised in heart and ears, *ye* do always resist the Holy Spirit; as your fathers, *ye* also". Some today seem to recognise the types that we speak of, such as the type in @Genesis 24, but then they say that the types are being taken out of their scope. Has not ministry helped us to see that we cannot limit the scope of what divine Persons may do? Is that not really an uncircumcised heart operating? I mean they are not taking on the truth because they are resisting it.
J.T. Yes, they are letting the Old Testament go, so to speak, and reducing it to a lower level than the New Testament. I know, because I have had to do with them. One of the first things I had to do with in the matter was in @John 10, where they said to the Lord that He blasphemed because He said He was the Son of God. But the Lord says, that "If he called *them* gods to whom the word of God came ... do ye say of him whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I said, I am Son of God?". The Lord makes the point that it is a question of words, and the Lord is convicting them of violating Scripture, so He says, "The scripture cannot be broken", and that is the great word, "The scripture cannot be broken". The Old Testament is the Scripture, and it cannot be broken.
S.McC. And so the Lord is referring here to the Old Testament Scriptures.
J.T. There were none others when the Lord was here, and then after the Lord arose there were none others, and after He went to heaven there were very few, and then the Scriptures began to be written.
A.C.W. In @1 Timothy 4 we read, "But the Spirit speaks expressly, that in latter times some shall apostatise from the faith, giving their mind to
{82}
deceiving spirits and teachings of demons". The Spirit is speaking there expressly.
J.T. The Spirit speaks expressly, quite so.
E.P. In relation to our brother's question as to this truth being known in apostolic days are we not being recovered to the truth as it was in the beginning? It seems in the book of Acts that persons were very familiar with the Spirit and His movements in the testimony?
J.T. Well, no doubt, we are being recovered, but I would not make it entirely what is recovered, because there are fresh things coming out; the Lord has been reserving things to bring them out in view of the end. Of course the word in Isaiah applies in a general way, "a remnant shall return"; that is what Shear-jashub means. That is the burden of the book of Isaiah, but then we do not need to limit ourselves to the idea of remnant, because God is God, and He is insisting on the fact that He is God; and the Holy Spirit is God, and the three Persons are, each one of Them God, for there is only one God; and there are fresh things coming out, things that perhaps the early christians did not touch; and why should we not allow that liberty to the Lord in our day?
W.W. It is a great thing to see that God is not limited to what was formerly known; it is a question of accumulation, and God never returns to just the previous status, does He? He always brings out something more.
J.T. Quite so, why should He not?
A.P. In the formula for baptism, baptising them "to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit", does not that involve the knowledge of each divine Person; and severally, and in the order in which they come? Our knowledge of Them seems to follow that order.
{83}
J.T. Quite so, you cannot reverse that order; you could not begin with the Spirit, and go back to the Father. You begin with the Father. It is "to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit"; there is only one name, it is one God in the three Persons.
Rem. So that now we are getting an increased knowledge of the Holy Spirit.
J.T. I think so; I think when we baptise now, we have a little more light and power in the baptism. You take up the child with more tenderness, I believe, and more feeling, and baptise it *to* the name of the Father; it is not *in* the name there, it is *to*, as if to put the child into the presence of God. It is "to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit".
Ques. As to this question of speaking to the Spirit, is it not a matter of desire, the desire of the soul to give to a divine Person what is due to Him in worship? In these verses you have read it says, "If any one thirst, let him come to me", and then it adds, "this he said concerning the Spirit". Is it not a question of really thirsting in one's soul to render to a divine Person what is due to Him?
J.T. Quite so: 'Hast thou heard of never thirsting', as the hymn puts it (`236:2). These wonderful things belong to poetry and God may help us to write poetry so that we may sing better.
A.R. In regard to the service of God there is quite an exercise at the present time as to how we should speak to the Spirit and when.
J.T. I think if you take the order of the service, the Lord's supper is, of course, the very foundation of our position; it is the very centre of it. The term refers to the Lord; it does not refer to the Spirit, it does not refer to the Father, it refers to the Lord, it is the Lord's supper. We cannot speak of the Father's supper, or the Spirit's supper; it is the
{84}
Lord's supper, and we go through with that rightly first, then we have liberty otherwise. If we want to speak to the Father, we do, and we may speak about the Son; we may speak about Him, but I would say, we should be sparse in doing it. I think what we have been doing for many years is pretty nearly right, that the Father is the ultimate of everything, the Father in the economy is the ultimate of everything, and therefore we proceed with the Father and end with the Father. And this, of course, leads to God, "that God may be all in all".
R.P. Just when would we speak to the Spirit?
J.T. Any time, I do not see that we should limit it in that sense. He is the Spirit of God, a divine Person. If you are led to do it, bearing in mind what we have said about the Lord's supper, there is no reason why you might not allude, for instance, to the Spirit of adoption, because that is a term that is applicable.
Ques. I suppose we should rightly differentiate between those who are enquiring in a godly and reverential way as to the matter of addressing the Holy Spirit, and those who are criticising. I am one who, heretofore, had not seen the matter clearly. I should say, that up till today, I had been looking for the basis of address to the Holy Spirit; but I have been doing it, I trust, soberly.
A.N.W. Was it not your point, that in @Genesis 26, some of the wells were an occasion of contention, but this matter is not a matter of contention.
J.T. We have come to Broadways. We have no contention here today.
Rem. @Ephesians 1: 14, would bear out what has been said as to worshipping the Spirit; it says, "to the praise of his glory", referring as I have heard you say, to the Holy Spirit of promise in verse 13.
{85}
J.T. Quite so. Relative to the remarks of our brother here, I think that what has been said as to Broadways implies richness, a certain richness and liberty of soul, and you are much more likely to bear with people when you are in that state than when you are not so free and easy. One has used the expression, being on easy terms with God, and I think it is a very good expression; and then we may be on easy terms with the Spirit, and on easy terms with the Lord Jesus, and on easy terms with the brethren too. You will not go very far in speaking rashly or too tersely to them if you are on these lines. You want to go as far as you can with them.
A.N.W. May I just read that last word about the Broadways? "And he called the name of it Rehoboth" (which means Broadways), "and said, For now Jehovah has made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land".
J.T. Very good.
Rem. I was much impressed that at the meetings at Plainfield you said that the brethren need to have patience with one another in regard to this matter of the Holy Spirit.
J.T. Quite so.
J.H.P. As our time is nearly gone, would you tell us what you had in mind as to the passages in Revelation?
J.T. It was just to bring out the place the Spirit has in the Lord's own remarks. As we know, the book of Revelation was given to Christ by God. It is a remarkable thing that God gave it to Him to show to His servants things which must shortly come to pass, and amongst these things that John was to write were "what thou hast seen", but particularly as to now, "the things that are". We have read from the things that are, meaning the addresses to certain assemblies, amongst which is the assembly of Philadelphia; and the most precious address of all
{86}
is the one to that assembly, because in that connection the great revival has worked out. The Lord says to her, "*I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth". The Lord says that to Philadelphia, and we are learning something of the meaning of Philadelphia, I mean to say, what the name means; brotherly love, and it is very precious that it does, and we should be in brotherly love. The Broadways makes way for it. But as we were saying, "the things that are" refer to the addresses to the assemblies, and that to Philadelphia is one of the most precious addresses that we have. The Lord says, to that assembly, which would mean the assembly in our day, "*I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth". So that is a promise, and a most comforting promise, that whatever happens in regard to trade unionism or any other ism that is a trial to us, the Lord says, 'I will keep thee from it'. I would think that He means that we are to be kept out of it, not simply from it, but out of it, by being transferred to heaven, and it is a great comfort to have that in our minds. That is why I suggested that we should read these few verses.
W.McK. Does that promise apply in principle at the present time? The Lord does not say that He will *take* them out of it, but if the saints are faithful in the things they have to go through such as you have mentioned, the Lord says He will *keep* them out of it.
J.T. Yes, I think that is right too, I am glad you mentioned that; but I do believe, that the Lord really means that He will take us out of it by taking us up to heaven.
W.McK. Yes, I see that, but I was only thinking of a present application of the word.
{87}
J.T. You have experienced that, and you have been kept out of it, I think it ought to be understood that although the trade unions are now pretty stiff, and employment is not so full as it was, at the same time at bottom there is a secret understanding, especially in some parts, that if a man has a conscience, they will recognise it, I do not know whether you would confirm that?
W.McK. I have had to do with that, and one of the things that the business agent said was, This man has a conscience and has a right to be respected.
J.T. Very good. That is what is meant, and I believe if others of our brethren in the New York area will take that ground, God will be with them. Moreover certain letters that I have seen show that the Senators are sympathetic with the idea of the refusal of the closed shop.
A.N.W. We saw a letter from a senator in which he used the words, 'We are very much concerned about the matter', showing his sympathy for the brethren.
J.T. That would indicate that God is perhaps in the thing. We are not politicians of course at all, we are christians, and we are dealing with our own matters now; but at the same time the powers that be are our matters too, that we respect the powers that be. They are the law makers, there must be laws, and we are glad there are, and they make them, and we have access to these men. If we were simply to say, I know of a man who cannot get work because the trade union will not let him, the senators might be helped to suggest something that would lead to the brethren getting work without difficulty.
V.C.L. Do you not think that the understanding of the Spirit's place as the Comforter is peculiarly intended to strengthen us at a time like this, when we may be able to prove Him in that capacity as perhaps we have not known Him before?
{88}
J.T. That is to say, He is in charge of our affairs down here as the Lord is in charge of our affairs in heaven. There may be opposition up there too from the devil, but the Spirit is in charge of our affairs down here on the earth, and we see that He is working in our favour; we count on Him to influence the authorities. But we should also see that there is such a thing as angelic service, which I believe is very much ignored amongst the brethren. They are said to be all ministering spirits, sent out to minister on account of those who shall be heirs of salvation; and that ministering is very largely a question of interference in connection with our external matters, as for instance one angel destroyed one hundred and eighty-five thousand men in the days of the Old Testament. So that we may count on God doing things for us not only by the Spirit but by angelic service.
R.P. Why is the Spirit so prominent in these early chapters of Revelation?
J.T. Because it is a question of what the Lord Himself has been given, the revelation which God has given to Christ, "to shew to his bondmen what must shortly take place". He sent and signified it; the word 'signified' means that it is in signs, there are significations and signs; and He sent and signified it by His servant John to His servants. John is viewed as a bondman in this book, he takes a lowly place; he says, "I John, your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus". Then he tells us that he was in the Spirit on the Lord's day; much is made of the Spirit, and then he tells us that he heard a voice behind him, and it comes to light that the Lord is acting judicially in this first chapter. In the second chapter the Lord says, "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies". The Lord says, so to speak, 'I am saying so much, but
{89}
the Spirit could say much more; He would open up and enlarge on what I have said'. That is the mystery of it.
W.McK. Does the fact that John denotes himself as a brother and fellow-partaker before he says, "I became in the Spirit", show what is possible for us?
J.T. Quite so.
R.P. The Spirit now today is adding to what has been said, is that your thought?
J.T. That is the idea. You might say, The Lord has said all that is to be said. He has written seven epistles to the assemblies. Why do they not contain all that is to be said? But then the Lord has not said everything; He is leaving something to the Spirit; so that we have ministry, we have meetings like this, and the Spirit speaks. It says, "let him hear what the Spirit says", not what the Lord says, but what the Spirit says to the assemblies.
Rem. That is still continuing is it not?
J.T. Yes, it is. We have our Bibles open, and one and another is saying something, and the Spirit is helping us to do it.
A.R. These letters that are being written to Washington are not being written to politicians; it is a question of recognising and writing to the government, is it not?
J.T. Quite so, and if we do not recognise that, we are not recognising the truth, because it is part of the truth, and it dates back to Nebuchadnezzar, when God handed over the government of the world to him; and this goes on still. Why should we not observe that, and recognise these facts? We are not politicians, we are simply acting wisely, we see our brethren suffering and we want to help them.
H.B. In the second chapter of the Song of Solomon where the beloved says to the spouse, "And the voice of the turtle dove is heard in our land", is that an allusion to the Spirit, do you think?
{90}
Would the turtle dove typically suggest the Spirit, the form in which He would come down?
J.T. Noah too had to do with that; the dove is mentioned in connection with him. It has to do with the blessed Lord Jesus, and when the Lord was about to be baptised the dove came down; the Spirit came in the form of a dove and abode upon Him, as if He enjoyed the thought of being with the Lord Himself. And we surely ought to enjoy the thought. Brothers have written to me from several different parts of the world that they are getting great enjoyment out of the thought of the communion of the Holy Spirit; that is one of the phrases that we get in the New Testament; the love of God, and the fellowship or communion of the Holy Spirit. Then too we read of the love of the Spirit, and these are great things that in our secret histories it is our privilege to enjoy. We are to be happy instead of being downcast, or overcome by circumstances; we are happy, for the Spirit is to shed abroad the love of God in our hearts, a very wide expression.
Ques. Would ministry like @Ezekiel 47, have in view waters to swim in?
J.T. Waters to swim in. There is no doubt that that might be a clue to what the Lord says in @John 7 as to the Spirit, "as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers". That probably alludes to @Ezekiel 47. It is a wonderful chapter. We have not much more to say as to @Revelation 3, it is a matter of what the Spirit says to the assemblies, and how much there is for us in what He is saying. It is the Spirit in ministry.
S.J.H. Could you give us some suggestion as to the titles we might use for the Holy Spirit in the morning meeting, whether we would start addressing Him as Lord and then if we were free use the different titles as we go on with the service?
{91}
J.T. That would be a question of the intelligence you have, because the Scripture says, "the Lord is the Spirit"; you can address the Spirit as Lord.
S.J.H. I thought that would be more for the early part, perhaps. Would it not be something different toward the end of the meeting?
J.T. Perhaps so. The fact of the matter is that the subject is so large, the matter of the service of God is so large, that we might make mistakes if we spoke hurriedly, and our time is gone. We hardly know enough about the subject to apply it, and I am just a little afraid we might say something that would not be quite right. At the same time I do see that the term Lord is applicable to the Spirit of God, and it is applicable to the Lord Jesus Christ, and it is applicable to the Father; He is sometimes called Lord, as in @Matthew 11: 25.
E.A.L. In regard to the repetition of the injunction to hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies, would it have a link with @John 16: 12; "I have yet many things to say to you, but ye cannot bear them now. But when *he* is come, the Spirit of truth, he shall guide you into all the truth"? So that now it is not just a question of looking into the Scriptures and seeing a worded basis for what we should do, but rather as we are in the Spirit, He will show us what we should do and say?
J.T. Just so, and I would add that the times we are living in now are greater than simply remnant times; the Lord is bringing out fresh things for us from the Scriptures, or rather I should say the Spirit is doing it. The Lord said, "He will shew you things to come", and "He shall guide you into all the truth". We have not got all the truth, maybe we are getting some now.
Rem. Would the words of Haggai suggest that, his words that the latter glory of this house shall be greater than the former?
{92}
J.T. That is a good confirmation, so that we might expect the latter glory to be greater than that at the beginning.
S.J.H. In the temple there were half-open flowers. Is there a suggestion that they are opening up now?
J.T. That is right.
A.N.W. Does not @John 7 show that there is more in the Scripture than we think there is?
J.T. Well, it is wonderful, it is marvellous, the glories that are there! 'Hidden treasures' they are called, and we are to dig for those hidden treasures. We have not time, so we say. Maybe we say in the morning that we have to hurry away for a train; but then these hidden treasures are more than a train, more than your business even; we must attend to the Scriptures.
W.W. Do you not think one difficulty with us is that we want to stick to the letter of Scripture and not make way for the Spirit?
J.T. Quite so, and yet we have the Spirit, who is ready to help us and to guide us; it is a beautiful word, to *guide us into all the truth*.
W.W. So as we are amenable to the Spirit, He would open up these things to us.
J.T. He would indeed.
E.A.L. The Bereans searched the Scriptures to see if these things were so; it does not say they searched them to see if they were not so. It is a positive approach.
J.T. It is the positive side, to see if these things were so. Why does it say that? If the things available are so wonderful, why do we not just stop and think? Maybe we shall get some wonders.
A.N.W. The Bereans received the things first, they did not refuse them, they received them.
J.T. They had a readiness of mind.
J.K.P. Is there not a beautiful suggestion of the present activities of the Holy Spirit as bringing out
{93}
the full thoughts of God in @1 Corinthians 2: 10, where it says that the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God? Do you not think we should cultivate more the desire for the company of the Holy Spirit in that way?
J.T. I believe that God is honouring what the brethren have been doing. In @Acts 20, seven brothers were concerned about things there. It was the first day of the week at Troas, and they had the Lord's supper, and Paul stood up to speak; he discoursed as if there was a great deal to say, and I believe there is a great deal to say about this matter, and we had better be patient and hear it. They all listened to Paul till he finished, and then they went up and broke bread, and they went away comforted. That is the way things are; that there is comfort.
S.McC. Do you think that verse 11 of chapter 3 is a good verse to go away with? "I come quickly, hold fast what thou hast, that no one take thy crown". There is something distinctive about the Philadelphian phase.
J.T. Beautiful. And then the further great and glorious thought in the end of chapter 22, "And the Spirit and the bride say, Come". They say, "Come", not, "Come quickly", but "Come"; as if the thing ought to be taken account of at once. The Lord is hearing that all the time, they are saying, "Come". But over against that stands the patience of God.
{94}
THE WORSHIP OF GOD HIMSELF
@Romans 11: 33 - 36; @Romans 16: 25 - 27; @Ephesians 3: 20, 21
J.T. These scriptures record the deep feelings that moved the apostle in his writing, first in the epistle to the Romans and then in the epistle to the Ephesians. The consideration of them may serve under the Lord's hand to bring under review in a little way what immediately suggested the doxologies. We have first the ways of God on the earth as seen in @Romans 10 and 11; then the gospel itself as outlined in the epistle, leading to the closing verses where the mystery comes into evidence which is outside these ways. It comes into them but had been hid, and the subject of the epistle promotes such deep feelings as to call forth an ascription of praise to God in regard of the mystery. Then we have the unfolding of the mystery itself in Ephesians, leading to such feelings as are expressed in the few verses read, including the power that is available, the power in which God does "exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think". This last passage is intended to fortify us in the maintenance of the exalted truths of the epistle.
C.A.C. Yes, indeed. Would you suggest that the spirit of these wonderful utterances is intended to pervade the service and worship of the assembly?
J.T. I thought the consideration of them would lead us to the great end in view in all God's counsels and ways. In each case it is God, the ascription of praise is to God, God Himself being the great end; God as such being the end in view. I believe that as we are drawing near to the end of this dispensation the Spirit would move in that way, that God should come before us feelingly; for these ascriptions of praise are to Him because of what He is in Himself.
{95}
F.W.W. In what character do you view God in these doxologies?
J.T. Well, briefly, the first scripture in @Romans 11 alludes to His wisdom, knowledge and judgments as manifested in His ways. His sovereign ways, His sovereignty affecting not only His people but those who are not such; then the second in chapter 16 is God in relation to the assembly, the establishing (verse 25) being needed by us, but the doxology going to God as such; finally in Ephesians it is God as He is presented to us in @John 1: 18, for instance-"No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". So in Colossians, we have the Son spoken of as "image of the invisible God"-Christ is that.
C.A.C. In what relation does that stand to the name of Father?
J.T. Well, I have been thinking lately that these relations into which God has entered through the incarnation have in mind what we are; it is God coming within the range of our intelligence and affections so as to secure us with a view to what He is in Himself. Having entered into the relation of Father with His Son, that relationship stands, but it is necessarily a narrower or more limited thought than the thought of Godhead, although the Father is God. The great thought is *God*; that is the word the Spirit of God uses to convey the Deity. That is the great thought. The relation into which He has entered is not anything less blessed, for it involves our being brought near in relations suited to Him, not simply as creatures but as sons; and all to the end that men might through redemption be brought near in freedom to worship God.
E.J.McB. You think of God as the supreme thought?
{96}
J.T. I think that is how Scripture presents the truth.
E.J.McB. And as to these doxologies, would the first one be more a question of His judgments, and the second one more a question of His wisdom, and the final one what we might speak of as the greatness of God? He is able to do all.
J.T. Quite so, as regards what is available for our help; and then, "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages". Ephesians gives us the full thought.
C.S.S. Would that be suggested in @Psalm 50: "Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined"?
J.T. Quite so, the shining out of God. It is not now the shining out of His creation, but *He* shines out of Zion, the perfection of beauty. The first doxology here is, "Of him, and through him, and for him are all things"; that is, the bearing of all this is Godward, as indeed we should expect in ascriptions of praise or worship. In unfolding these wonderful things by the Spirit, he knew the One who was capable of such emotions, reminding us that in ministry and service these emotions are in keeping. The ministry occasions them; the servant is not only being used, but he is an intelligent person himself and capable of these emotions.
F.W.W. These doxologies result from the spirit of worship in the speakers?
J.T. That is what I was thinking, that in unfolding these sovereign ways of God in relation to Israel the apostle is moved first as to the depth of wisdom; the first doxology is occasioned by the thought of the depths of wisdom, that is the first thing mentioned: "O depth of riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!"
{97}
Ques. Would the title here be equivalent to the title in the first chapter of Genesis, "In the beginning God"?
J.T. I think so, I think that is what is in mind; it is God. "In the beginning God". The word is in the plural in @Genesis 1, which would emphasise the thought of the Supreme, the One to be worshipped.
C.A.C. Are these ascriptions specially to be noted as being the only intimation of the character of worship on the part of the saints? We have no account in the New Testament of expressions used in the assembly, have we?
J.T. You mean that we have no psalter in the New Testament, so we have to take these expressions as representative of what believers said in the early days. Yes, one can understand that if the apostle Paul were in a meeting on the first day of the week, as he would be as he had opportunity, he in worship to God would touch on these things. Of course, we rightly bring Christ and present Him to God in His infinite perfections as Son; but then there is what God is, and that is touched on in these passages: "O depth of riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable his judgments, and untraceable his ways!" You feel that the speaker is in the presence of God, the Source of all, for he proceeds to say, "Of him, and through him, and for him are all things". He is in the presence of God! He would be supported in this, of course, by the great Priest, for access to God is through the great Priest; and he would be in the power of the Spirit; but he is in the presence of God.
L.M. As to God and the Father, would you say why John in his gospel and epistles puts the two thoughts alongside so often? For instance, in chapter 4, "The Father seeketh such to worship him"; and
{98}
then, "God is a spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and truth".
J.T. While they run together, God is the great thought. "God is a spirit". The Father denotes a relationship entered into; in John it usually denotes God in grace, that He has entered into that relation in grace, hence, "The Father judgeth no man", @John 5: 22. That shows in itself that it is a title or relation narrower, though not less blessed, than the primary or the final thought. God is the primary and the final thought. The relations taken are with a view to the great final thought being reached, that God might be known. See what a knowledge the worshipper has here! What an apprehension of God he has! How he is moved in thinking of Him, in the word, "O depth of riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!". He is in the presence of God, he is in the presence of the great Being who has come out; and he is moved in His presence and moved intelligently.
Ques. Is that the thought in @1 Corinthians 15: 28. "Then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all"?
J.T. That is the end.
E.J.McB. Is this somewhat similar to Israel's blessing of Joseph's sons, where he refers to the God that had brought Abraham and Isaac through? "The God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked, the God that shepherded me all my life long", @Genesis 48: 15. Is that the character of doxology, and should we not experience, as the result of God's ways with us, this holy sense of His own blessedness?
J.T. That is what I think we might see, that the Spirit is aiming at that; God is to be worshipped because of what He is Himself. Jacob alludes to the God of his fathers, and the God that shepherded
{99}
him; his view is very great for him. But when you come to @Exodus 3 God not only says, "I am the God of thy father", but when Moses makes the inquiry, Who shall I say sent me? God says, "I AM". There you touch something that enters into this chapter; "I AM hath sent me unto you", @Exodus 3: 14. That is the ever-existing One.
Ques. As to the word of the Lord, "I ascend to my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God" (@John 20: 17), is God the higher thought there?
J.T. God is necessarily the greatest thought. The Father comes first there, but it never comes first in the epistles. When you get the ascriptions, there it is to God and Father; God is first, so that we have to take @John 20 as progressive. That is, you come into the knowledge of the Father; the Father is a term of the relationship into which He has brought us that we may know Him more intimately; the very term implies that. There is more intimacy possible than with God as God, but that intimacy that we come into serves us in good stead in worshipping God. The relationship is to that end, it is progressive; that in the knowledge of the Father I have power and more liberty to speak to God. I believe the Son in taking graciously a lower place on our account as Man, teaches us how to speak to God, gives us feelings, as in the case of the apostle here, suitable to God. The relation of Father and Son serves to that end.
Ques. Is God as thus presented the Source and Object of all, in Romans?
J.T. That is what is stated plainly here, and with a view to that we see how He acted sovereignly in chapter 9, not only in regard to Isaac, but also in regard to Jacob and Esau. He acted sovereignly as to Isaac and Jacob in regard of those born after the Spirit; but He also acted sovereignly as to those
{100}
who were not. He says, "Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated". We have to know God in that way. He did not say He hated Esau before he was born, but it is brought in in that connection. Before they were born He said, "The elder shall serve the younger". That is God's sovereign discrimination in favour of one person and against another. Then He raised up Pharaoh sovereignly to show His power in him.
T.C.F. Would you say that God has entered into a mediatorial position so that He might be known thus?
J.T. The relationship and the system of affections are really to lead us into a state great enough to worship God; not that the worship of God is any more blessed, but it is the end in view. Obviously the Creator is to be worshipped, the Supreme is to be worshipped.
Ques. Is that the idea of glory in each scripture?
J.T. Exactly, the great end is God, and these relations set men free, set us free so that we might worship Him.
P.A.R. Would this doxology connect with @Proverbs 8 in any way, the beginning of God's way there?
J.T. I think so, wisdom is in mind in that chapter as marking His ways. That is the first thing mentioned in Romans, "O depth of riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!"
G.C.S. In the song of Moses he says, "Ascribe ye greatness unto our God", @Deuteronomy 32: 3.
J.T. Quite so, "greatness unto our God".
C.S.S. Is your thought that these depths of God's riches are made known to the assembly, as we get, "The Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God"; and He reveals them to us?
J.T. He does, but this is really in a way greater, because it extends back to what was remarked as
{101}
to @Proverbs 8; it goes back to the beginning of God's way; wisdom was there. @Proverbs 8 takes us back to the beginning of everything, and wisdom was there; that is, you are impressed with this, that God was operating, and He was operating in wisdom. So that all Scripture is intended to promote the knowledge of God in our hearts and minds, from @Genesis 1 onwards. "In the beginning God"; a great thought presented in a word that denotes supremacy and power, presented in the plural as if to remind us of God; and that is never to be lost sight of. The whole tenor of Scripture is to keep that before us, to make us worshippers.
Ques. Is that what underlies the Lord's prayer in @John 17?
J.T. The three chapters in Romans blend together in the apostle's mind by the Spirit. He begins with deep feeling as to Israel, as to those whom God took up sovereignly, showing that he is not a mere instrument but a feeling person, a man affected feelingly. He is a worshipper even in that matter. So deep are his feelings that he says, "I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh", @Romans 9: 3. That is the feeling that the sovereign ways of God promote in us. He took up that people and the apostle gives us a list of things that attached to them. "Who are Israelites; whose is the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the law-giving, and the service, and the promises; whose are the fathers; and of whom, as according to flesh, is the Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen", @Romans 9: 4, 5. That is another doxology; it is the outcome of his feelings, of what he is about to speak of as to Israel, a people that God took up sovereignly and in connection with whom is the Christ; but who is He? God, over all, blessed for ever. Now you may question why this as to God is brought
{102}
in there. We come at the end of these three chapters, 9 - 11, to God, and praise ascribed to Him because of His wisdom, knowledge, judgments, and so on; but this God is Christ too. Christ is God over all, blessed for ever. I mention that because of the importance of our being governed in our minds by Scripture's way of speaking; lest there should be any shade cast on Christ. In making everything of God rightly there is not; it is just that He has come in according to this wisdom, according to love of course, but according to such a scheme of wisdom; that One who is spoken of as God over all should come in in connection with Israel and be known here as a Sufferer, a lowly Servant. But what for? To the end that the great primary thought of God should be reached; and it is reached in those verses read.
Ques. Does this first doxology suggest the entire solution of every moral question for God Himself, everything caused to work for His glory in that way?
J.T. That is right; all is for Him.
Rem. I thought this treatise on the gospel comes in so that God gets His own pleasure out of man now, however viewed.
J.T. "Through him"-we have to understand how that works out; I think the epistle has that in mind. At the beginning of these three chapters we see the wonderful scheme of wisdom, that Christ came in in relation to God's earthly people. Instead of bringing Him in immediately after Adam failed, wisdom required that centuries should pass by, and God should call out a people in connection with whom all these things should be, and then that Christ should be by them. Surely we have to consider wisdom in all that! Wherein lies the wisdom of God postponing the incarnation? He spoke of it in @Genesis 3, and He postponed it for centuries; and in the interim He calls out Abraham and Isaac and
{103}
Jacob, and attaches to them the promises, the law and the adoption. He brings all these things in before the incarnation. What does all that mean? What have I gained by that? What is there in that lesson book for me? That is what enters into these chapters; and then finally the Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever. There is the scheme of wisdom; the great lesson book for faith to understand and see how God reaches His thought in His ways on earth.
Ques. Is it not the sovereignty of mercy that the apostle is speaking of here? Having learned what mercy is, it fits us to think of God in this worshipping way.
J.T. That is right; that comes into it, the idea of wisdom is the first thing mentioned. He is rich in mercy to all that call upon Him; and Ephesians too says He is rich in mercy; but then He is rich in wisdom. What does all this mean? Why did He defer the incarnation? What is He working out?
C.A.C. And it is all God; if it is through Him, it is through God, not exactly through the Mediator. Is that important?
J.T. "Through him"; that is the reason why it is well to call attention to what is said about Jesus at the beginning as, "over all, God blessed for ever". It is God's doing, and the One who carries it out in detail, the Man Christ Jesus, is no less than that; He is God.
T.C.F. Would you allow the suggestion that the thought of God in these doxologies is greater than that of God in @Genesis 1?
J.T. It must be, for there we have the bare statement, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth"; but now we have the unfolding of wisdom in God's ways. Why did He defer the incarnation? He spoke of the seed of the woman
{104}
coming in, but it was not immediate. All this is worked out in the meantime. What is it for? It is a question of wisdom, and as a lesson-book for us, so that we should be worshippers from this standpoint, so that we should know God from this standpoint; so the three chapters go over the ground. The apostle in the first emotional statement tells us the depth of his feelings-what he thought of those whom God called out, Israel, as He called them. But what do I think about them? It may be only a few years before God will begin to move in them; what do I think about them? The apostle says, what I think is this, that at one time I was ready to be accursed from Christ because of them; and he tells us why. Then he proceeds to show how God in coming in in this way works sovereignly; He took up Isaac instead of Ishmael; He took up Jacob instead of Esau; and so on. The principle of sovereignty comes home to me. Why did He take up me? Any of us ought to be able to say that, Why did He take up me? He passed by others. That is intended to make me a worshipper.
L.O.L. Is it significant that we do not read much of wisdom until we come to Solomon? He asked for wisdom. Solomon wrote @Proverbs 8.
J.T. You can see how great a thought wisdom is in Solomon, in God taking up a man and making him so wise. Wiser than all men; wiser than Ethan, than Heman and Calcol; he had no equal. Of course the thought is Christ: Christ now is the wisdom of God. But we can only touch on these things, they are really the greatest possible things; the greatest range of things is what is presented in these doxologies. It may be the gain will be in the suggestion more than in what may be said.
When we come to the last chapter, the apostle has the mystery before him. Why did God keep it a mystery? We are told in @Proverbs 25 that it is the
{105}
glory of God to conceal a matter, we have to understand wherein the glory lies; the glory of concealment. So that what is in view is the establishment of the brethren, of the saints, "according to my glad tidings, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, as to which silence has been kept in the times of the ages, but which has now been made manifest, and by prophetic scriptures, according to commandment of the eternal God, made known for obedience of faith to all the nations-the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever. Amen". It is again a question of wisdom. We have to see wherein lies the glory of concealment, spoken of in the book of wisdom, that is the book of Proverbs, and how there was wisdom before the world, prepared for our glory. See @1 Corinthians 2: 7.
H.P.W. It says here, "According to commandment of the eternal God". That links us with the greatest thought of God.
J.T. Yes; God, but now the eternal God.
C.A.C. Is that the thought of the mystery of God in Colossians? It is what pertains to the knowledge of God Himself. "In which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge", @Colossians 2: 3. It is a greater and wider thought than the assembly, is it not?
J.T. That seems to be how it stands. The mystery of God, I suppose, includes all that can be called mystery. This thought of mystery is intended to make us treasuries, hiding places, safe keeping places or depositories for divine thoughts.
C.A.C. Then the apostle's agony of desire for the saints in @Colossians 2 stands in direct relation to what you are bringing before us today.
J.T. He was combating. One feels how meagre we are in dealing with these immense matters, but
{106}
yet they belong to us. One is made to feel one's limitations and the limitations of the brethren; how little we can elucidate these thoughts, they are so great and we are so limited! The very suggestion of these wonderful depths of God is so great, unveiling His mystery so that we may be rooted and grounded in love. It is the state of the saints that is in mind here. Even a Paul could not unfold the thing to certain ones because of their state. What God would remind us of is our state; whether them is the state of love and the unity of the Spirit, so that these things should be unfolded to us that we might know "the mystery of God; in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge".
E.J.McB. Would the thought be that if one accepts the sovereignty of God and the wisdom that has taken one up, one would want to be established in the present ministry and the place the assembly has in the mystery of God?
J.T. The epistle, I suppose, augments this; the apostle does not go forward to unfold it to the Romans, but it is the expected outcome that should be looked for by those who have received the gospel; "according to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery". It was already revealed; it does not speak of it as future, it was already there; but the Romans evidently were not ready for it. The establishment would be that we might be equal to the thing, to the mystery that he speaks of here, leading up to the great thought of God wherein are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. They are hidden there; they are not spread abroad for the natural mind of man; they are hidden there.
C.A.C. Could we have a little on @Ephesians 3?
J.T. Well, I thought it would be a good finish to our reading as leading up to the great end. The passage really begins immediately with the apostle's
{107}
prayer to the Father that He would grant the saints to be strengthened by the Father's Spirit in the inner man. It is the Spirit of the Father, I apprehend, to the end that the Christ should dwell in our hearts by faith, that we being rooted and grounded in love, should be able to take in what is "the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ". That is where we are led to, to this great thought, the strengthening by the Father's Spirit, that we might thus be fully able to know "what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God"-not the Father here, but God. Then in verse 20 he says, "But to him that is able to do far exceedingly above all which we ask or think, according to the power which works in us, to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages". It seems as if we are led there to the final thought as to what God has in mind in the assembly.
Rem. The Father's Spirit would give us ability to apprehend Christ in His greatness. "Strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man; that the Christ may dwell" in our hearts.
J.T. I think what you say suggests much. The relation entered into of Father and Son enables God to speak so as to be intelligible to us as to what He thinks of Christ, what His thoughts of Christ are. It is not simply God and man, it is Father and Son; and that is a relation that existed in humanity from the very beginning, and it is intelligible to us, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased", @Matthew 3: 17, was the announcement from heaven; and that was said of a Man. Well, we are capable of understanding that. God works by way of environment with an end in view. He placed the relation of father and son in the human race; I do
{108}
not think He placed it in the angelic order of being, although angels are called the sons of God. But I do not think Scripture warrants the thought that there is the relation of father and son amongst angels, that there is any suggestion of it. He is pleased to place that relationship in the human race; and all that God did had a purpose in it. He enters much more into detail than we are inclined to think, in view of taking us up according to His counsels. He operates externally: our antecedents, how we are brought up, our environment, all this is in God's mind. He works with wonderful forethought and detail in regard of each of us; and if He had the idea of coming in in the relation of Father and Son. He places that relation amongst men. It is well known. And so at the Jordan He announces from heaven, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased". Anyone who heard that would be affected. There is the relation of Father and Son; a Man being here on earth in that relation.
E.J.McB. And that is conducive to the knowledge of God in a worshipful way.
J.T. Conducive to the full thought that God had in mind.
C.A.C. So this scripture confirms the line of thought you have been suggesting; the Spirit of the Father strengthening, and Christ dwelling in the heart through faith, leading up to the great thought of the fulness of God.
J.T. Yes; that there may be glory to God in the assembly in Christ Jesus.
C.S.S. Do you think that the knowledge of the Son of God referred to in @Ephesians 4 is preparatory to our being filled to all the fulness of God as in chapter 3?
J.T. I should think so, but of course in the epistle it comes afterwards in relation to ministry. All comes from the ascended Man, Christ in heaven,
{109}
and the wisdom with which He has provided the ministers, as it is said, "for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ", @Ephesians 4: 12, 13. You are alluding to that thought of the fulness of Christ. That fulness of Christ is one thing; what He is as Man in sonship, what comes out of that, as it were, that is what we are to come to. The fulness of God is obviously a greater thought although they run together. Being filled to all the fulness of God is, I apprehend, that the assembly is set up in the presence of God in the light of the full knowledge of God, not in the weakness of the creature but in power filled unto all the fulness of God. I stand up there with all the saints as filled in the presence of God. Each of us would be there in that way.
A.J.G. Would that be the perfecting of the saints that you referred to at the beginning?
J.T. The perfecting of the saints comes in chapter 4, in the work of the ministry; the gifts are to that end, for the perfecting of the saints. That is to say, the saints are to be brought round to the full exercise of their senses, nothing missing, no malformation; so that there might be growth, growing up to Christ in all things. But then, "filled even to all the fulness of God"; of course it is perfecting, but not the same thought, I think. The thought is that there is capacity formed; the saints are great persons. The Father's Spirit in the inner man implies capacity. I want to be able to take everything in that is there; and that is why we ought to be attentive now. The apostle says he bows his knees because of that; in Colossians he combats in view of the mystery of God, but here he bows his knees in view of capacity in the saints, that we may be fully able to take in
{110}
the "breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge". Think of the greatness of these things! It is a question of capacity by the Father's Spirit in the inner man.
Rem. I was wondering whether the thought is seen in the sons of God in @Job 38: 7. The sons of God entered feelingly into what God was doing.
J.T. I think you can link that on with Paul here in Romans; how they were moved when the foundations of the earth were laid; the sons of God shouted for joy and the morning stars sang together. They entered sympathetically into what God was doing. With Paul, after the long history and manifestation of power on God's part, how beautiful it is to see him ascribe praise to God because of what He is! Not only what Christ is-of course Christ is the manifestation of God-but then God is to be spoken to in relation to what He is Himself.
Ques. Have you the Holy Spirit in mind in relation to God?
J.T. Certainly; He is God Himself. God is here by the Spirit. That is why I was remarking that we should pay attention to the way Scripture speaks. We have in Genesis l, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth"; then, "And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters". It is the same God but now He is moving in compassion, and that runs right through the history of the Spirit as we have it in the Scripture. It is what God is here compassionately and feelingly. God maintains His own majesty; He is God, and yet He serves, and even makes coats for Adam. And right through it is God as feeling, even humbling Himself to behold the things in heaven and in the earth (@Psalm 113: 6). Yet He maintains His majesty in the Deity.
{111}
Rem. The heart of the apostle is bowed in the conscious sense of God's absolute supremacy.
J.T. That is what I was thinking. The apostle is great enough to speak to God in this way; and that is what one would like, to be great enough for such utterance. The passage is a matter of inward ability; that we may be filled, able to take in these great things.
E.J.McB. We are to be competent to worship God intelligently.
J.T. And great enough in our feelings, not only to use the expressions, but great enough inwardly in ourselves in speaking to God. It is not only the question of intelligence, but of the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of God; that is @Ephesians 1. Then the Father's Spirit in the inner man giving me ability to stand up in the presence of all this, and to enjoy it; and to speak of it feelingly as Paul does here. You can see what a man Paul was by the Spirit, as able to speak in this way, and with such fulness.
{112}
*Pages 112 to 517: "The Mediatorial Service of Christ and the Holy Spirit". Meetings in Great Britain, 1949 (Volume 180)*.
THE MEDIATORIAL SERVICE OF CHRIST AND THE HOLY SPIRIT (1)
@Revelation 1: 1 - 20
J.T. It should be remarked that the purpose is not to deal with the whole book of the Revelation, but the beginning and the end of it, and especially with the seven assemblies. The primary reason is because the Lord is seen here in a mediatorial sense more fully than elsewhere. It is said, "For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time", @1 Timothy 2: 5, 6. The thought was that this book affords certain indications, or clarity, as to the mediatorial services of the Lord Jesus, and, of course, accompanying these are the mediatorial services of the Holy Spirit. In @Mark 13: 32 the Lord distinguishes between Himself and the Father, in saying that certain things were held in the Father's thoughts and counsels. It is as if the Lord Jesus takes the place of not knowing them, yet He is Himself God over all, as verse 8 of this chapter shows, "I am the Alpha and the Omega, saith the Lord God, he who is, and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty". Although He is God Himself, and never less, yet, at the same time He takes a lower place in the mediatorial realm, or the mediatorial economy, as we rightly call it. Then there is John's place in the service, according to verse 9: "I John". He stands in a certain relation to us as our brother, saying, "your brother and fellow-partaker", and he speaks of himself and how the Revelation came to him as he was in the Spirit on the Lord's day. We are thus reminded of what is
{113}
suitable to us as brethren, the state of being in the Spirit on the Lord's day. Then all that entering into the idea of an economy, and of the Lord's own rights in the assembly, and at the same time, there are the Lord's own rights in that He speaks authoritatively to the assembly, and then the Spirit is seen as saying things too, without specifying what the things are, "what the Spirit says to the assemblies".
A.J.G. Is the mediatorial position of the Lord Jesus emphasised in that the Revelation is said to be given to Him by God?
J.T. Just so. He is in that *position*, which implies a certain relative inferiority. At the same time we hold clearly in mind that He is God; that is, He belongs to the Deity, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.
J.A.P. Is the thought of the mediatorial position an eternal one?
J.T. I do not think it has been, although I am not prepared to say much about that, but it would look as if things are put on a mediatorial basis. Eternity is put on a mediatorial basis on the ground of redemption, so that I should say in general that that is true, and that we shall be on that basis eternally. Everything will be in the hands of the Son, for "the Father loves the Son and has given all things to be in his hand".
A.J.G. Do you mean that things will be on the mediatorial basis to all eternity, looking forward, but have not been on that basis in past eternity?
J.T. Quite so, because things now hinge on the incarnation. The incarnation is a fact now, and this book assumes it: "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him". God gave it to Him, and that would coincide with the verse in @Mark 13.
Ques. Is the mediatorial system designed so that all that is in the mind of God for men should be made available to them?
{114}
J.T. That is what I would say. We cannot exclude angels, but the redemptive work of Christ refers to men. The angels that fell remain in that state and do not get restored, but there are others and they are called the elect angels.
Ques. I thought you might say something more as to eternity being held on the basis of redemption. How does the purpose of God come in there?
J.T. We have the idea of eternity attached to the purpose of God. His eternal purpose, and everything evidently is to be based on that purpose. The angels (see @Ephesians 3: 10, 11) come into it happily and freely in this book even, as they do elsewhere, but the redemptive work of the Lord Jesus clearly has allusion to man.
F.J.F. We speak of redeemed creation. Would that be understood only in a limited sense?
J.T. I would say that, in a limited sense. At the same time we have in Genesis l: "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth", and then in @John 1 it says. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God ... All things received being through him, and without him not one thing received being which has received being". So that all was made to fit into the redemptive work of Christ.
Ques. Does scripture not clearly show that we are brought into sonship on the basis of redemption?
J.T. I think it does.
A.J.G. I think it would help if you would add a further word with regard to the question as to how redemption fits in with the purpose of God which was formed before any question of sin arose.
J.T. Well, that would have to be spoken of as it is presented in Scripture. There is the eternal purpose of God, meaning that it is a matter really entering into time. Although the word *eternal* might be assumed to mean something different, yet it does
{115}
not. It is a question of what is in the mind of God in an eternal sense. Eternal sonship is not a thought which we get in Scripture; the Lord is Son in time, but as to His Person He is eternal.
S.McC. When we are engaged with what is linked with new creation and the purpose of God in assembly service, would it be right and comely to bring in thoughts connected with redemption, or what flows out of redemption?-for instance, in Mr. Darby's hymn, 'O Mind divine, so must it be', finishing with 'We should be part, through Jesus blood' (`88:5) We have tended to leave that out, as linked with the redemptive side rather than with the side of new creation and the purpose of God.
J.T. Well, of course, new creation assumes that there is such a thing as creation, only it is a new one. It links on with the idea of creation in @Genesis 1, so that we have things new.
P.L. Would the allusion to redemption in Ephesians, the great epistle of divine purpose, link the two together? It says in chapter 1, "The Holy Spirit of promise, who is the earnest of our inheritance to the redemption of the acquired possession to the praise of his glory". Is not this thought of God's purpose linked up there with redemption?
J.T. Clearly, "Redemption of the acquired possession".
Ques. Would you say that redemption is the sacrificial basis upon which God gives effect to His purpose?
J.T. Quite so, *sacrificial* is good.
J.C-S. Do you think that redemption is involved in the scripture, "In whom we have also obtained an inheritance, being marked out beforehand according to the purpose of him who works all things according to the counsel of his own will"?
J.T. Quite so. Everything is "according to", it is continuous. The whole scheme of God is continuous,
{116}
beginning with Himself. It is a question of His will and His counsel and His love, and His power, of course.
J.C-S. So would the working bring it into time?
J.T. Yes, it is brought into time; incarnation belongs to time.
A.M. Does the idea of redemption bring in the thought of cost and value such as we might get in the expression, "to you therefore who believe is the preciousness"? Is what is secured through redemption in that way shown to be of added value on account of the cost?
J.T. Quite so. You mean the cost seen in the death of the Lord Jesus?
A.M. Yes, so that there is an added preciousness brought in.
Rem. As to what is brought into time; in the first few verses of the epistle to the Hebrews you get a reference to the greatness of the Person and the only thing said to be done in time is the purification of sins, the greatness of the operation in time. I was thinking of the link there is between the side of purpose and the work, of necessity done in time, in regard of sins.
J.T. Quite so. "God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son", or "in Son". It is God Himself speaking, and the speaking has in mind redemption, which was accomplished by the Son.
P.H.H. Is the feature of what is eternal suggested in this title of God-*who is*? "Grace to you and peace from him who is". I was wondering whether "him who is" was to impress us with the eternal Person, who is there.
J.T. It is the present tense, of course, and then "who was" is historical, and "who is to come" is future, or prophetical.
{117}
P.H.H. Speaking about eternity, and what is eternal; is there the suggestion that the eternal God is here having relation to time?
J.T. Quite so.
P.H.H. Would that put a great impress upon the mediatorial system which you have spoken of?
J.T. I think it does. Hebrews was intended for that. The epistle to the Hebrews was undoubtedly written by Paul, and it is to bring things out for the Hebrews so that they might come into christianity. The Person of the Son is thus stressed in the words, "hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds". That is, things are all kept within that compass.
F.J.F. Would you say that the love that prompted the counsel came to light in the sacrifice in the redemptive work?
J.T. Quite so. There must be the thought of sacrifice; God intended that. One of the Persons addicted Himself, speaking reverently, to do the work. It was by divine appointment, and He has done it, and in doing it He was forsaken of God. So the whole basis is the sacrifice of Christ, and it all endears Him to us everlastingly.
Ques. Does @Genesis 22 help in that respect, in that as soon as the sacrifice is offered God speaks of blessing in a wide-spread way, heavenly and earthly: "I will richly bless thee, and greatly multiply thy seed, as the stars of heaven, and as the sand that is on the sea-shore"?
J.T. Therefore it has become universal through Abraham. It is a question of God's purpose, of course, and the chapter is wonderful in that sense. It is a question of the Father and the Son, typified by Abraham and Isaac, and then God is speaking to Abraham of His purpose as to him. He is determined to bless through him, so that things are working
{118}
out to us through Abraham in that sense, and not through Adam.
F.C.H. Is that why it says in Hebrews that He took hold of the seed of Abraham?
J.T. Just so.
F.J.F. I should like to ask if the Spirit had any part in the redemptive work, as it is written: "Who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God".
J.T. Well, the Spirit was there, of course. The Son, as it were, used the Spirit, but the redemptive work was by the Son Himself. The Spirit was available to be used, as He is to us now, in wondrous grace and humility. The Lord Jesus offered Himself without spot to God by the eternal Spirit. It is a question of instrumentality, but as regards the actual redemptive work, it was done by one Person, and that was the Son.
Rem. "Having made by himself the purification of sins".
J.T. Quite so.
J.C-S. Is there any point in the service where we may look at the thought of purpose apart from the sin question, while still holding in our minds the redemptive thought?
J.T. I should not object to that much; we are keeping it in its proper limitations. The matter is in the hands of the three Persons, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit; matters are kept in limitations, so to speak, and yet infinitude enters into everything. We are thus dealing with matters that we cannot fully understand, and cannot assume to understand fully. It is a question of what is written, and we go by that, not by what we may assume, or what we may think, or what we may feel even. When we come to matters that have to be attested it is a question of what is written.
{119}
J.C-S. The Scriptures must be the standard in all these matters.
J.T. Quite so, absolutely.
Eu.R. In @Colossians 1 and in @Ephesians 1 we have: "In whom we have redemption". It stands in the Person now?
J.T. Quite so. It is in the Person.
J.A.P. How far is the thought of redemption brought in in connection with Christ's love for the assembly, and His giving Himself for it?
J.T. Well, it is clearly there, "Christ also loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it". Redemption is in mind. Many other things could be quoted to amplify that, but we should just confine ourselves to what is needed in view of getting through this chapter intelligently. We have first what is introductory in the opening verses, and then John himself addressing the assemblies, showing that apostolic feeling was there corresponding with the feelings of Christ, a beautiful thought. "John to the seven assemblies which are in Asia", and so forth. Then he runs on to the thought of the love of Christ. "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father, to him be the glory and the might to the ages of ages. Amen". That is the finish of one subject, and then the next thing is the Lord's own Person, and His coming, "Behold, he comes with the clouds", I am only trying to confine what we are speaking of, as much as possible, to our chapter, so as not to go too far afield, and yet get light nevertheless on the book of Revelation.
H.W. Why is it that we have in this book greetings from the Spirit, in the form of the seven Spirits of God? It seems unique to Revelation.
J.T. It is a very beautiful thought. The number *seven* suggests the fulness. Of course, the book is
{120}
symbolical almost throughout, and therefore we have to make allowance for symbols. The Spirit of God comes into the passage as, we might say, having part in the mediatorial position, as well as Christ Himself.
P.H.H. Would you say a little more about the Spirit coming into the mediatorial position?
J.T. It is quite clear that He is. It says: "Grace to you and peace ... from the seven Spirits, which are before his throne". So that the Spirit is in the position of mediatorship; He has part in it.
S.McC. Have you any thought as to why He is mentioned before Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, in verse 5? Generally the Spirit comes after.
J.T. "From him who is, and who was, and who is to come"; that is God. Then the Spirit and then the Lord Jesus in His humility, as Man here, carrying out the will of God.
A.J.G. Does the Spirit come before the Lord in this scripture because it is a question of God being here in the Spirit in support of the throne, and then Jesus Christ setting out in manhood the principle of faithfulness in suffering by which the rights of the throne are maintained.
J.T. Very good. So that we can now go on to the idea of what the Lord has done for us in making us priests unto God, "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father, to him be the glory and the might to the ages of ages. Amen". Well, we have come to the end there in that section. Then the next thing is. "Behold, he comes with the clouds"; that is a question of His coming personally in relation to the accomplishment of things and the administration in the future, in the millennium, I would say. "Behold, he comes with the clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they which have pierced him, and all the tribes of the
{121}
land shall wail because of him". So that He is now fully in our view, as the coming One, the One that is to set up everything, to set up the millennial day, and finish everything that God has in His mind to accomplish through redemption.
E.T.S. Is that why John bursts out in this note of praise as soon as Jesus Christ is introduced, the One who has accomplished redemption and won our hearts?
J.T. Just so! You feel how suitable it is. Everything is so suitable, and all centring in Christ.
G.H.W. Is this outburst of praise expressive of assembly response to the Lord Jesus?
J.T. I am not sure about that. The idea of the assembly would have to be put into it. Of course, there is assembly response, but I think we could find it later, in chapter 5.
J.C-S. It says: "To him who loves us". It is not exactly said to be the assembly, is it?
J.T. It is more the personnel involved; that is, christians; John is going to speak to christians. Then verse 9 says, "I John, your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus, was in the island called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus". We see John there who is the brother of the saints, I would say the assembly is purposely kept out of view, until the time comes for it, because, in fact, the assembly is about to be addressed by the Lord in a judicial way.
Ques. Is the coming of the Lord in verse 7 a challenge to the whole creation?
J.T. "Every eye shall see him, and they which have pierced him, and all the tribes of the land ..." that is the universal idea.
F.R.S. Why are you stressing the point of the brother?
{122}
J.T. Because of the expression, "your brother". How comforting it is that John is our brother; one like that who had such a place with Christ. He is the disciple whom Jesus loved, although that does not appear here.
P.H.H. Would John be a kind of sample of the brotherhood which is in the world, in a suffering position (@1 Peter 5: 9)?
J.T. Just so. That is how he puts it, "Your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus".
W.W. Would you say a word distinguishing between "the word of God" and "the testimony of Jesus"?
J.T. Well, the word of God is what God says. It is found in @Hebrews 4, "For the word of God is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit". Then in @John 1 the Lord Himself is called the Word. It is a question of what God says, although sometimes it applies to the Person. Whilst therefore it is a question of what is being said in @John 1, it is more than that. It is the Person designated in that character, I think "the Word" covers the Person.
Ques. Would not John taking the place of a brother tend to throw authority on the word of God?
J.T. I think the word would bring authority into our hearts, anyway. The word of God is what God says; it is the *Logos*. You might say it involves christianity; that is, what is being said by God, through Christ.
Ques. Does the expression, "I John, your brother", give a sympathetic touch?
J.T. Sympathy enters into John's address to us, and how that ought to appeal to our own hearts! He was "in the island called Patmos, for the word of God". He was there, in testimony, as a sufferer.
{123}
G.C.G. You were stressing a little earlier the necessity for going by what is written. Are you connecting "the word of God" with what is written for us?
J.T. I am using the expression which is well known in Scripture. The Word of God is God Himself, of course, nothing less than that. Whether you apply it to Christ or to God, it is God Himself. But then it is a question too of what is set out in testimony in the dispensation into which we have come. It is the character of the testimony now, not what will be in the millennium; it is what is going on now. We are to have part in the word of God and to be formed by it.
G.C.G. I was thinking that the word as coming to us would ever be substantiated by what is written. Have you that in mind?
J.T. I have, in measure, only I think we ought to keep to what is said in Scripture. In effect the Word of God is God Himself. Christ becomes it, and therefore it says of Him. "In the beginning was the Word". It is a designation of Christ personally, but then the allusion is to what He spoke and what has come out through His speaking. The Spirit of God, of course, is involved in that, and therefore He has part in the mediatorial system into which we have come.
A.J.G. Do you mean that the thought of "the word of God" is more than merely the expression of the mind of God, but God Himself coming out in revelation?
J.T. It is not only what is said, but what can be said, and all that enters into the dispensation into which we have come, showing the wonderful character of our dispensation. John has that in mind, and the Spirit of God has it in mind, and God Himself had it in mind when He gave to the Lord Jesus, in a mediatorial sense, this wonderful revelation; as it is
{124}
said, the "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to shew to his bondmen what must shortly take place".
S.McC. Would what the Spirit says to the assemblies be further unfoldings in connection with "the word of God"; that which *may* come out?
J.T. I doubt if there is much in this particular book of what is new in regard to revelation. What we are dealing with now, I believe, involves not only what the twelve said, or were given to say, but I believe Paul's ministry is involved in this book. I am saying this, subject to what the brethren may think, but Paul's ministry must be taken into account in the book of Revelation.
Ques. The assemblies that are addressed are really Paul's assemblies, are they not?
J.T. That is right.
L.E.S. So that the completing of the word of God would have this in mind?
J.T. Yes. That is the phrase that enters into it fully, "To complete the word of God", @Colossians 1: 25.
R.W. Has "the word of God" any connection with "made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father"? Is the word of God to come into expression through those who are priestly?
J.T. I would say so, because the word 'priest' would mean that we are in a condition suitable to have to say to God and to speak for God, on His behalf. I would say, therefore, that "and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father", involves the mind of God, and that God's mind was that His communications should be through priests.
Ques. Does it involve, "If any one speak-as oracles of God; if any one minister-as of strength which God supplies; that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom is the glory and the might for the ages of ages. Amen", @1 Peter 4: 11?
{125}
J.T. Quite so. Therefore it is a question of God, and the wonderful dispensation that is unfolded to us, through Christ mediatorially. We are in that now. It is a question of God and what He is saying to us, and what can be said and will be said, too. It is a wonderful thing that we are here today, and we have the word of God in our hands, so to speak, and the word of God, in that sense, would be what He says. It is a question of what God is saying to us, and what He is ready to say. Of course, that would all come out not only through Christ, but through the Spirit as well, because the communications would be largely through the Spirit. Every scripture is inspired of God, and, in that way, the word 'inspiration' implies the Spirit, and what He does.
E.A.L. Would it help us to see that this revelation was given to Jesus Christ by God, and then in verse 3 we have, "Blessed is he that reads"; would that refer to the written words of the Spirit? I was thinking of the Lord's word in @John 16, "I have yet many things to say to you; but ye cannot bear them now. But when *he* is come, the Spirit of truth, he shall guide you into all the truth". Would the things the Lord has in mind be the written voice of the Spirit?
J.T. Quite so. Although the word 'voice', of course, is not properly connected with writing, yet the expression 'the written voice' is quite intelligible and good too. So we have the voice of the prophets, which is what they say, or have said. And so it is what God may say or what He is saying; and what we are dealing with now, is what He is saying.
Ques. Would the statement, "God is in you of a truth" bring the authority and power of the word of God into our prophetic meetings?
J.T. It would, fully. The man that comes in at Corinth would fall down and say so, that "God is
{126}
in you of a truth". He reports it, and I hope some of the reports today will be such. It is the word of God, really, and we should not hesitate when we know it is so.
J.C-S. So that the value of this occasion would be that our minds and our affections are ready to be impressed with the word of God.
J.T. That is right. Then it is "the testimony of Jesus". That is to say, the Lord has His part in it, for it is what His testimony is. So we may well proceed to the part we did not say much about, namely verse 8. The One speaking there is God, of course, "I am the Alpha and the Omega". That refers to speaking, or to language, and the allusion is to God in the sense of One who speaks, or who says things, "He who is, and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty". Then the next thing is what we have already been saying about John, and then we come to what the Lord says to him. John says, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day". Let us notice that; we are dealing with the Lord's day, "and I heard behind me a great voice as of a trumpet, saying, What thou seest write in a book". Now, it is a question of writing; "and send to the seven assemblies: to Ephesus, and to Smyrna, and to Pergamos, and to Thyatira, and to Sardis, and to Philadelphia, and to Laodicea". There we come to the end of another section of what John was to write. We have clearly set before us who John is, he is related to us, peculiarly, and he is the one whom Jesus loved, and now he is speaking to us, and telling us what he heard, and he speaks about the Lord Himself. He says to him, "What thou seest write in a book, and send to the seven assemblies", so that we are now where the book can speak to us. By that I mean there is a word for us as to what John says, for he is the one whom the Lord is using in the unfolding of what is in His mind.
{127}
W.C. Would *becoming* "in the Spirit" be essential to hearing this voice?
J.T. It is the state we are in; exactly. He said he was "in the Spirit", and that is the proper state either for ministering or for hearing.
C.M.M. Would "I became in the Spirit" be something which John did?
J.T. Well, he is able to take that attitude. It is an action of his own, you might say. It is a state that he is coming to in the power of the Spirit. So that it is becoming to us on the Lord's day.
P.H.H. Does it involve power in John himself?
J.T. I think it does. It is inward power, involving what any of us may become, or what we may change to. John clearly changes here; he became something else; that is, he became "in the Spirit".
Ques. Would that be additional to the beautiful qualities that had shown themselves in him earlier, in his being a fellow-partaker in tribulation, and so on?
J.T. I think so.
Ques. I was wondering whether it involved what was specific, in contrast to what may be characteristic?
J.T. Well, what is specific is seen in what he is becoming, something in which the Lord can use him. Then we proceed to verse 12; it says, "And I turned back to see the voice". This shows that he is interested, which is another point. It is not to hear the voice, but to *see* it. That implies that he expects to see something, and that is often a very good thing when we come together. We not only expect to hear something, but to *see* something, because it is a question of what the saints are. They are beautiful.
F.J.F. Is that what characterised Moses when he turned aside to see the great sight?
J.T. Just so, and he did see it, too.
{128}
S.F.P. Whose is the voice?
J.T. I would think that it is the Lord Himself: "And I turned back to see the voice which spoke with me; and having turned, I saw seven golden lamps, and in the midst of the seven lamps one like the Son of man". So that I would say the voice is the Lord's own voice.
P.H.H. Is there a suggestion of that in @Isaiah 2? It says, "The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem. And it shall come to pass in the end of days, that the mountain of Jehovah's house shall be established on the top of the mountains". Is the seeing of the word at all similar to seeing the voice?
J.T. Evidently he had in his mind what was to be seen. It was a great matter. May we always say that too; so that if we are at a meeting, such as this, and when we get home the sisters enquire about what was there, we have to say the things that we saw, and heard too. It is because we think of the brethren; we think of what they are, and how the Lord thinks of them, of course, and then we can say, Well, what did He say? Well, that is another thing. We have the idea of what we see and what we hear.
Rem. Mary in the garden, in @John 20, turned to see the voice that spoke with her.
J.T. Very good. It is all a question really of what is to be seen and heard, and how the Lord Himself comes into it, and how we get disclosures, and how we change our minds too. We very often change our minds, and we hope we shall change our minds about things that we once heard and we are not quite free about now, because that is what these meetings are for.
Ques. Would the word in Malachi fit in, "Then they that feared Jehovah spoke often one to another; and Jehovah observed it, and heard"?
{129}
J.T. "And they shall be unto me a peculiar treasure, saith Jehovah of hosts". The whole matter enters into this chapter we are dealing with.
J.G. Would seeing involve the divine presentation, and hearing the subjective answer?
J.T. Quite so. The hearing, of course, brings in more than the seeing, because it is a question of what may be inside. The Holy Spirit is in the believer, and, therefore, there is much more to be heard than there is to be seen.
L.E.S. Would you say that Ezekiel's position as seen in his book and his name meaning 'strength' would fit in largely into this?
J.T. A good deal. That book is peculiar to what we are speaking of now. Of course, we all know that the book of Revelation is very much like what Ezekiel presents to us, but what is the specific thought in your mind?
L.E.S. He says: "This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of Jehovah. And when I saw, I fell on my face, and I heard a voice of one that spoke. And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I will speak with thee. And the Spirit entered into me when he spoke unto me, and set me upon my feet; and I heard him that spoke unto me".
J.T. The Spirit was speaking, and it was a conversational matter really between the prophet and the Spirit.
H.W. Would this matter of seeing and hearing underlie properly all true ministry? I was thinking of what the Lord says to Nicodemus in @John 3. "We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen". There is the seeing and the hearing brought to us in the power of the Spirit. John, in his epistle, enlarges upon it when he says: "That which we have seen and heard we report to you".
{130}
The Lord Jesus seems to have ministered on that principle, and also His servants, the apostles.
J.T. Quite so. As we run down @John 3, we get all these things. If we read fully a few more verses, perhaps we shall get a little more.
A.J.G. It reads, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that which we know, and we bear witness of that which we have seen, and ye receive not our witness. If I have said the earthly things to you, and ye believe not, how, if I say the heavenly things to you, will ye believe? And no one has gone up into heaven, save he who came down out of heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven".
J.T. Well, that is wonderful: "The Son of man who is in heaven". That is mysterious; it is mystery and what is presented as mysterious is one of the things we should keep closely before us. We cannot assume to know fully; we have just to look into it. We are only creatures, we are not divine, but we can just bow ourselves and be glad that we hear so much. There is a little more to say there, if you would kindly read it.
A.J.G. "And no one has gone up into heaven, save he who came down out of heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, thus must the Son of man be lifted up, that every one who believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal".
J.T. That is the point that I was thinking about. In @John 3 we are led up to life eternal, which implies redemption and the Spirit. We have the Spirit as well as being redeemed, because we cannot have life except by the Spirit.
H.W. John, in his epistle, speaks of that as something which he saw. He says. "The eternal life which ... has been manifested to us".
J.T. Yes. That appears in John's epistle.
{131}
Now we might go on from verse 17. We have seen the Lord Jesus Himself, in the section from verse 12, in His judicial character, dealing with the seven assemblies judicially. He is not building them up but, as it were, judging them. Then in verse 17 it says: "And when I saw him I fell at his feet as dead; and he laid his right hand upon me, saying, Fear not; I am the first and the last, and the living one, and I became dead, and behold, I am living to the ages of ages, and have the keys of death and of hades. Write therefore what thou hast seen, and the things that are, and the things that are about to be after these. The mystery of the seven stars which thou hast seen on my right hand, and the seven golden lamps. The seven stars are angels of the seven assemblies; and the seven lamps are seven assemblies". We thus have the whole matter now set out before us, so that we may proceed into it intelligently in the following readings. The Lord lays the whole matter open to us. He lays it open to John, and it is for us to take it in and ponder it, and then perhaps we would be able to help one another more fully.
P.L. In the presence of all the assembly sorrows, we have a model in John taking upon himself, in becoming humility, the grief of the whole position.
J.T. Quite so, "I fell at his feet as dead". The Lord did not rebuke him. He was rebuked by the angel later, in similar circumstances, but the Lord does not rebuke him here. He accepts it, and it is very suitable that we, in our attitude towards the Lord, should accept the position humbly, and then the Lord says, "Fear not", so that our hearts are assured. In this wonderful book, we are assured that the sufferings or the judgment are not for us; they are for others. Then it goes on: "I am the first and the last, and the living one; and I became dead, and behold, I am living to the ages of ages,
{132}
and have the keys of death and of hades". And then the Lord tells him what he is to write, which is a good point for us. In any written ministry, let the Spirit of God tell us what to write.
L.E.S. There is an interesting footnote to the word 'send' in verse 11 which says, 'have it written and sent:' it is to be a complete thing done. Then we have, in verse 19, "Write therefore what thou hast seen". Would that enter into the matter of completing the present ministry?
J.T. That is just what I was thinking, too, "Write therefore what thou hast seen, and the things that are", (these are the classifications of the things to be written about) "and the things that are about to be after these". And then the explanation; "The mystery of the seven stars which thou hast seen on my right hand, and the seven golden lamps. The seven stars are angels of the seven assemblies; and the seven lamps are seven assemblies". So that the whole matter is stated in the first chapter.
Ques. Verse 17 says, "He laid his right hand upon me". Is that for strengthening him?
J.T. That is the idea, exactly. It is what the Lord is Himself, the impartation of the power that is in Him. John is to be a partaker of it.
Ques. Is John like Daniel in the Old Testament, exemplifying the truth that the greatest love receives the greatest light?
J.T. Very good. He was the disciple whom Jesus loved, and the Lord is showing that He does love him. He is taking him up, in confidence, as one capable of writing such a book as this.
Rem. Daniel is addressed as one greatly beloved.
J.T. Very good.
{133}
THE MEDIATORIAL SERVICE OF CHRIST AND THE HOLY SPIRIT (2)
@Revelation 2: 1 - 11
J.T. It will be understood that we are not considering the whole book of the Revelation, but thinking rather to stress the Lord's addresses to the assemblies; that is to say, the plural thought; it is the idea of the assembly worked out in localities. It is also intended to look at the closing chapters of the book, where we shall find the assembly, not as here on earth, but as coming down from God out of heaven, complete. This will enable us to look at chapter 19, and the remaining chapters, especially the last. What is in mind now, is first the address by the Lord to the assembly at Ephesus, and then secondly the assembly at Smyrna. It is to be noticed that the first chapter conveys a description of the Lord Himself as in judicial garb. What is in mind is judgment, only there is the acknowledgment of what there may be that He can approve, making full allowance, too, for the vessel through whom the Lord was speaking, that is John the evangelist, as we call him, though more properly John the prophet in this book. John is told to write, and then the detail is given as to what is meant in the different symbols spoken of. So it says: "Write therefore what thou hast seen, and the things that are". "What thou hast seen" is the first thing mentioned, and then the conjunction, "and the things that are", and the second conjunction, "and the things that are about to be after these". Then the explanation in verse 20, "The mystery of the seven stars which thou hast seen on my right hand, and the seven golden lamps. The seven stars are angels of the seven assemblies; and the seven lamps are seven assemblies". Then we get the immediate word to the angel of the
{134}
assembly at Ephesus. The word 'angel', it may be remarked, is not to be taken as a literal angel, but rather as symbolic, as a representative.
P.H.H. Would it be diverting you to say another word about verse 8 of the previous chapter? "I am the Alpha and the Omega, saith the Lord God, he who is, and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty". Did we understand you to say that referred to Christ?
J.T. Yes. The allusion to the Greek language would point to the Lord's own speaking. The Lord is the One who is speaking, and He speaks of Himself in that sense: "who is, and who was, and who is to come". That is to say "who is", the present first, and then the historical, and then the prophetical.
A.J.G. That would seem to be confirmed by chapter 22 where, after saying, "Behold, I come quickly, and my reward with me, to render to everyone as his work shall be" it says, "*I* am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end".
J.T. That confirms, and we have in mind to reach the end of the book, but we shall reach it in relation to the assembly intact. There the assembly is presented, not as here on earth, or as continuing the service here, but as coming down from God out of heaven. That is to say, her place is in heaven; indeed we might say, using a word well-known, she is indigenous to heaven. The first part, however, does not mean that, but gives the responsible side of the position.
C.O.B. Is there a principle in John being told to write in a book and send to the seven assemblies; it is one book?
J.T. I think there is. It is as if God intends to have the idea of the book in our minds, because the Bible is really *The Book of God*, we might say. It is one idea, only greatly enlarged from the outset.
{135}
The beginning is by Moses; he is the first writer, and John, you might say, is the last. Although that may be questioned, that, in reality is how the matter stands. It only stresses what we are saying, as to the importance of what is written. We have what is said, of course, but we have what is written as well.
Eu.R. Does the Lord being seen in this judicial garb in the midst of the assemblies show that He has His own appraisement of the whole responsible history of the assembly from beginning to end?
J.T. Yes. He is saying something about it, but He is not confining what is presented to Himself. He also adds, "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies". Therefore we must consider what the Spirit says as covering the whole dispensation in the sense of ministry. We are to heed not simply what is formally stated by the Lord, but whatever the Spirit says, and that is through vessels taken up to be used of Him in the building up of the assembly, and the elucidation of the responsibility of it.
J.C-S. What would be said by the Spirit through them would be in concert with what is said by the Lord Himself.
J.T. It would be just the enlargement of what the Lord says. What the Lord says is in a few words, but what the Spirit says covers the whole dispensation.
A.J.G. Would that involve that the Lord, in pointing out things that needed to be corrected in the local assembly, in five cases, at any rate, out of the seven, has in mind that the assembly should link on with the universal ministry of the Spirit?
J.T. Quite so. You say universal ministry, I suppose you mean the real ministry, not what is professedly ministry, such as we get abroad in the denominations?
{136}
A.J.G. No, I mean what the Spirit has to say to the assembly as a whole, in contrast to what the Lord has to say to a particular locality.
J.T. Quite, or to particular localities. The word 'localities' would have to be regarded in the sense in which it is used in the letter to Corinth, which presents the idea of the local assembly.
Ques. Would "with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ" link on with the general position?
J.T. That would be the idea. It is every place; it shows how large it is, and how the whole earth, really, is in mind, for the Lord has His rights in it. He puts His right foot on the sea and His left foot on the earth. So the position is universal in that sense; He has rights everywhere.
Ques. You said the angel was symbolic. Of what is it symbolic?
J.T. It is representative of the whole assembly responsibly; we are all included. That is the idea of the assembly, only it is given under seven different heads. So that we begin with one of them, the angel of the assembly at Ephesus. That is the idea of local position, and that shows us how important it is. How important the epistles to Corinth are and should be in connection with what we are saying, for the idea of the assembly responsibly is seen there! The first letter to Corinth indicates the true idea of local responsibility.
Ques. Why does the Lord begin with Ephesus?
J.T. I suppose He intended Ephesus to represent the whole of His work; the full thought of His work through Paul.
Ques. Is that emphasised by the fact that while the Lord is addressing Ephesus He presents Himself as holding the seven stars in His right hand, and thus the whole work is in mind?
{137}
J.T. And it implies that His power is in it, so that what is done is in power. So that gift has to be taken account of in that sense. It is His very best. It says in @Ephesians 4: "Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men".
L.E.S. You were referring to Paul's link with the Revelation. Would this have a bearing on @Acts 20, in which we are told that he had not shunned to declare unto them the *whole* counsel of God?
J.T. I think he takes it that way himself. Besides, the great thought in that chapter is love, showing that Paul's ministry was carried on in love. It is not merely what one may be able to say and do in the sense of power to speak, and to lay out things, but that what is done is done in love.
A.J.G. Would that give force to the Lord's words, "Remember therefore whence thou art fallen"? They had really fallen from love.
J.T. I would say that fully. Therefore the challenge to our hearts is as to what we are going on with and what we have in mind. If we are going on to the end then we want to be thus in love. It is a question of love and God is going to finish, as He began, with love.
F.C.H. Is not Christ's own love for the assembly included in verses 4 and 5?
J.T. It is the love of Christ, and everything is to be on that basis. Paul said, "The love of the Christ constrains us".
J.C-S. Is it interesting that Paul in giving the Ephesians the basis for his prayer in regard of them, says, "Having heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus which is in you, and the love which ye have towards all the saints". That seems to be the basis of his prayer.
J.T. Very good, "The love which ye have towards all the saints".
{138}
Ques. Referring to the local position, does it emphasise the importance of chapter 13 of 1 Corinthians, a chapter of love? It says: "If I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, but have not love, I am become sounding brass or a clanging cymbal. And if I have prophecy, and know all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have all faith, so as to remove mountains, but have not love, I am nothing".
J.T. Quite so. We are therefore challenged as to partisanship, involving special persons or links. We are to be governed by love in everything, and not be special in our likes and dislikes, "If I have ... not love, I am nothing". We may as well admit that.
P.H.H. Would it be the work of love there which had caused them to try what was false, and refuse it?
J.T. Surely it would. The Lord is accrediting them with that, and, of course, it is quite important that anything that the Lord can approve He does approve; at the same time. He does not fail to disapprove what is to be disapproved.
P.H.H. I was thinking that ministry by itself is not sufficient, but we need the building up in love.
J.T. The building up in love, exactly. We sometimes hear that intelligence puffs up, but love builds up.
P.H.H. Would it be love that helped them to endure? "Thine endurance", and then later on, "and endurest".
J.T. Just so.
H.H. Is not the Lord justifying Paul's ministry in these chapters, in that Paul had to say in 2 Timothy that all that were in Asia had turned away from him?
J.T. What we have said as to this book involving Paul's ministry would be applicable to what we are saying now.
J.C-S. Ephesus in particular is the peak of it, do you think?
{139}
J.T. Exactly. The Spirit of God makes much of Ephesus. We know how much He says about it, and how much detail is given as to what was involved. I thought it was very remarkable that the value of the books burnt at Ephesus should be given, according to @Acts 19: 19, as fifty thousand pieces of silver. It is well to notice what was involved, and how much is said about the work at Ephesus.
S.McC. It says in verse 2, "And thou hast tried them who say that themselves are apostles and are not, and hast found them liars". Do you not think it is a commendable feature, that things and persons, in that way, should be tried or tested?
J.T. Just so. These are the Lord's own words, you notice. Paul and others speak about lying too; in fact, throughout this book we shall get much about that sort of thing. We are therefore not to be afraid to speak out what is implied at any given time, or in any given case, and to say the full expression that is needed. So the word 'liars' is a very strong word, and the Lord is using it here, saying: "and hast found them liars". Ephesus was accredited with that.
S.McC. It would be apparent that they did not just accept everything in that way?
J.T. Quite so. How much lying there is abroad in the profession of christendom in what is called ministry. Hence the importance, for those who are professing to walk in the truth, of being truthful, "Let God be true, but every man a liar", Paul says.
Rem. There is a word in the epistle to the Ephesians which says, "having put on the new man, which according to God is created in truthful righteousness and holiness".
J.T. Very good, "Truthful righteousness and holiness".
Ques. Is it not remarkable that the enemy's first effort at Ephesus was to set up a false apostleship,
{140}
as though to change the foundation. It says, "Who say that themselves are apostles and are not".
J.T. That is a very solemn assertion. Paul says: "Such are false apostles".
A.M. Paul speaks in a similar manner in @Acts 20 when he says, "For I know this, that there will come in amongst you after my departure grievous wolves, not sparing the flock; and from among your own selves shall rise up men speaking perverted things".
J.T. It is clear that the word for the moment is to be truthful, and to be free from partisan feeling. The passage in @Acts 20 stresses perverted things, meaning what had been done from the very outset. We need not mention a certain system that is to be thought of and that enters into this book peculiarly, but the whole system of christianity is perverted in that system. It is literally perverted in the words and the terms they use. It is now seeking to gain the confidence of Protestantism, but it is not to be trusted at all. It has the same character as ever and God is not going to let it go. He is going to deal with it fully, as this book, particularly chapter 18, shows.
W.C. Would the "synagogue of Satan" in Smyrna be a development of this false apostleship? That seems to go through, even to Philadelphia, as if the assembly has to face that power of opposition and imitation.
J.T. The word 'synagogue' is a religious term, and that system we have already alluded to carries it through, and makes much of it, in all the varied forms in which it is seen in christendom today.
P.H.H. Does the assembly, as spoken of in 1 Timothy, stand over against this, Timothy having been left at Ephesus? I was thinking particularly of chapter 3 which speaks about conducting oneself in God's house which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth. Would that be Paul's
{141}
exercise through Timothy, as over against the false apostles and liars?
J.T. Quite so. Timothy would represent a feature of service wholly at the bidding of the apostle. He is Paul's child in the faith; a man subject entirely to Paul.
Ques. It says in @Ephesians 4: 25, "Wherefore, having put off falsehood, speak truth every one with his neighbour, because we are members one of another", and the note to the word 'falsehood' reads, 'everything that has the character and nature of falsehood. It is abstract, what has this quality, not merely the act of lying'. Does that bear on the way in which things may appear to be true, but are perverted and give a false impression?
J.T. Quite so. Perverted things are the most dangerous; they are the most deceptive.
J.C-S. You referred to the perversion of the truth in christendom generally, but do you suggest there is even a danger among those who minister, that sometimes, in their desire to have something new, they go beyond the Scriptures and pervert the truth?
J.T. Yes, and especially if we have peculiar ability to speak, and the apostle speaks of that. Paul's traducers said about him that his speech was contemptible, but, at the same time, God was using it. We have thus to be on our guard not to rely on mere ability to speak, but to bring in love in what we are saying, and thus be marked by building up things.
J.T.Jr. @1 Corinthians 14, therefore, as introducing the matter of prophecy, says, "Follow after love".
F.J.F. How would they discern those who were false apostles? Would it be by the Spirit's teaching that they had received?
J.T. Let us read what is said about it. The Lord says, "I know thy works and thy labour, and thine
{142}
endurance, and that thou canst not bear evil men; and thou hast tried them who say that themselves are apostles and are not, and hast found them liars; and endurest, and hast borne for my name's sake". Now your question is how did they find that out; and I would say by the Spirit. The Spirit is here by us all the time. He is our Paraclete here below, as Christ is that above, and therefore He is here to help us to discern what is wicked or bad in ministry.
P.L. Would it be particularly as the Spirit of truth?
J.T. As the Spirit of truth, exactly.
D.J.M. As in @Acts 5, "Why has Satan filled thy heart that thou shouldest lie to the Holy Spirit?"
J.T. Very good.
A.J.G. Does not John himself in his first epistle give a lead in this matter of discerning the spirit of what is put out as doctrine? He says, "Hereby ye know the Spirit of God".
J.T. Quite so. And then his allusions to the word 'unction', as we understand the meaning of the word, "The same unction teaches you as to all things", @1 John 2: 27. He refers to the saints as having the means of knowing all things by the unction, which alludes to the Spirit, of course. But the word 'unction' is a striking word, and should be understood.
Eu.R. "I have not written to you because ye do not know the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth. Who is the liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? *He* is the antichrist who denies the Father and the Son", @1 John 2: 21, 22. That kind of thing is all abroad in christendom now so that we need the Spirit as the unction.
J.T. The unction is the point that John makes in the first epistle.
{143}
P.H.H. Would you just say a word about it, and the importance it has in your mind?
J.T. The allusion is to the Spirit, of course, but a peculiar word is used, which would show that John understood, and knew that the saints understood too, and that he could speak to them with intelligence. It is a great matter for those who minister to speak with intelligence, and to see that they know the terms, and the saints know the terms as well.
Ques. Is it encouraging that even the little children have the unction?
J.T. Yes, it is very encouraging. It is not little children literally, but little children comparatively. The saints are first addressed as children, then specifically as fathers, or as young men, or as little children. Little children are persons who are least formed in the good of the truth of christianity.
S.McC. It is striking how the thought of the lie is brought in in relation to the unction. It reads: "And *yourselves*, the unction which ye have received from him abides in you, and ye have not need that anyone should teach you; but as the same unction teaches you as to all things, and is true and is not a lie".
J.T. Showing that it is not really what any brother can say in a so-called reading meeting, but it is a question of what the expression 'all things' covers. The unction therefore is a peculiar word, and has to be understood in that sense. All things are within the range of christian teaching. It says: "And they shall be all taught of God", and christianity undoubtedly is the prime thought in the whole system of teaching. So that the teaching depends on the unction, and the Spirit of God is really what is meant. In the setting out of the truth at any time, whether it be in our assembly meetings, or in ministry,
{144}
or writings, or whatever it may be, the unction is the basis of all.
P.H.H. Is it the anointing of the Spirit as particularly affecting the mind?
J.T. Particularly affecting the mind, is good, I would say that, because the Lord's supper is the great centre of everything, it is the beginning of everything for us as to the service of God, and the mind is that which is stressed in it. It is the calling to mind of the Lord Jesus Himself. See footnote to @1 Corinthians 11: 24. That is where the mind is affected, and I believe it is the beginning of everything in the service of God.
Ques. Do you think "the holy one" refers to the Spirit there? "The unction from the holy one".
J.T. Undoubtedly. The basic thought in all this is the Spirit.
Ques. The Scriptures would have their part?
J.T. Surely, because every scripture is divinely inspired, and that means the Spirit of God has to do with it.
Rem. With reference to your remark as to what is abroad in christendom, John in speaking of the saints in his epistle refers to them as knowing the Father and having the Spirit; he does not go below that.
J.T. Then John writes his gospel as well as the epistles, and the gospel of John recognises the Spirit as bringing about new birth, which is preliminary to the truth of the Spirit received.
Rem. I had in mind what you were saying about things being perverted, and I thought John was safeguarding the standard in the way he speaks of the little children.
J.T. You said he does not go below, but then John goes down to new birth, too.
Ques. But is not that the operation of divine Persons from their side sovereignly?
{145}
J.T. But that is the Spirit. We are speaking of the Spirit, and @John 3 gives you the Spirit, and being born of the Spirit.
P.H.H. In what is said, "Remember therefore whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works", is there a repentant revival contemplated?
J.T. I would say that. But when the Lord says, "Do the first works" he means something definite and specific, that can be pointed to, not only in a general sense. I think it is very important in ministry that there should be something that can be pointed to specifically, and that we deal with specific things.
E.C.M. Do you connect "the first works" with the continuing in the apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayers?
J.T. Well, just so; only we are dealing with Ephesus, and the work of God at Ephesus, the failure of it, on the one hand, and what is commendable in it, on the other.
A.J.G. In view of there being so much that is commendable in Ephesus, and yet of the fact that Ephesus is the beginning of the departure that is now so evident on every hand, would you say a word as to the import of leaving "thy first love"?
J.T. It is an act; it is a solemn act. We say such an one is going out of fellowship, or growing cold, but the time comes when he leaves; he takes a definite attitude, and so the Lord says, "Will ye also go away?". We must take account of what people do themselves, not only what they say or have in their minds, but what they actually do.
A.J.G. Do you mean that this was a certain attitude of mind in regard of Christ that had developed at Ephesus, that they had left the simplicity of affection which marked them at first?
J.T. They left their first love. That is, there is no thought at all in Ephesus, or in the book, of full recovery. It is what they had done, and that is
{146}
specified; they left their first love. That could be specified, but then the Lord goes on to say, "Do the first works"; let them be specified too. Our brother spoke about @Acts 2, but then we are speaking of Ephesus, and it is a question of the first works that marked Ephesus. Therefore we shall have to look into @Acts 20 to see what the first works that marked that assembly were.
Rem. You reminded us of the words spoken by the Lord Jesus in the question He put to the disciples: "Will ye also go away?" Peter answered, "To whom shall we go?". He does not say, where, but "to whom".
J.T. Quite so. It is a question of a Person; leaving the Lord Jesus, in other words.
P.L. Would first love involve the assembly's sense of her place in the heart of Christ, and the sense of Christ's place in her heart?
J.T. Well, I would rather connect the things with the saints, as to whether love is seen amongst us, I am not saying a word against what you are saying, only we have to be specific so that we can put our fingers, as it were, on the thing we are talking about, whether it is in the saints or not. We may *say* it is in Christ; well, that is very general, but we want to see how the saints are getting on.
Ques. Are you thinking of the expression of love towards Paul in the end of @Acts 20? It says. "And having said these things, he knelt down and prayed with them all. And they all wept sore; and falling upon the neck of Paul they ardently kissed him".
J.T. Quite so. It would be a remarkable thing that they were kissing the great servant through whom the light had come to them, but then when we come to the saints themselves we want to keep in mind what marks them. It is not simply the great apostle, the servant through whom the truth has come, but what the saints have; what marks the
{147}
saints, and that, of course, must be involved in any word to Ephesus.
J.C-S. So that it is not the measuring of ability, but the measuring of what is really formed in love?
J.T. Just so. It is a question of what there is in the saints, really. So it goes on to say, "Remember therefore whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works". Well, all these can be pointed to. Then the Lord continues, "But if not, I am coming to thee, and I will remove thy lamp out of its place, except thou shalt repent. But this thou hast, that thou hatest the works of the Nicolaitanes, which *I* also hate". So the Lord can refer to something that was hated at Ephesus, and *that* can be pointed to, also. It is not a general idea, it is some specific thing that is hated.
Ques. What is involved in the expression, "But if not, I am coming to thee"?
J.T. I would say it is a question of the Lord coming in and dealing with some local assembly, or something in some local assembly. As He comes to us on the first day of the week in love, so He comes in, at other times, in judgment. It may happen at any time. "Coming to thee" conveys the thought that He is apt to be there, in the way of judgment, as judging sin. It is a very solemn thing. Sometimes things happen and we wonder at it, but the explanation may be that the Lord has come into a matter.
Ques. Is that in keeping with the remark in the gospel of Mark, that He "looked round on all things"?
J.T. Just so; "on all things", whatever they may be.
Rem. It is as coming into the temple and the sphere of profession, that He looked round on all things, I thought it was an illustration of what you were saying.
{148}
A.J.G. Do you mean that we are to keep in mind that the Lord maintains this attitude of walking in the midst of the assemblies judicially?
J.T. Quite so. Many a time I have thought of it. The Lord, in the gospels, alludes at times to His coming Himself. He comes at times; He takes His own time and we cannot say that the Lord must be there, because He says, 'I will be there if I will be'. The Lord has His own rights, and therefore if He comes to us to judge things, He will judge them, but if He comes to evaluate and praise things, He will do that. Therefore we might connect His coming here with @John 14, "I am coming to you".
P.H.H. Does your remark about specific things explain why sometimes we take long to get free in a meeting? We may think it is just a general state, whereas the Lord would have in mind specific details which need attention?
J.T. That is just what I am thinking. We are too general in our remarks about matters, whereas we ought to be specific about the things. When we come to our so-called care meetings, we try to be specific, and we may arrive at a judgment in assembly, but the Lord Himself has to come sometimes. And so at Corinth, I would say the Lord Himself came there and dealt with that incestuous man.
R.B. Are you thinking of Paul's remark, "What will ye? that I come to you with a rod; or in love?"
J.T. Exactly.
J.O.S. Then there is the word to Gaius as to Diotrephes, "If I come, I will bring to remembrance his works", @3 John 10.
J.T. Now we shall have to proceed. In verse 7 it says, "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies". That is the first mention of the Spirit's work. "To him that overcomes, I will give to him to eat of the tree of life which is
{149}
in the paradise of God". We have now come to what the Lord is promising; that is to say, we count on His promises in these epistles.
F.C.H. The Lord said, "It is more blessed to give than to receive". Is there not His own joy in giving these portions to the overcomer?
J.T. Quite so.
P.H.H. What is the exact meaning of the overcomer, in this setting?
J.T. The idea of overcoming is a general thought covering these epistles. The Lord sets Himself out as the great Overcomer at the end of @John 16, and also in the word to Laodicea. "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" @1 John 5: 5. We get there the true idea of overcoming, in that sense; but this is a more general idea, and covers the whole of these epistles.
H.W. Would you think that the gospel by John is intended to help us to be overcomers, in the apprehension of the Person of Christ? It was supposed to have been written after the Revelation, I understand.
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Would not the man in @John 9 be a good example?
J.T. Very good. The opposition was great, but he overcame it, and the Lord took him on as soon as He saw that. It says the Lord found him, which is very comforting and precious, and He says, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?". That is just what we are talking about, that overcoming is bound up with belief in the Son of God. But, in these epistles, if is more general than that; the word is not specified.
W.C. Does verse 7 indicate that the Spirit is on the line of recovery by being Himself the Spirit of overcoming?
{150}
J.T. Well, quite so.
W.C. Now that "what the Spirit says to the assemblies" is mentioned, an overcomer is contemplated.
J.T. Yes. We must confine ourselves, in the main, to being specific, in that sense, to what the Lord says, and that is what we get here, and so "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies". But, the Lord says, "To him that overcomes, I will give to him to eat of the tree of life which is in the paradise of God". It is the Lord's own word, but He is not telling us just what to overcome means; it is for us to understand; it is there.
Ques. Is it significant that it is addressed to an individual, to all who may have that character?
J.T. Very good-"to him". Now we must go on to verse 8, to get to the end of the passage. What is to be said here is that Smyrna is the great suffering assembly. Suffering had come in, as if the Lord had taken account of what had happened at Ephesus and was allowing suffering. He specifies that there will be the ten days of suffering, which is a remarkable thing, and that is to save the whole position, I would say, but especially Smyrna. It is a suffering assembly, but salvation is by suffering, which we ought to recognise.
A.J.G. Is it encouraging that while the suffering comes through means of the devil, as it says, "the devil is about to cast of you into prison", yet the Lord has control of it and limits it to ten days?
J.T. Exactly; the Lord Himself has control of the devil, which is very comforting. The whole matter is under His hand.
L.E.S. Would it suggest that it is not so much a matter here of their works, but what flows out of their works? He does not say, "I know thy works" but "I know thy tribulation".
{151}
J.T. That is what He says, "I know thy tribulation and thy poverty; but thou art rich; and the railing of those who say that they themselves are Jews, and are not, but a synagogue of Satan. Fear nothing of what thou art about to suffer. Behold, the devil is about to cast of you into prison". He goes on to set us up fearlessly, in entire independence, as overcoming the opposition there is. This is the state of things at Smyrna. It is a most encouraging word.
A.M-h. Would it be like the Lord's word in the last verse of @John 16: "In the world ye have tribulation; but be of good courage: I have overcome the world"?
J.T. I would say that, fully. It is almost the centre of John's thoughts in the gospel and it is to encourage the Lord's people.
A.H-n. Is that seen in @Acts 9, "Saul, still breathing out threatenings and slaughter", and the section concludes with: "The assemblies then throughout the whole of Judaea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified and walking in the fear of the Lord, and were increased through the comfort of the Holy Spirit"? I wondered if the suffering began in the first part of chapter 9, and the divine answer is seen in the close of the section.
J.T. Very good. The word 'assemblies' is doubtful there, but it is the general idea, I think, and they had comfort, the comfort of the Holy Spirit.
P.H.H. Is it significant, the way the word 'life' and the thought of what is living appears in these passages?
J.T. I thought of it as we were reading it, I omitted referring to that; so that it is well now to refer to the various references to what is living in the word to Smyrna, for it is a very comforting word.
P.H.H. First of all, the Lord says of Himself, in verse 8, "These things says the first and the last,
{152}
who became dead, and lived", and then at the end of verse 10, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give to thee the crown of life".
J.T. It reminds you of the apostle Paul saying, "Having the desire for departure and being with Christ, for it is very much better", I believe he is saying there that we need not fear death, and we are all very prone to fear it, and to fear it too much. But we are to learn how not to fear it, as the Lord Himself said, "And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul, but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell", @Matthew 10: 28. Therefore I think the word is very important; that is to say, we will not be afraid of death.
P.H.H. What about the tree of life, in verse 7? Would that fit into that theme?
J.T. It is the full idea of life, of heavenly growth. It is taken up again in chapter 22.
P.H.H. In the end of chapter 1 the Lord refers to Himself as the living One who became dead, and then "living to the ages of ages". Then the references made here, including Himself, and then the tree of life and the crown of life. Is there something peculiarly sweet about the tree of life?
J.T. I think there is, and about the crown of life, too, because the crown refers to ourselves; it does not refer to the Lord. He said He would give *them* the crown of life, I think it is a word for us, and I have felt it very much. How prone we are to be afraid of death, instead of going through in the will of God and accepting what comes to us, and accepting it joyfully, because it is a question of joy.
Ques. Is that illustrated in @Acts 16-Paul and Silas wonderfully unafraid overcomers in the Lord?
J.T. Wonderful! They sang in the prison and the prisoners were listening to them, which is very
{153}
beautiful! They were listening to them in their sufferings; but they were singing, they were engaged in the service of God, in spite of the suffering. Their feet were made fast in the stocks, and they were suffering, but they were singing, and the prisoners were listening to them. There was a regular congregation there that they did not expect.
Ques. Was it not exemplified particularly in the early martyrs of this period of the assembly's history?
J.T. Just so. This period is the time of the early martyrs, and, of course, the idea of martyrdom was prolonged in the Reformation. Those of us who have had part in the revival have not had much to contend with, in that sense, but the Lord may cause us to come into it unless we are awake to it. There is a terrible time ahead of us; the great apostasy is ahead of us and almost imminent, and we may as well face it.
Ques. Is the full thought of it in @2 Corinthians 1: 9, where it says. "But we ourselves had the sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not have our trust in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead"?
J.T. That is right. We have the sentence of death in ourselves. That is to say, it cannot be any worse. And then the joy that Paul alludes to is very beautiful. He says, "Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better", and, of course, that means victory, and the apostle Paul leads the way in it.
J.C-S. Are you suggesting that we are getting near the time when the conditions that are present in Smyrna may be repeated? The name Smyrna means 'myrrh'. You may say that odour permeates this epistle to them, and the suffering seems to bring it out, so that the Lord has nothing whatever to complain of among them, nothing to disapprove.
{154}
J.T. Myrrh-yes, quite so, "If indeed we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him", @Romans 8: 17.
S.McC. Would not this particularly be of encouragement to our brethren universally, faced with the trade union matter? And do you not think it would help them to face it?
J.T. Exactly. And the Lord is helping them too, and giving deliverances. Some of us know well enough what it is.
Ques. Is it to be noted that while the devil may cast into prison, it is that "ye may be tried". Is it to bring out the reliability of divine workmanship?
J.T. Just so; and that recovery may take place, too; because the man at Corinth was recovered sooner than Paul expected it. Recovery may take place. Paul says: "To deliver him, I say, being such, to Satan for destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus". But his body was saved too, meaning that God saved him. So we are told, "Is any sick among you? let him call to him the elders of the assembly, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil", and so forth (@James 5: 14). So we may look for recovery on those lines.
Ques. What is implied in the ten days of tribulation?
J.T. The numeral ten would carry the thought of responsibility. It is a complete thought from the standpoint of responsibility. Twelve is the complete thought as regards administration, but ten is responsibility. I think the Lord is saying that they are responsible and that they are gaining through it.
Ques. Is there something distinctive in this promise being made to the whole assembly, not simply to the overcomer, this conditional promise, "I will give to thee the crown of life"?
{155}
J.T. Very good. You mean the whole assembly at Smyrna?
Rem. Yes. We should aim at that in our localities.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Would not suffering help in that direction, by bringing everyone into it?
J.T. Just so. We do not want to be out of it. If suffering was going on, we would be ashamed to be out of it, I mean to say, it is a thing to be accepted; it is a privilege. "For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake", @Philippians 1: 29. I am not saying that any one of us is ready to do it, only we can say perhaps a little more than we are ready to go in for. At the same time, I can see clearly that the Lord here is pointing these things out to us.
F.J.F. Is it our testimony that causes the suffering?
J.T. It may be; but it may be also a privilege, because the Lord says to Peter, "When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst where thou desiredst; but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and bring thee where thou dost not desire", @John 21: 18. I think the Lord was saying to Peter, 'I am going to give you the privilege of suffering, of being martyred, for Me'. Peter is particularly the martyr; I mean to say, that he particularly loved, or thought of, the sufferings of Christ, but I believe it meant that the Lord said to Peter, *I will give you* the privilege of being martyred.
R.W. Is the suffering in view of reigning? The suffering here leads up to the crown of life.
J.T. Quite so, "If we suffer, we shall also reign".
Rem. The idea of being "faithful unto death" is very challenging. We sometimes draw back at the loss of a good job or some other material gain, but
{156}
it seems to call for the facing of death as in the path of faithfulness.
J.T. The crown of life is immediately promised; but then we have just to keep on with what we are saying, that suffering unto death means that we come actually into death. This might make the thing too pointed so that we might shrink from it. Sometimes in martyrdom we have heard of these things, particular sufferings, causing people to shrink from death, I believe what the Lord is saying here is that it is a privilege to die. "Be thou faithful unto death", that is the actual article; do not be afraid of it.
Rem. The way that the Lord sets Himself before us here is very encouraging. He says, "Who became dead, and lived".
J.T. He *became* dead; it was His own doing. He knew what He was doing; He became dead, and lived; it was His own action. We can do that, too, in the sense that we can accept death; it is given to us to die, of course, but it may be a test to us. We might feel it, and the Lord is saying here, "Be thou faithful unto death"-unto the actual article of it.
Ques. Would you please open out what is involved in the word 'faithful'. Is it to the Lord, or is it to the truth?
J.T. I would say, to be true to whatever principle of doctrine may be involved; to be true whatever you are committed to; take it up absolutely, in the reality of it.
P.H.H. Does the anointing help us in this? Referring to the remark about the myrrh, there was a large quantity of myrrh in the ingredients of the anointing oil. Would therefore the anointing help in regard of the suffering?
J.T. I think it does. As our brother says, the word 'Smyrna' means that. Of course, it is designed to be put there; the Lord meant it to be put there.
{157}
It should thus be in our minds in a general way, that it is a time of suffering.
J.O.S. Esther was purified by the oil of myrrh for six months, and then later she faced death.
J.T. Very good.
J.C-S. So that in this suffering there is no exit, so to speak, apart from death.
J.T. It is the only thing, and the Lord is saying, Be faithful to that. He does not specify suffering. He says, "Be thou faithful unto death".
J.T.Jr. Paul says he is already poured out. Would that be the thought in mind, that he was already fit for the great change? He speaks of the crown of righteousness, which I suppose would be a similar thought here?
J.T. Just so. He was like an oblation, poured out.
Ques. Does Stephen set out the thought of a man faithful unto death?
J.T. I think he does, perfectly. He is intended to do it. He is called "thy martyr". Paul calls him the Lord's own martyr.
{158}
THE MEDIATORIAL SERVICE OF CHRIST AND THE HOLY SPIRIT (3)
@Revelation 2: 12 - 29; @Revelation 3: 1 - 6
J.T. It might be worthy of notice that the addresses to the assemblies may be taken to be historical as well as prophetical. That is to say, we can reckon historically from the letter to the assembly at Ephesus to the fifth one; we reckon the time that has elapsed. It is a question, however, of spiritual understanding, that the historical matter becomes clear after we come to Philadelphia, because the letter to that assembly is so definite that it is clear that the Lord meant, in that letter, to convey that He was thinking of the assembly as a whole. Laodicea, however, ends up the matter, and the Lord is seen there as spewing the whole public assembly out of His mouth. Hence it becomes very serious and solemn when we come to Laodicea. At the same time it is clearly helpful and instructive to keep the historical matter in mind. We can tell pretty well where we are, as we proceed from the first, and especially from Thyatira to the end; because Thyatira is collateral in time with the last three, so that we are now in the midst of it. Therefore we can discern that Sardis treats of the period of the Reformation. Thyatira, however, is earlier and runs collaterally with Sardis, the Romish system being now current and will be current to the end. We may thus reckon where we are at any given time, but especially now as we come to Pergamos, and then also when we come to Thyatira, because Jezebel points to a historical condition which is running its course. The later part of the book contemplates her in a political sense, where she is seen as the woman that rides the beast; but here in chapter 2 she is seen purely ecclesiastically. It is well to notice all this, as I believe it will clarify what we are now about to speak of.
{159}
S.McC. Is that what Mr. Darby had in mind when he referred to the protracted scale in this book?
J.T. I would say that. Things are extended, so that any student of the book of Revelation can gather up, from time to time, where he is, where we are, ecclesiastically, to use that word. When we come to the political side it becomes also obvious because the woman that rides the beast is no less than Jezebel, so that, from the political standpoint, the position is changing.
A.J.G. Would it be right to regard Thyatira as the last of the first four, and therefore the climax in the development of evil in the professing body, but also the first of the last four, being the first one that goes right through to the end?
J.T. Quite so. She takes on another character from the standpoint of the Roman empire; that is, she rides the beast, which refers to the Roman empire.
J.A.P. Do you regard Pergamos as a past phase?
J.T. It is, from the standpoint from which we are speaking, as are also Ephesus and Smyrna. Thyatira, however, continues to the end.
C.M.M. Is the lamp withdrawn with Thyatira?
J.T. I would think so. The Lord does not recognise the ecclesiastical position any more. Then we can readily see that Thyatira involves instruction as to the final state of things; I mean to say, final in the sense of iniquity, and we can see where we are. So that what you get in verse 24 of chapter 2 is: "But to you I say, the rest who are in Thyatira". The word 'rest' there is synonymous with the word 'remnant' and it is something that God has secured for Himself in that stage of the history of the assembly. The word 'rest' implies that we have come to remnant times, which become most interesting for us, and, of course, ought to be compared with first Timothy, and second Timothy particularly, as regards the remnant.
{160}
A.E.D. Is the thought of the remnant carried over in the fact that in the last four the overcomer is referred to before the word, "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says"?
J.T. Quite so. There is a change as to the position of the overcomer. Then the Lord eases the pressure upon us, as He says in verse 24. "But to you I say, the rest who are in Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine, who have not known the depths of Satan, as they say, I do not cast upon you any other burden; but what ye have hold fast till I shall come". That is to say, from the Lord's point of view, there is some relief for us from the remnant standpoint; so that the Lord eases the burden. We all know how He speaks of the burden Himself in @Matthew 11: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me; ... and ye shall find rest to your souls", and I believe there is a reference in that to the letter to Thyatira.
R.W.S. Does the expression, "as they say" represent the saints being accused?
J.T. "As they say", would refer to what the opposers were saying; the Lord is assuring the godly, or faithful, amongst the saints that He knows.
R.W.S. "The depths of God" would be known amongst the saints, in a sense; are they being accused of knowing "the depths of Satan"?
J.T. Just so. It is over against that point.
F.C.H. Would you say a word as to what is hidden and secret in relation to Pergamos as over against the public side earlier?
J.T. To quote Mr. Darby:-
<blockquote>'Called by that secret name <br>Of undisclosed delight <br>(Blest answer to reproach and shame), <br>Graved on the stone of white'. (`79:4)</blockquote>
I think that is a pretty good answer to your inquiry.
{161}
F.C.H. Does it not speak in John's gospel of the Lord Himself going up in secret?
J.T. Quite so. As we had it last night: "He hid himself". That is, He did not expose Himself outwardly; and why should we expose ourselves and give an advantage to the devil. In all these matters we are actually in contact with the devil; so here, "I know where thou dwellest, where the throne of Satan is; and thou holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith, even in the days in which Antipas my faithful witness was, who was slain among you, where Satan dwells". So that we do well to take notice of these features, because we are in direct conflict with the devil. The Lord is aware of that, and He puts it into His letters from time to time, that they were having direct conflict with the devil.
J.C-S. Do you think that is why He introduces Himself as the One with the sharp two-edged sword, the idea of conflict being in view?
J.T. Very good. We have already had the idea of the word of God in @Hebrews 4, where it is said to be "sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart".
A.J.G. Is it significant that in Pergamos there are those who hold the doctrine of Balaam and hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes, apparently not yet openly teaching it, but holding it secretly? Does that bring into evidence the necessity for the sharp two-edged sword?
J.T. Quite so, I would say that fully, because Pergamos, in the history of it as in the letter, involves that the Romish system had already begun; the public assembly had become degenerate. One can see that the degeneration was there in the days
{162}
of the celebrated emperor Constantine. That is where the thing began, I believe.
P.L. So that the detective power of the word is found in the sharp two-edged sword?
J.T. Quite so. It is a question of the word, and that is what exposes in the ministry.
J.C-S. Was Balaam compelled to express the word of God?
J.T. Quite so. So that we have here the doctrine of Balaam. As was just said, the doctrine may be there and not openly expressed, and so also in Thyatira it may not be openly expressed, but usually it is perverted things in Thyatira. I am not sure whether we can apply the idea of perversion, or perverted things, in Pergamos; things are hidden rather.
Rem. In the record of the killing of the kings of Midian it is said that Balaam was slain by the sword.
J.T. Showing that the idea would be there, aimed against him.
P.L. Would Phinehas illustrate all this?
J.T. He would, indeed; he lived at the same time as Balaam.
C.M.M. Would you spare us a word as to @Joshua 5, the man with his sword drawn in his hand.
J.T. The drawn sword is there for it is a time of conflict. Joshua had been the leader at that time, but the man with the drawn sword would undoubtedly be *some* allusion to the Spirit of God, because the Spirit of God is seen secretly in such instances in the Old Testament. It would be some allusion to the Spirit Himself.
A.E.D. Would that link more with the word, "the sword of the Spirit, which is God's word"?
J.T. Well, we have alluded to the word of God already, as mentioned in @Hebrews 4.
W.S.S. Is it significant, in connection with what we have been saying about the word of God, that in
{163}
these three assemblies we have first God Himself in relation to the word; and then the Son, and then the Spirit? It says in chapter 2, verse 12. "And to the angel of the assembly in Pergamos write: These things says he that has the sharp two-edged sword"; this has the word of God in mind. Then in verse 18, "These things says the Son of God". And then in chapter 3, verse 1, "To the angel of the assembly in Sardis write: These things saith he that has the seven Spirits of God".
J.T. All that is quite instructive, I am thankful you mentioned it, because it opens up much.
W.S.S. I was thinking of what you were speaking of in connection with the truth historically, as to the order in which it is opened up in the days of recovery in which we are privileged to have part.
J.T. Quite so. So that we have first of all the idea of the Word of God, which is most important to keep before us. Then the Son of God, which is, of course, the Lord. He is not so described in chapter 1, but still it is a most precious presentation of Him. That is to say, the allusion is to the house, for the Son of God is over the house of God. He that built all things is God, but Christ is Son over the house. Therefore the word to Thyatira points to the Lord's authority over the house, and points to what He says as to Jezebel, and all the terribleness of her conduct. She aims at being the word herself; as some say, 'The church says so-and-so'. She claims to have the voice of God; whereas it is just an apostate reference. She is an apostate; she is in an apostate condition; it is a woman. Then the Spirit of God in chapter 3 points to the Spirit in power in all that He implies. It is "the seven Spirits of God", showing that we have full power now to deal with the doctrines that are set out, not only in Thyatira but since the Reformation.
{164}
W.C. Would the reference to the Son of God and His eyes as a flame of fire suggest His resentment as to the bondage of Thyatira, the saints being brought into the bondage of Romanism; the Son of God stands for liberty?
J.T. It is the spiritual power of the word, the Son of God coming in; that is, the authority of Christ as Son over the house. He has full authority over the house, and that is challenged by the conduct of Thyatira, by Jezebel.
D.J.M. "She who calls herself prophetess". Is that the church?
J.T. That is true. That is just the idea, and it is over against the word and the authority of the Son of God.
J.C-S. Who shall speak after the Son?
J.T. Just so.
P.L. Have you all the divine Persons taking up the issue militantly? The Word of God, and the Son of God, and the Spirit of God.
J.T. Very good. We must not overlook the man with the drawn sword, for I believe the allusion is to the Spirit, how the sword of the Lord is used.
F.J.F. Is that seen in the Lord as Son supporting Martin Luther, when he stuck to the word and faced the whole of the conflict?
J.T. Quite so, 'Here I stand; I can do no other', he said, I believe that is the idea. He stood out, and that introduces Sardis, but it really comes in in Thyatira, because it is a question of Rome's authority, Rome's claims; Luther stood out against it. He says, 'I can do no other'. He was a real martyr. He failed, alas, in the doctrine, but at that time, he was a real martyr.
H.F.N. Is there any link between the thoughts in chapter l, "the seven Spirits which are before his throne" (verse 4) and becoming "in the Spirit on the Lord's day" (verse 10) and then what you have
{165}
referred to this morning, "He that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars" (chapter 3: l) and then in chapter 4, "Immediately I became in the Spirit; and behold, a throne stood in the heaven"? Is there a link between those references to the Spirit?
J.T. I think there is. Perhaps you could enlarge on it for us.
H.F.N. Well, one was only thinking of the Spirit in all the plenitude of His power, as suggested in the expression "seven Spirits which are before his throne", maintaining the rights of the throne, and then, in regard to privilege, how we become in the Spirit on the Lord's day. Then there is what you have referred to, the fulness of power, and then, finally, how we become in the Spirit and are caught up into heaven and get a vision of the throne. But I would like some help from you in regard to that.
J.T. The only thing to be said immediately is that chapter 4 refers to the things that shall be after these. We are now dealing with things that are. But what you say is very touching, especially the becoming in the Spirit on the Lord's day, as John does. He says, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day". It opens up much to us as regards the service of God.
S.McC. In regard to the man in Joshua, that you have referred to, he says, "For as captain of the army of Jehovah am I now come". Would it be a suggestion, in a hidden way, of the Spirit in regard to a certain phase of things?
J.T. I would think so, I felt that we should not pass it by without commenting on it, because the Spirit is in the conflict too, and it was an opportune time in Joshua's day. Joshua represents the conflict, we might say, and the Spirit of God comes in there. He appeared there to him and said to him, "Loose thy sandal from off thy foot". I believe it
{166}
was the Lord the Spirit there, in authority, in the conflict.
F.J.F. Is that why you could worship Him?
J.T. Quite so; why not? As we often say, the Spirit is to be worshipped, for the Spirit of God is God Himself, in a certain sense.
J.T.Jr. Is not that the force of the word of God in Hebrews, that "all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do"? Is that not really the Spirit?
J.T. Well, I would go with that.
A.M-h. When David went down to Ahimelech he asked for a sword, and Ahimelech said, It is wrapped in a cloth. What would you say about that?
J.T. You would wonder about wrapping the sword in a cloth, I would say that it ought to be in use at that time. Of course, David was ready to use it, in time.
A.M-h. I was thinking how we need to be in possession of the idea of the sword.
J.T. It does not seem in keeping with the idea of the conflict for the sword to be wrapped in a cloth; it is not in action. If we wrap up the word of God in a cloth, it fails in its power.
Ques. Does Paul use the sword in @Acts 13 against the man who tried to hinder the deputy from hearing the word of God?
J.T. I would say so. He was, however, a type of the Jew, and so the judgment was to be for a season; meaning that the Jew would come to light again, I would think, in time, in the millennium.
Rem. At that point it says, "But Saul, who also is Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, fixing his eyes upon him, said, O full of all deceit and all craft", I was thinking of his name, Paul, and his being "filled with the Holy Spirit".
J.T. Quite so. The word there is, "Thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt
{167}
thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?" A certain man in America, who was a circus man, wrote over here to Spurgeon and offered to hire him, and Spurgeon in replying quoted that verse, "Thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?" I have often thought of that, and I would say that it is only right that we should bring Spurgeon into Sardis. I do not want to enlarge on that, but I just felt that it was a good opportunity to suggest that there was a faithful man, in that matter, in Spurgeon. He refused the subtleties of the devil to turn his services into devilish work; that is, into circus work.
E.C.B. Would the word fit in, "Behold his couch, Solomon's own, threescore mighty men are about it, of the mighty of Israel. They all hold the sword, experts in war; each hath his sword upon his thigh because of alarm in the nights", @Song of Songs 3: 8?
J.T. Your suggestion is that the sword is there to be used, and it was to be used in relation to Solomon, which would be in relation to Christ. The word of God would defend the Lord Jesus, when attacks are made upon Him.
Ques. Is it not remarkable that in the address to Thyatira all the assemblies are referred to: "All the assemblies shall know that *I* am he that searches the reins and the hearts"?
J.T. It is remarkable. It indicates that the Lord would have the situation that has arisen in regard to Rome, which is Jezebel, made known to all the assemblies. Does it not suggest that God has worked in the Reformation and that things have become known? Rome has been exposed, so that it no longer has the power it used to have. As a matter of fact, it is courting the sympathies of Protestantism, and we have to watch that. The brethren may not
{168}
know that; but it is true, that Rome is courting the sympathies of Protestantism. In fact, they are claiming that they are the first church and all the other denominations belong to it, which is a remarkable thing, I do not believe the brethren know about that, but that is the truth.
J.C-S. Is that the object in bringing out a new version, to try and make a kind of affiliation?
J.T. Quite so. An English version of the New Testament was published four years ago. It is a subtle matter and we have to watch it.
P.L. Are they not claiming that Protestant believers are the soul of the church, if not the body?
J.T. Well, that is exactly what a man said to me on the Atlantic. He was a monk, and he spoke to me about Rome and so forth, and then he spoke to me about my soul, and I said, 'What would you think about me?' I spoke to him as a monk. I told him that I was converted in Ireland. He was an Irish monk, and he said to me, 'How did you become converted?' I told him, and he said, 'Were your father and mother christians, Protestants?' I said, 'Yes', and I went on and told him my history, and I said, 'Now, where would you place me?' I am sure he did not know what to say, because ordinarily he would say I was a heretic, but he did not say that. He said, 'You belong to the soul of the church'. It was a remarkable thing, but that is what they claim, and I think he was forced to say it. He did not know what to say. But now they are coming down toward Protestantism, because of communism. We might feel there was not much to choose between communism and Romanism, but I would rather have Romanism than communism. Communism is out-and-out infidelity. Rome, of course, is infidel too, in a way; but, at the same time, it is not out-and-out infidelity.
{169}
W.S.S. Do you not feel that these movements which are taking place form a kind of dark background against which the truth of the Holy Spirit is shining out?
J.T. I would say that, fully. The Holy Spirit is working and the Spirit is calling attention to Himself, and the brethren are coming to it. Only the Spirit is not wishing to make everything of Himself. He wishes us to accept the truth as it is in the New Testament, I would say. At the same time the truth of the Spirit is in the Old Testament too, but it is not so definite as it is in the New; we must keep with the New Testament, at the same time recognising the Old as Scripture. Therefore it is the Old and New Testament properly, but at the same time we must recognise the precedence of the New Testament.
Ques. Would you say that the understanding we have that God holds the balance of power and arranges matters, for instance, in regard of Roman Catholicism and communism, would leave us free to pursue what really belongs to us and not be too occupied with what sways men at the present time?
J.T. Not *too* occupied, but it is not wrong to have some light as to what is current, because we are afforded light in the government of God as to certain things, and it is quite right to pursue what we have in the way of light. It may be dim but still it is light in its own self.
Ques. Do not prophetic scriptures clearly show that all is working according to God's plan, and He holds the balance of power in His own hand, and we are to be aware of that?
J.T. Well, He does, but then there is the government of God, too.
Ques. Could we have a word as to the way in which the Spirit is spoken of in this book: "the seven Spirits of God" or "the Spirit", and not "the
{170}
Holy Spirit", or "the Spirit of Christ", or "the Spirit of Jesus"?
J.T. Well, the "seven Spirits of God" is, you might say, a symbolical reference. The whole of the book of Revelation, in measure, is symbolical, and the term *seven* is just that. The understanding lies in the numeral seven; that is just a question of the fulness of the Spirit, I would say.
Rem. And then "the Spirit" would be that Person in deity, in contrast to the seven Spirits, "What the Spirit says to the assemblies", is that a reference to His deity?
J.T. Quite so. It is the Spirit of God that we are dealing with. The Spirit of God is a divine Person; He is one of the three divine Persons; He is God Himself. So that "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says", is an allusion to the Spirit of God.
A.J.G. Would you say that He is presented as "the seven Spirits of God" in an assuring way, because of the power of the opposition to the truth?
J.T. Just so. It is the fulness of the Spirit. It is a peculiar term and it is not found in the epistles. It is really symbolical of the power of the Spirit in the sense in which it is used in the book of Revelation. It is without doubt the Spirit, it is just a symbolical reference and it implies fulness; the fulness of the Spirit. We ought to keep to the idea of a symbolical thing when we are dealing with symbolical scriptures such as Ezekiel. There are terms such as, 'seraphim'. What is a seraph? Is it a being? I do not think it is; I think it is a symbol. Take @Isaiah 6, or any passage that treats of the seraphim, and the cherubim. What are they? Are they beings, or are they symbols? I should like the brethren to say now; what do you think; Mr. G.?
A.J.G. I would say they are symbols.
J.T. Well, quite so. What do you think, Mr. L.?
{171}
P.L. Surely.
F.C.H. The seraphim are not mentioned, are they, apart from the symbolic reference in @Isaiah 6, where the holiness of God is asserted thrice, probably involving the Trinity? I cannot recall any other reference.
J.T. Well then, we may as well leave it, and look into it, and see what the words 'seraph' and 'cherub' mean, whether they are beings or whether they are symbols.
H.W. Would it be right to suggest that they may have been symbolic of divine attributes?
J.T. Well, quite so; they are symbols.
Ques. Is there anything to learn that one of them flew with a live coal from the altar (@Isaiah 6: 6)? I thought the cherubim were symbolic of the rights of God; whereas the seraph, while still containing that idea, had a peculiar touch of grace in this scripture in the fact that one of the seraphim flew unto him (that is, unto Isaiah) and he had in his hand a glowing coal which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar. I wondered whether that showed that, intermingled with the rights of God, there was a peculiar sense of grace towards the prophet.
J.T. There are the rights of God, but there is the holiness of God too, and the cherub and seraph are used in those connections; so that I would advise the brethren to look into it themselves, because I believe many think they are just beings.
H.F.N. Did you not refer, some years ago, to the seraphim and link them with John's gospel, and the cherubim with the other three gospels?
J.T. Well, there are certain links in which all that is true.
Now I think we might as well go on with our scripture, for we have not much time and we have not fully covered Thyatira. We have alluded to much
{172}
that is very important for us to understand, and now we have this matter of the burden. The Lord says in verse 24. "I do not cast upon you any other burden; but what ye have hold fast till I shall come". The Lord is saying that He is not overburdening the saints; which I think is very touching and it ought to affect us; it suggests that things are not quite so heavy as they might be. There was much persecution at the time of the Reformation, of course, but then that has subsided. Although it went on after Thyatira, Protestantism implies that it was not so severe; there was some lightening of it.
P.H.H. Could you liken the voice of the Son of God here at all to Solomon's remarks on coming to the throne, in meeting the heavy opposition centring in Adonijah and so on? I was thinking of Solomon in the way he suggests the Son and the way he causes these opposers like Adonijah, Joab and Shimei to be dealt with. Would this result in the lightening of the burden for the saints?
J.T. Very good. Perhaps you would enlarge on that, so as to make it clear for us.
P.H.H. It says that Nathan the prophet came in and exposed the position. Would that be, in a certain way, like the position being made clear to us in the Lord's address to Thyatira? Then the position of these opposers, each one in his own turn is made clear to Solomon-the Son, as we might say-and he causes each one to be dealt with, and the saints are eased of what might otherwise have been a great apostate burden.
J.T. Quite so. David had exposed the position generally, although he was tardy in dealing with it, but, in due time, Nathan the prophet, we might say, is the instrument that God used to expose the whole position. Hence Joab is brought into judgment, and others who are secretly opposed to Solomon, I suppose you have in mind that in Thyatira there is a
{173}
secrecy in opposition to Christ. Perhaps you would enlarge further on that.
P.H.H. It says that "Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada ... went down, and caused Solomon to ride upon king David's mule", @1 Kings 1: 38. Would those elements, the priestly element, and the prophetic element, and the military element, all help us to stand against the great system that is coming in?
J.T. Just so, I think there is a good deal of instruction in that, especially in how Solomon himself acted, and then how those that were guilty secretly, were brought into judgment. We can count on that; and so Jezebel is going to be brought into judgment. "And her children will I kill with death", the Lord says here.
E.C.B. In relation to what you are saying, would not Matthew's gospel come in as a great support? @Matthew 16 especially, and the last verse of the gospel. Is there not great comfort in the assurance that hades gates shall not prevail against the assembly, and in the Lord's presence with us all the days?
J.T. All that is most assuring.
Eu.R. You referred to Jezebel and her children. Have you in mind that her children would suggest the different systems of Protestantism now, to a large extent, taking on some feature of Rome?
J.T. "And her children". It is a question of what there may have been in the dark ages of Europe and how Rome's children came into prominence and were killed with death. I should think the word 'death' would mean just apostasy; that there is an apostatising spirit current, and it is current now too. Certain ones are becoming affected by apostasy, and of course, communism would be that in time. But where it says Jezebel's children, it refers to Rome, that system; it is apostasy and nothing less than that.
{174}
E.A.L. Thyatira represents the public position and at present we see Rome is inclined to make much capital out of the attitude of certain high clerics in Protestantism. Is that somewhat like the sword of Goliath, the uncircumcised Philistine, being used to take off his own head? He had defied the armies of the living God. Then, too, is it like what we get in Corinthians where we see the messenger of Satan being used to help Paul that he might not be over-exalted after being in the third heaven? The messenger of Satan is used to do the work of the Lord, so nothing can be done against the truth but for the truth.
J.T. Very good. That is to say, at Corinth there was a messenger of Satan sent to Paul, so that he might not be exalted above measure. The Lord says to him, "My grace suffices thee; for my power is perfected in weakness"; and therefore the apostle says, "Most gladly therefore will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may dwell upon me". We have therefore a solution of the whole matter in regard to these questions that are now before us.
E.A.L. I would like to refer to the remark of beloved Mr. Darby, that when he would be privileged to break bread on the Lord's day he would think of the brethren in the systems. Do you not think we ought to have right feelings about such?
J.T. That is good. I would say that too. We cannot ignore what God is doing with them, even although they are not walking in the full light in which we are, through grace. That is to say, the revival is to the full light of christianity, the full light of the assembly; but, at the same time, there are those who are not coming into the full light, and of course, we must be patient with them and wait on them, having in mind that God may deliver them.
J.W.B. Is there a remnant in Thyatira now?
{175}
J.T. I think so.
P.L. Mr. Darby wrote two addresses 'to his Roman Catholic brethren by a minister of the Gospel'.
J.T. And then he says another thing that is over against that, that the notion of a clergyman is dispensationally the sin against the Holy Spirit. That is to say, the idea, or notion, of a clergyman, and that is not in Rome only, it is in Protestantism also.
A.J.G. Is that what is referred to in the Lord saying to Sardis, "I have not found thy works complete before my God", in that the clerical system was not overthrown in Sardis?
J.T. Just so. They have not gone to the full length.
Ques. Referring to Thyatira; the word in verse 20 is, "Thou permittest the woman Jezebel", and then in verse 21, "And she will not repent"; not she *would* not but "she will not repent". Does that expose the boastful claim to authority of the Church of Rome?
J.T. That would bring out just what has been remarked, that the political side of the position which begins in chapter 4 with the throne seen standing in heaven, has in mind that Jezebel comes into judgment, but not as Jezebel but as the woman that rides the beast. It is the same thing, the same system, only she is viewed politically, for she rides the beast, and so her doom is predicted; it is intimated, or seen; in chapter 18 of the book we are reading.
Rem. Over against what is said as to Jezebel, the word to the overcomer in verse 26 is "to him will I give authority over the nations".
J.T. That is, there is moral power with the overcomer. The Lord is not simply speaking now of a literal sword, but the moral power that is with the overcomer. So that He says, "He that overcomes,
{176}
and he that keeps unto the end my works, to him will I give authority over the nations, and he shall shepherd them with an iron rod; as vessels of pottery are they broken in pieces, as I also have received from my Father; and I will give to him the morning star". All these are promises to the overcomer, and I think they are on moral grounds. These promises are what we are coming into as the remnant, in the midst of Protestantism. The coming of the Lord is the answer to all this.
N.K.M. What would the Lord particularly be referring to when He alludes to "my works" in speaking of the overcomer? "And he that keeps unto the end my works".
J.T. There is what the Lord is giving us to do, in our own little way now; what the Lord is apportioning to us as viewed as the remnant in Thyatira.
A.E.D. And is the Lord referring to His mediatorial service in the word, "as I also have received from my Father", in contrast to Rome, where it is denied?
J.T. What He receives from His Father is what He has come into, and the overcomer in Thyatira is coming into it, which is very comforting to us. These promises are very comforting for us. Then chapter 3 refers to Sardis, so that we have now come to the actual Reformation. What is said there shows that Sardis has not answered to the Lord's mind in completing things; but there is a word that ought to comfort us, and that is, "These things saith he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars". That is to say, He has the Holy Spirit in fulness. The Lord has fulness of spiritual power in His own hands; Sardis has not got it, the Lord has it. The ecclesiastical system in Protestantism has nothing really in the sense of full spiritual power; the Lord has all that. Then the next thing is, "I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and
{177}
art dead". That is to say, things are in a dead condition in the Protestant system around us. At the same time, the Lord says that He has the seven Spirits of God, and He has the seven stars.
Eu.R. What is the import in that He has the seven stars?
J.T. Well, it is just that He has control of the position. The assembly has not control; Protestantism and all the councils and synods and so forth, they have not anything. The Lord has not committed anything to them in that sense, but He has committed something, as we shall see, to Philadelphia. We have not come to that yet, but we shall see that the Lord has something there.
A.J.G. Would it be right to say that the deadness of things in Sardis is entirely due to the non-recognition of the Spirit?
J.T. I would think that is fully the truth. We have already quoted the remark that 'the notion of a clergyman is dispensationally the sin against the Holy Spirit'; the Holy Spirit is denied in that sense.
Ques. Would you say a word on, "Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard"-not 'what'?
J.T. All the ministry that had come out in the Reformation, including Luther because God gave him a place I am certain, is alluded to. It is a question of what Sardis has received, and whether they are keeping it and going on with it. And so it goes on, "Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and keep it and repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come upon thee as a thief". He is saying He will come upon them, just as He comes to the world. There is no difference between Protestantism and the world. When the Lord comes He will deal with them as the world.
R.W.S. It says in verse 4, "But thou hast a few names in Sardis which have not defiled their garments,
{178}
and they shall walk with me in white, because they are worthy", I am enquiring about some of the hymns in Sardis to the Holy Spirit. Would this be an allusion to such?
J.T. It is possibly an allusion to the ministry of some. If we look over our hymns we find that some of them were written before the revival began, and, of course, we cannot but recognise them. We recognise the merits of these hymns, and the value of our hymns and our hymn book is an important matter to bring up just now. Some of us went over the hymn book in 1932, and the Lord gave us this result. The question now is whether there can be anything more done. Anyway, it is important that each one of us should take to heart as to whether we know the hymn book, and all that there is in it, in a spiritual sense.
H.H. What about these hymns to the Spirit, should they be put in?
J.T. It is a question of their importance. There is no one who would undertake to say we should have another revision. I certainly would not, I think we have a good hymn book, and we should go on with it as it is. It costs a great deal to revise a hymn book, and I doubt very much whether it is needed. At the same time it is well to take notice of anything that comes in that may be called an addition to what we have spiritually, and there are many such. Many hymns have come to different ones as regards the Spirit, and they are good too, and profitable, and worth reading.
Rem. There are over forty hymns in the book that have some reference to the Spirit.
Eu.R. There is no hymn in the book which is addressed *to* the Spirit.
{179}
THE MEDIATORIAL SERVICE OF CHRIST AND THE HOLY SPIRIT (4)
@Revelation 3: 7 - 22
J.T. I think Mr. McC. wishes to refer to something left over from our reading this morning.
S.McC. I wish to ask whether there is a reference in verse 2 to the place of Christ in the mediatorial position. He refers to "my God" in that unique way, "I have not found thy works complete before my God".
J.T. Well, in Philadelphia we have: "He that overcomes, him will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more at all out; and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven, from my God, and my new name". No doubt you will think it well that we might open the whole subject as to the Philadelphian epistle, so that we may get what leads up to this matter and the verse I just read. The question of Philadelphia is vital; it is of peculiar value or importance. In truth, as was referred to in prayer, the latter glory of the house is in mind. That is to say, the whole idea of the assembly is in the Lord's mind and not simply a phase of it; hence the word *thy* applied to Philadelphia. It becomes, therefore, a matter to which the brethren will wisely give full consideration. Although the idea of remnant is seen in Thyatira, yet what is alluded to in the book of Haggai is not a remnant properly. It is the whole idea of the latter glory of the house; that is to say, applying it to ourselves, the latter glory of the assembly. Perhaps therefore we may somewhat revise our thoughts of a remnant, seeing that the whole idea of the assembly is in the Lord's mind in this address to Philadelphia.
{180}
H.H. Would not that mean that the remnant becomes the whole assembly?
J.T. Well, yes. We use the word 'remnant', but Philadelphia represents, in the Lord's mind, the whole assembly, and that gives it a magnitude that perhaps we have not applied to the assembly for the latter days. It is not simply a remnant, but the whole idea of it, and the Lord is going to close with that.
L.E.S. Would the word in @Haggai 2 have the same thought in mind? "The word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, and my Spirit, remain among you: fear ye not".
J.T. Quite so. That is just what was in my mind, because the covenant is the full idea, and then we have "my Spirit". "The word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, and my Spirit, remain among you".
P.L. All that connecting with intactness; "Jehovah of hosts" involving completeness?
J.T. Quite so.
J.C-S. Then is the assembly, as seen in this epistle to Philadelphia, the assembly in its totality, so to speak?
J.T. Well, it is in the Lord's mind, I am making much of that, because He has a right to say what He pleases, and He is pleased to speak to Philadelphia as representing the whole assembly. He is pleased to indicate that. It is not, of course, strictly what Ephesus was; it cannot be. At the same time the references that the Lord makes indicate that, in His mind, the whole assembly is there. Of course, we have to make allowance for the condition of christendom, that is scattered and broken, and we have the really infidel condition of the church publicly at the present time, and yet the Lord has never given up the thought of it, and He is reverting to it now in this epistle.
{181}
Ques. Do you mean that what the Lord finds in some He credits to all who form the assembly?
J.T. Well, quite so; but you use the word 'some'. I would prefer to use the word 'whole', the whole idea, as making much of the Lord's mind and what He has a right to say, the actual words that He has a right to use. That is, it is not simply reduced in His mind to a mere part, but the whole idea, as if He were holding on to the whole idea of the assembly, and going to close with it.
P.L. Do you have that set out also in the gospels, that when He cleansed the temple He called it His Father's house?
J.T. Quite so.
J.C-S. Does what you were saying in regard of the assembly viewed in this way account for the Lord not introducing any one of the features that marked Him in His judicial garb, as given in the first chapter? He is pleased with Philadelphia, is He not?
J.T. Just so. He has nothing to say against it; in fact, He is approving it. He is using the pronoun 'thee' as if He were speaking to the whole; but then He has a right to do that. It is a question of the liberty that He has and that He takes.
F.C.H. "The holy, the true"; does that refer to manhood or does it include Deity? "These things saith the holy, the true".
J.T. Well, I am not sure about that. If we refer to @John 6: 67, we shall get a touch on that. The Lord says, "Will ye also go away?" And Peter says, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God". There it is a question of the Person of the Lord Jesus, but in our passage now He is pleased to refer to Himself as "the holy, the true", and He is referring to something that should be in the assembly and *was* in Philadelphia.
{182}
A.J.G. In @John 6 we have the Lord confessed as "the holy one of God" and then, in @John 7, He says of Himself, "He that speaks from himself seeks his own glory; but he that seeks the glory of him that has sent him, he is true", I wondered whether you got the holy and the true in those two chapters?
J.T. Very good. Then again, of course, we have in the first epistle of John, "He is the true God and eternal life". That same term is used of the Father in @John 17, so that the words have to be taken in their context, and it raises the question as to why the Lord connects the idea of holiness and truth with Himself in speaking to Philadelphia.
A.M-h. Does the emphatic *I* in the last clause of verse 9 give the whole idea, "*I* have loved thee"?
J.T. I was thinking of that. The pronouns throughout would indicate that the Lord has the whole idea in His mind, but then it is a question of what He is pleased to have in His mind. It is not to go back to the beginning of the dispensation, but just to recognise the liberty the Lord is pleased to take, in writing these epistles. The pronouns throughout, as I was saying, indicate that the Lord has the whole idea in His mind, but then that is what is due to Him. We should not question it and we should not limit Him to what should be said literally in so many words. It is a question of what He is pleased to have in His mind in writing this particular letter.
A.E.D. Would the expression, "I have loved thee", link on with the love of Christ for the assembly in @Ephesians 5, and the way in which He has retained the whole thought, in view of the presentation and the word that it might be holy and blameless?
J.T. Quite so; if the Lord's words here just imply what @Ephesians 5 says. The Lord's words are, "I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an opened door". That is the assembly at Philadelphia.
{183}
The Lord would indicate that He is thinking of the whole assembly, and yet the meaning has to be understood by the actual wording of the Lord, by what He says; the "thee" is Philadelphia. That is to say, it is a phase of the assembly and not the whole assembly.
W.C. Would this be the work of the seven Spirits of God, the complete establishment of every assembly thought? In Sardis the Lord is said to have the seven Spirits, as if the Spirit had no scope in the Sardis conditions. Here would it be that there is the full answer?
J.T. I think it would. The Lord had in mind to speak as if the assembly was present there, as if the Spirit was in the assembly, and the Lord is addressing the assembly. At the same time we have to make allowance for the fact that He is using the word *thy* to a phase of the assembly called Philadelphia, a feature of the assembly. So that we are bound, I think, to recognise the wording that the Lord uses. The question of the Spirit must come in, of course, in Philadelphia, but then it does not come in until the Lord says, "Let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies". The Spirit, of course, is implied, we can see this, but then the Lord is not stressing it. In writing to Sardis He stresses the idea of the Spirit in the employment of the numeral He uses; that is, the seven Spirits of God. There is a fulness of spiritual power which He has, but it does not say that He is using it; but He has it.
P.H.H. It says in verse 8: "I have set before thee an opened door, which no one can shut, because thou hast ..." certain things. Would they be practical features, which would prevent us from merely thinking of this as an abstract picture?
J.T. He is speaking of certain features of the assembly which were true at Philadelphia. It is therefore just one phase of the assembly just as each
{184}
assembly is a phase, beginning with Ephesus.
F.J.F. Is not what is in the Lord's mind in our minds when we put the loaf on the table on the Lord's day?
J.T. I would think it is. As the Lord comes in, after we begin the service, I would think He would have in mind what we are dealing with here; He would have nothing less in mind than that. Therefore the service of God enters into the present time peculiarly. That is to say, we are in the time of a revival, and a revival marked by the Lord's supper, which is the great feature of the beginning of the service of God. We have the service of God restored to us.
M.B. Does the "key of David" refer to, or link with, the full thought of the service of God in the assembly?
J.T. The word 'key' would imply the administration of the truth of the assembly, and the service of God in the assembly, and all that is opened up to us according to this phase of the assembly.
A.N.W. Does the whole thought come still more clearly into view in the statement. "They shall come and shall do homage before thy feet"? That could hardly be local, could it?
J.T. The 'thy' there is clearly the assembly itself. So that the Lord is making promises, because the enemy, Satan, is in mind here. The Lord is going to challenge him and rebuff him, and oust him, as it were. The Lord is taking up the combat in this letter.
W.C. Does that remark as to doing homage imply the presence of a divine Person there, the assembly being a creature?
J.T. The homage is to the assembly at Philadelphia, not to Christ, "Behold, I make them of the synagogue of Satan who say that they are Jews, and are not, but lie; behold, I will cause that they
{185}
shall come and shall do homage before thy feet, and shall know that *I* have loved thee". It is the assembly that is in mind. The Lord intends to cause the enemies to come and worship before Philadelphia's feet. That is to say, it is the remarkable distinction that the Lord makes as to Philadelphia. It is not a divine Person, of course, it is not other than a creature, but, at the same time, the Lord is pleased to use this language and we may well let Him use it.
Ques. Is it not similar to what we get in @John 17? "I in them and thou in me, that they may be perfected into one and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and that thou hast loved them as thou hast loved me". Is not the language there similar?
J.T. Very similar; but here the word 'worship' is used, which is very remarkable.
L.E.S. Would this be somewhat like the passage in Zechariah, where Satan is seen standing at the right hand of the Angel, and it says, "And Jehovah said unto Satan, Jehovah rebuke thee, O Satan! Yea, Jehovah that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee!" @Zechariah 3: 2?
J.T. Very good, "Jehovah that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee!" Jehovah will do that. And now the Lord Jesus here, in writing to Philadelphia, is saying things about Philadelphia that are similar to that, but it is a remarkable thing that He says, "Do homage before thy feet". That is, the feet of this phase of the assembly, namely Philadelphia.
W.C. In chapter 19, John is rebuked by the angel for doing homage to him, which makes it all the more remarkable here. According to the note, the word is apparently the same.
J.T. It is the more remarkable. John is rebuked twice for falling down to the angel, but the Lord is pleased to say this here, and should we not give Him the liberty to do so? It is a remarkable thing.
{186}
Ques. Does it imply that the Holy Spirit is in Philadelphia, in that way?
J.T. Well, of course, if it is viewed in this light it certainly would imply that the Holy Spirit is there, and, of course, He is there. The Lord is speaking to a phase of the assembly, and the Holy Spirit is in the assembly. It is a feature of this dispensation that the Holy Spirit is in the assembly.
A.J.G. Is your point that the homage is not to the Holy Spirit, but to the assembly?
J.T. That is what I see. The Lord says, "I make them of the synagogue of Satan who say that they are Jews, and are not, but lie; behold, I will cause that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet, and shall know that *I* have loved thee". That is plain enough.
Ques. Will that come into evidence while the assembly is here on earth?
J.T. Well, if you want a concrete evidence of it, of course, one is not prepared to say that. I am seeking to insist on what the Lord says, for we are to pay attention to it. Whatever it may mean, we are to pay attention to it. The Lord says it.
H.W. Would you connect it in any way with the closing words of @Ephesians 1. "The assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all"?
J.T. That is very like it. That is another thing to be observed, that Paul refers to the assembly, as "the fulness of him who fills all in all". That is to say, she is viewed as having part in the headship, which He is exercising. She is not viewed there by herself *as* the assembly, but she is a feature of the headship. The Lord is Head, of course, but she has part in the headship, which is a remarkable thing.
Ques. Is the homage contingent on what is said in verse 8, and does that go back, perhaps to the beginning of the Acts? In @Acts 4: 7 it says, "In what power or in what name have *ye* done this? Then
{187}
Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them". Here in this passage we have "a little power" and the keeping of His word, and the not denying His name.
J.T. Now you are coming to another thing. You are not questioning the matter of homage, you are coming to the things that the Lord approves in Philadelphia, which, of course, we must observe, but then what we are dealing with first of all is this question of homage. The Lord says of Philadelphia, "I make them of the synagogue of Satan ... that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet, and shall know that *I* have loved thee". That is stated by the Lord, and I think we ought to keep that clear, and then try to understand what He means. All we can say is that He says it, and, of course, we must accept that it is His word and it means what it says. We are not to make it concrete. To make it concrete is another matter, which I am not prepared to do, because we have no concrete evidence that the Lord is making anything or any person to worship before the feet of the assembly. But there it is, and we may well leave it and wait on the Lord to give us light about it, if we have not the light.
C.M.M. When Nebuchadnezzar fell on his face and worshipped Daniel, was that right?
J.T. Well, I would prefer now to have the passage from Daniel read, so that we can see the meaning of it.
A.J.G. It is in chapter 2, after Daniel had interpreted the dream of the great image, he says (verse 45), "Forasmuch as thou sawest that a stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it broke in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold-the great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter. And the
{188}
dream is certain, and the interpretation of it sure. Then king Nebuchadnezzar fell on his face and worshipped Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet odours unto him. The king answered Daniel and said, Of a truth it is that your God is the God of gods, and the Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, because thou wast able to reveal this secret".
J.T. There is nothing said as to any question about it. What Nebuchadnezzar did is accepted by Daniel, and that is the fact, I would say. Well, we might leave it there. There is no question about it. But when we come to this book, the prophet John falls down to worship the person who spoke to him, and he is rebuked twice for doing it. It is clear enough therefore that the idea of worship is not attributed to a creature. The angel says, "Worship God". That is the full truth that comes out in regard of anyone attempting to worship a creature.
A.J.G. If the Lord makes the enemies bow down and do homage before the assembly, no one can question it.
J.T. Just so. That is just what I am thinking, I am trying to stress that the Lord has a right to do these things, and we must allow Him that right, and understand, if we can, what He means by it. We may be sure that He is not encouraging idolatry, far from it. At the same time He is surely honouring the assembly in a peculiar way, and we might accept that.
Ques. Is not the expression used in Scripture- for the movement of an inferior towards a superior person? It is referred to in worshipping the king, for example. It has not necessarily a religious significance.
J.T. That is, you would make it a question of language or custom, but the Lord is saying more than that here.
{189}
Eu.R. In the Old Testament it says they worshipped Jehovah *and the king*. The king would represent the rights of Jehovah, would he not?
J.T. He would.
Eu.R. And may there not be some representation of Christ in the assembly when this is done?
J.T. It is just a question for us to consider, I think Mr. Darby makes a strong remark, if I remember rightly, dealing with the word 'worship', but nevertheless what we are speaking of is important and should be left as it stands. The Lord has used these words and He has a meaning in it, and it is clearly to distinguish peculiarly the assembly at Philadelphia.
R.W. Is that supported in that it is said of Philadelphia that she has a crown?
J.T. Well, of course, that is not very much. We are made kings and priests ourselves, according to @Revelation 5.
A.A-n. Is it because there is what is in affinity with Himself as "the holy, the true" in Philadelphia?
J.T. There is that, clearly, and ought to be, and always is in the assembly really, and in every one of us, that we are holy and true, but the Lord is saying more than that. He is saying, "I will cause that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet". And what is it for? That they may "know that *I* have loved thee". Therefore we might perhaps enlarge on the thought that the Lord is enlarging on, namely, the thought of His love for the assembly.
J.C-S. It is not that the assembly invites worship but the Lord causes it.
J.T. Just so. It is to distinguish the assembly at Philadelphia peculiarly, and I think we might as well accept that and proceed with what we have further. It says in verse 10: "Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, *I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come
{190}
upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth". Now we have a question of the patience that is apparently marking Philadelphia. It is a time of patience, and apparently it is there; and there is a promise attached to it, as it says: "Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, *I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth". I would think the Lord means that He is going to save those who are true to Him as in Philadelphia from the awful trial that is coming upon the whole earth. I suppose communism is involved in it, and the great apostasy that is imminent is involved in the promise that the Lord makes. It seems to me it should be a great comfort to every one of us that we are going to be kept out of it. It is not simply that we are going to be taken to heaven, but we are going to be kept out of *it*, and I suppose that will synchronise with the rapture. We are going to be kept out of the great tribulation that shall come upon all the world, "to try them that dwell upon the earth".
Eu.R. Would you include every believer that is on earth at that time in the "thee" in that verse? "*I* also will keep thee".
J.T. It refers to those that are in Philadelphia, and that would mean the state we are in now, that God has brought about through the revival. He has brought certain of us into a state of holiness and truth with the Lord Himself. He speaks of "a little power", showing that it is still, in a sense, a remnant, but it is there, and it has a little power, and then there is the patience; and then the keeping of 'thee' out of the tribulation that is to come upon all the world to try those that dwell upon the earth. I should not say it goes beyond the true ones; that is, those who belong to Philadelphia.
{191}
Eu.R. You said it synchronised with our being raptured.
J.T. I believe it will, but I do not think the promise is made specially to those who are not walking in the truth. The Lord has stressed that it is to those who are walking in the truth.
A.J.G. Is it not a promise made to those who keep the word of His patience? Would you mind saying what is involved in the expression "the word of my patience"?
J.T. What patience the Lord has! I believe He includes in His own mind the thought of what God is, indeed in His patience regarding the whole race. He is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, and it is the time of that, and we do well to think of it and have it in our hearts in the Lord's day evening preachings, so as to be in accord with the spirit of Philadelphia.
A.J.G. Does it mean that the Lord Himself is patient and that we are to be patient? And that throughout the period of patience the Lord will sustain the saints with His word?
J.T. Quite so. Very good.
L.E.S. In the word in James, which is a reference to this, it says. 'The man who is patient, though under great trials, bears up, and does not lose heart or courage' (See footnote to @James 5: 7).
J.T. That passage in James refers to having patience, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. It is a time of patience, and why should we not participate in it? I believe we may well introduce it in connection with our little meetings for the gospel services on Lord's day evenings. The gospel is continued in our little meetings; there is a little power, no doubt, and it is honoured, and perhaps an occasional convert, but it does not go much beyond that.
{192}
E.C.M. God "desires that all men should be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth".
J.T. Quite so. It seems to me that God is greatly pleased with what is being done in this little homely way amongst the brethren, in the small gatherings throughout the world. They kneel down in their homes to pray for the gospel, and they bring in terms that imply the gospel, I am sure God is pleased with that, and I believe it enters into what the Lord says here.
R.W.S. I think we are being helped to see that all things have not the same value, and that we are really in a realm of refinement, so that there is something special here. We may be inclined to think in a common way, and not specialise.
J.T. I think that is very good. There are specialities, and I believe Philadelphia is a speciality with the Lord Jesus. Then this matter of the gospel should be continued urgently, so that the truth is kept before men in our little meetings for the preaching.
Ques. Does the word in Thessalonians come in there. "The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patience of the Christ"?
J.T. I think it does fully.
H.W. Does not the closing of the dispensation call for greater public activity perhaps in a gospel way?
J.T. I had thought of that. I attempted to say something to my brethren in New Zealand and Australia when I was down there, as to going out with the gospel, and preaching in the open air, and they are doing it, as far as I can hear. It was the way the gospel began first, according to what we get in the book of Acts. We cannot conceive that Peter could have preached to three thousand people otherwise than in the open air.
{193}
F.J.F. Mr. Darby has a very important letter on the subject. He says it would be a sad day if we did not go out in the gospel, I think it is in his first volume of letters.
Rem. It needs a lot of faith when nobody stands to listen.
J.T. That is true; but some do. It is well worth continuing, therefore.
J.G.H. Paul's word to Timothy is "preach the word".
J.T. Well, that is what the brethren are doing now. They have changed the wording of the sign boards to indicate that "the word" is preached, I think it is a wise choice, a wise correction. Of course, it is right to say, preach the gospel too, but preaching the word is more in keeping with a "day of small things".
A.R. You spoke of prayer for the gospel; do you think that in our prayers we should extend outside the circle in which we move, and pray for the gospel universally, where it is preached?
J.T. I should think so, whoever may be preaching. We are thankful for the preaching, whoever preaches and our prayers should cover them too.
Ques. Do you think the preaching of judgment should enter into the preaching at the present time, or not?
J.T. Well, it is always preached. Paul preached judgment, and judgment should accompany it. It is only a matter of warning and we should not be ignorant or silent about judgment. We surely should not let people die in their sins without telling them the danger.
Rem. Paul says, "Warning every man and teaching every man".
J.T. Quite so. But now we should come down to verse 12. "He that overcomes, him will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no
{194}
more at all out; and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven, from my God, and my new name". These are precious thoughts and they belong to Philadelphia. They imply that Philadelphia, at least those who have part in it, is coming in for great things; the Lord is using the word "My" so much.
E.C.M. Is the thought of "My God" the same as in @John 20, where the Lord says to Mary, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God"?
J.T. Well, "the name of my God"; these are the Lord's own words, and He would speak of the thing from His own standpoint. It is not a question of the privilege that belongs to the saints, as in the message that He sent through Mary; here it is from His own point of view that He is speaking, "The name of my God", and that name involves much, I would say that it is somewhat different from what we find in @John 20. In @John 20 the message is that "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". Well, that is the question of christian privilege and glory, but here it is the "name of my God" by itself, and therefore I would distinguish it. The Lord Jesus refers to the name by itself; so that the two things are not the same.
J.C-S. Is this exclusive to Him?
J.T. It is exclusive to Him. That is what I would say, but in @John 20 it is linked up with ourselves as well.
A.J.G. Does it indicate great feeling in the heart of Christ, in thus speaking?
J.T. I think it does, and it really works out to what belongs to the present time, the idea of the name of God. The Lord is saying, "the name of my God"; note the word 'name'.
{195}
C.M.M. Would it be linked with the baptismal formula?
J.T. I think the name there is God as God, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. There is only one name there, implying the Deity, as we might say. It is the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, so that one name would apply to Them all.
H.H. We ought not then to say 'the name of the Father, and the name of the Son and the name of the Spirit', but one name comprising the three Persons of the Godhead.
J.T. Quite so. It is presented in that way, "baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit"-the *and* is there in each case. So that the thing is presented in that way; it is the one name but presented as affecting, or applying to, the three Persons severally.
P.H.H. What is the force of the expression, "the temple of my God", here? The word used is *naos*, which we understand to be the shrine itself.
J.T. I suppose the allusion would be to @1 Corinthians 3, where it is said that the Corinthians were the temple of God, but then this is "the temple of my God".
P.H.H. Is it a peculiarly blessed thought that Christ's God shines upon the saints, upon the overcomer?
J.T. Well, there is such a thing as that. Whether we understand it, whether we apply it in a practical sense, the saints are said to be the temple of God, "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God?". It is based upon the presence of the Spirit, for "the Spirit of God dwells in you". It is a question therefore, in that sense, of the Spirit of God being there with the Corinthians, and therefore the shrine was there. It is that in connection with which God is worshipped, but it is really largely because of the
{196}
truth that is ministered, and the truth that was coming out there at Corinth.
Ques. Could the word to the overcomer that "he shall go no more at all out" be opened out a little?
J.T. It is a comfort to those who are serving, travelling throughout the different parts of the world, in all climates and at all times, that that will be over for ever. "He shall go no more at all out". It is a promise to us, and it belongs to the overcomer in Philadelphia, that he does not go any more out. Every one of us here, we might say, goes out in our service, sometimes in all kinds of weathers and with all kinds of difficulties, but all that will be over.
P.H.H. As to the temple; did you say it involved the truth coming out?
J.T. I think so, and the ministry where Paul says. "*I* have planted; Apollos watered; but God has given the increase". It is a question of the truth, I believe. The apostle is speaking of the truth that was coming out at Corinth. Corinth was the temple really; the assembly was the temple.
A.J.G. And the overcomer becomes prominent in that?
J.T. Quite so.
Eu.R. You get increase connected with the temple in @Ephesians 2. It says, "in whom all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord".
J.T. The allusion there would be to what is coming out in the millennium; what the assembly is to be in the millennium. It "increases to a holy temple in the Lord".
Eu.R. Does Philadelphia refer to that?
J.T. Well, of course, that is the truth, and we are dealing with the truth in Philadelphia too, and with the idea of the temple.
{197}
A.J.G. May I ask whether the promise to the overcomer in Philadelphia is entirely future in its bearing, or is there any sense in which it may have present application?
J.T. I think it would allude to the millennium. The millennium is alluded to several times in the addresses to the assemblies, and in the promises made in the letters, as, for instance, in what the overcomer in Thyatira comes into.
Ques. Is not the term 'new Jerusalem' connected with the eternal idea?
J.T. It is; but you can say more about that, please.
Rem. I wondered if these statements suggest the mediatorial service of the Lord Jesus in the glorious position in which He places us, "Will I make", "I will write". Does it lead on to finality?
J.T. Well, let us read it again, "He that overcomes, him will I make a pillar". The word *pillar* is to be noted there. It is a pillar in the temple. That is to say, the temple is alluded to as a building. That is the first thing, and it is "the temple of my God". Then it says, "he shall go no more at all out; and I will write upon him the name of my God". That is the first thing to be written: "the name of my God". Then the second is "the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem". That name is written upon the overcomer in Philadelphia. Well, what would that be except that the idea of new Jerusalem has come to be known? The holy city, which is a millennial thought, has come to be known, and then finally "the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven, from my God". Then we have "my new name". These are all promises to distinguish the overcomer in Philadelphia.
L.E.S. Would the thought of 'my God' enable us to understand the Lord's reference to @Psalm 22, where He begins: "My God, my God, why hast
{198}
thou forsaken me? why art thou far from my salvation, from the words of my groaning? My God, I cry by day, and thou answerest not"?
J.T. That is what the Lord says in the hour of His sorrow, but I think this is more a time of joy. That is to say, the Lord Jesus is speaking of His God, not as the One who forsook Him, but as the God whom He knew and was enjoying. "My God" in @Psalm 22 would, of course, point to the Lord's death and the forsaking, but then He had a God and He alludes to One who is His God, here; He wants to bring the Philadelphian overcomers into what He Himself had. He is going to link it on with the overcomer in Philadelphia and He is going to write it upon him.
D.J.M. Has the overcomer stood for these things at the present time?
J.T. Exactly. Any brother who is here today ought to be able to say, 'Well, I am going on with that; I am going on with Christ's God'. The Lord will honour him because he is an overcomer. The Lord is just pointing to what is true of him. That is really what is meant in the things that He promises here, because these things are true of Philadelphia, and the Lord knows that they are true, and He is enjoying the fact that they are true, and He is speaking to us today because they are true. He appreciates us all the more because they are true and that we belong to Philadelphia, not that *we* are saying that we belong to Philadelphia, but the Lord is saying it, and He is writing upon us because of this.
S.McC. Does the expression "my God" in this passage here refer to the fullest and greatest way in which God may be known?
J.T. Well, I suppose so. We might link up @John 20 with it, "My God and your God", but the Lord here is speaking by Himself.
P.H.H. What is the force of "my new name"?
{199}
J.T. It must apply to something that the saints at Philadelphia had come to know as new. It is not something old such as the denominations have, referring back to old things; but we have come into new things and we are enjoying new things. The Lord Himself presents what is new.
J.C-S. Do you think it might stress the idea of how the truth of His Person has been unfolded in recent years?
J.T. Very good. It is what is new, not what is old and about to be discarded. That is what is in mind in the epistle to the Hebrews, that there is something about to be discarded, but what we are going on with is not about to be discarded; it is a new thing. It belongs to what is new, and it is eternal, really. I was noticing last night, as we left these buildings, there was hardly anyone in sight that was not in fellowship. Well, I think that was something. God has effected that in our day, and therefore we are going on with something that the world does not know of at all. They do not know what we are going on with. If they looked in here now they would not know what we are speaking about; but *we* know, and we are enjoying it. It is a new and blessed thing that will go on for ever.
J.T.Jr. Is it the idea of God and man? Is that the idea here? The Lord is speaking here to us as Man in relation to God, and that we are now brought into relation with God as men.
J.T. Just so. The Lord says, in @John 17: "The men whom thou gavest me". These are the men, and we, through grace, belong to them.
Well now, we shall just have to look at Laodicea for a few moments, and get a few thoughts that we can carry away with us as to it, and the attitude of the Lord toward it, particularly the way He is presented as "the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God". That is to
{200}
say, the Lord presents Himself to Laodicea, not as the new creation or in connection with the new creation, but "the beginning of the creation of God". We have the idea of creation, and therefore our minds are directed back to the first of Genesis, where God has to do with the creation. That is the God we have to do with too. He is the God of creation; but then Christ is the beginning of that. He is the beginning of it. That is to say, He is before it; He begins it. What is presented to us in @Genesis 1 begins in Christ; He is the beginning of it, and, of course, that directs us back to much, because the actual world that we are dealing with was created before man, much before man. Angels were created before men. We have therefore to think of the Lord Jesus as the beginning of all that. What a place it gives Him! What a place it should give Him in our minds, as seen in this address to Laodicea!
Ques. What is the import of the "Amen" coming before the thought of the beginning?
J.T. The "Amen" is mentioned at the beginning of the book and it is a suggestion of finality. It is final. Whatever is in mind, the Lord is that; He must finish up everything, it is like the Alpha and Omega.
S.B. Would it be right to say that this beginning of the creation of God was in His mind in the way in which He speaks to Job: "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?"
J.T. Well, quite. We have to go back in our minds and think of what God had. He had been operating long before man; He had been operating when "the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy". He was there then. So that it enlarges our minds, and leads us to think that it is not simply @Genesis 1, but it is what was before that. So that whatever was before that, the Lord is speaking of it.
{201}
Rem. So that in Colossians it is said, "*He* is before all, and all things subsist together by him".
J.T. A very good application there.
Ques. Would that link on with what we have in Colossians, "who is image of the invisible God, firstborn of all creation"?
J.T. You have the Firstborn there, but here He is the Beginning. Each time it is the beginning, not the firstborn, but the beginning. It is a cognate thought, of course, whether it is the firstborn or the beginning.
P.H.H. What is the force of the Lord referring thus to Himself in addressing Laodicea?
J.T. I think it is to impress us with what He is. He is "the Amen". He is the finish of everything, but He is "the beginning of the creation of God", no matter how far back your mind travels, you cannot get to this, but He is there. In John l, it is: "In the beginning was the Word"; but here it is "the beginning of the creation of God". We cannot just say what the beginning in @John 1 was. "In the beginning was the Word", but here it is "the beginning of the creation of God". The Lord is that. Whatever it was, He is it. So that the mind is directed to something in that sense, as to the glory of Christ.
P.L. Is it an answer to the heartlessness of Laodicea, involving in our day such attacks upon Christ? Does this silence all? I was thinking of the heartlessness in the profession today in regard of the Person of Christ.
J.T. Well, and, too, the much that is made of science and what science has found out in the work of creation. The scientific man makes so much of it, but the Lord Jesus says: 'I am the beginning of it'. They may say it is millions of years and you marvel how they spin it out in terms of millions! Well, the Lord says, 'I am the beginning of that'.
{202}
That is what He says here. No matter how far back you go, He is the beginning of it.
Ques. Would that dismiss from the minds of the saints all these evolutionary thoughts that man has taken on?
J.T. Just so. The idea of evolution would do away with all this. Men of science would not admit that the Lord Jesus was the beginning of it. They would make out that it was some scientific thing.
Ques. Is the presentation of the Lord's glory in this way calculated to stir us up out of any lukewarmness?
J.T. Very good.
A.J.G. Does it add peculiar lustre to His readiness to stand at the door and knock?
J.T. Very beautiful. That is one thing I thought we ought not to pass over. It is as if the Lord is standing and knocking at the door of everybody, especially christendom. "If any one hear my voice and open the door", He says, "I will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with me". We are reminded of Peter, what the Lord said to him, when He washed his feet: "Unless I wash thee, thou hast not part with me". Here the Lord is proposing to have part with anyone that opens to Him, and that he should have part with Him.
{203}
THE MEDIATORIAL SERVICE OF CHRIST AND THE HOLY SPIRIT (5)
@Revelation 19: 1 - 9; @Revelation 21: 1 - 8
J.T. The beginning of chapter 19, to the end of verse 5, was read because it gives the background to all that follows; that is to say, the assembly viewed as the wife of Christ and the bride of Christ. The suggestion now is that the sections read convey to us the truth as to the assembly, first in the ending of its responsible life here, culminating in its place as the bride of Christ, and then leading on to the passage in chapter 21, which involves the completion of everything, leading into eternity. Whilst undoubtedly these two passages involve the rapture, as we call it, yet there is the idea of responsibility entering into chapter 19 particularly; and then there is what we may call an appendix to bring out more fully the idea of the assembly in its administrative capacity in the millennium. So it was morally right that the history intervening between the addresses to the assemblies and this section should come into view, so that we now, as still living here in responsibility, should not overlook what the completion is to be, but prepare for it. The idea of preparation is strong in the passage in chapter 19, "his wife has made herself ready", and then when she is seen later as "a bride adorned for her husband".
Ques. Would that stress the necessity for understanding the eternal place of the assembly before the administration of the millennium?
J.T. Well, I think the eternal place really comes in before we have the millennial facts. It is a question of spiritual understanding as to what has yet to be done, because all must come into change, for flesh and blood does not inherit the kingdom of God. So that the Lord will help us doubtless to think on these things and to see how what we now have part in
{204}
down here culminates in the eternal state in which each of us will be and in which the assembly will be.
P.H.H. May I ask if you make a distinction between "his wife", in chapter 19 and "the bride", or "as a bride", in chapter 21?
J.T. Well, the early verses of chapter 21 contemplate almost what is figurative, because of the "as". John says, "I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea exists no more. And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, prepared as a bride". The preparation and what works out in it: "as a bride", there, is a strong figurative presentation of the assembly. But when we come to verse 9 of chapter 21, it is said, "And there came one of the seven angels which had had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues, and spoke with me, saying, Come here, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife". So in this chapter we have come to the beginning of what we may call the eternal state, but still the administrative side that she is to occupy, and therefore the description that we have in the whole of chapter 21. In the meantime what is in mind is to get the idea of chapter 19 and how she is seen there. First we have the great jubilation over the overthrow of Babylon, and then in verses 6 and 7, "I heard as a voice of a great crowd, and as a voice of many waters, and as a voice of strong thunders, saying, Hallelujah, for the Lord our God the Almighty has taken to himself kingly power. Let us rejoice and exult, and give him glory; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready". Then we are told what is given to her; so that we have presented to us in the passage almost the end of the responsible period and the beginning of the eternal conditions.
L.E.S. Would @Psalm 150 have any bearing on this, as to the word 'Hallelujah'? "Hallelujah! Praise
{205}
God in his sanctuary; praise him in the firmament of his power. Praise him in his mighty acts; praise him according to the abundance of his greatness". And then the last verse, "Let everything that hath breath praise Jah, Hallelujah!". I was wondering if the buoyancy and the exalted character of praise in the psalm would not underlie this passage here.
J.T. Well, just so. We may link on the Old Testament with the New, and especially when it becomes a question of psalms, David being the "sweet psalmist of Israel". He speaks of "the instruments which I made", @1 Chronicles 23: 5. That is to say, the instruments of praise are the work of Christ figuratively.
C.A.I. What is involved in the making herself ready? Does it include what is suggested in @Proverbs 31, the assembly as the virtuous woman here?
J.T. I would say that. It is another link between the Old Testament and the New. That is to say, it is one idea; the mind of God is one in both books, the Old and the New.
F.J.F. It is remarkable in that passage at the end of Proverbs that the whole Hebrew alphabet is covered in what is said of her. From verse 10 to the end of the chapter, the initial Hebrew letter of each verse follows the alphabetical order.
A.E.D. In this link between the Old and the New, might we refer to verse 12 of chapter 21, where the names inscribed are those of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel?
J.T. That is another link. It is well to remind us of that because the twelve tribes come down to us from the Old Testament, and have their place in the New. The links are therefore the stronger the more we look at them; so that we may say it is one idea from the first of Genesis to the end of Revelation, one great idea. It is the book of God, as a matter of fact, *the* book.
{206}
Ques. Does not chapter 21 show that the accumulated glory of all the dispensations is seen in the assembly?
J.T. I would say that too. It shows the place that God had designed for the assembly, and especially the place that He intended for it in the book of Revelation, that which God gave to Christ to show to His bondmen the things which must shortly come to pass. It is something that God does, no doubt, to express His admiration and love for Christ; He gave Him this book. According to @Mark 13, as we have already remarked, the Lord takes the ground of not knowing certain things; everything is in the hand of the Father, He says. So that more and more we can see the links between the Old Testament and the New.
F.C.H. Why do you think the assembly is presented in relation to the Lamb at the end of Revelation, this view of her not forming part of Paul's ministry nor referred to in the early part of Revelation?
J.T. I think the Lamb as seen, beginning with chapter 5, means a sufferer; it implies suffering. He is seen as the Lamb that was slain.
A.J.G. Is the marriage of the Lamb regarded as the public vindication of Him and a celebration?
J.T. That is what I should think, and how she is in it. According to Proverbs, "her husband is known in the gates". That is to say, the assembly reflects the Lord Jesus in His suffering character.
Ques. Because she participates in them?
J.T. She participates in the sufferings. It is given to us, on behalf of Christ, "not only the believing on him but the suffering for him also", @Philippians 1: 29.
A.J.G. And therefore her presence here is to enhance this occasion?
J.T. Just so.
{207}
P.H.H. Would that connect itself at all with the Lord's supper as being in a scene of suffering? Would you be free at that time to refer to both the Lord's sufferings and the suffering position of the assembly?
J.T. Yes; I certainly should. It has often been remarked that it is a dead Christ that is presented to us. First He is dead: "I became dead", He says; but then He is alive for evermore. Therefore the Lord's death is the great thought that dominates in regard to His Supper.
R.W.S. Then it says in verse 9, "And he says to me, Write, Blessed are they who are called to the supper of the marriage of the Lamb". You have helped us elsewhere that this is not only a future thought, but it is linked on with the marital thought in the service in the morning meeting.
J.T. Just so. The Lord should surely have something, in that sense, as coming to us. We might say He comes out of heaven; but really He comes to us in relation to what is on earth immediately. If we regard it as it actually comes about, He comes to us not exactly from heaven, He is coming as in a scene of suffering, as in the scene of testimony, and the Lord's supper must enter into that, and it does enter into it, and we have part in it. So, as the service proceeds, we move on because He becomes the Minister of the sanctuary; He takes the thing on Himself and looks after everything for us.
P.H.H. In relation to what was said in the first reading, about redemption, may I ask whether you would say a little more about the mention of the Lord's sufferings? I remember at Glasgow we seemed to get clear about the suffering position of the assembly, but now are we to understand that we are free to refer also to the Lord's sufferings, His own personal sufferings?
{208}
J.T. I would think so. I think we should. If we go over the facts beginning with verse 17 of @1 Corinthians 11, I think we shall see that.
Ques. Would you think that the reference to the Lord's feet in @Luke 24 might give us liberty to refer to the way love has taken, involving the sufferings? In John, it is His hands and His side, but in the local position, as suggested in Luke, it is His hands and His feet.
J.T. Yes; as if it were the idea of travel. The woman in @Luke 7 apprehended the Lord as travelling to her, as it were. It is as if she would say, 'He has come all this way for me!' The Lord says, "For she loved much".
J.C-S. You spoke of the Lord's burden, in giving thanks for the emblems last Lord's day. Had you in mind His personal sufferings, in that way?
J.T. He said, "My burden is light"; but still there was the idea of it. "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and *I* will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me ... and ye shall find rest to your souls". It is a burden, but it is a light one. It is characteristic really of the Lord as to what is on the first day of the week.
J.G.H. What character of the Lord's sufferings would be before us in the Supper?
J.T. Well, you would scarcely say much about the forsaking, but the idea of suffering is there anyway. But if one is pressed to allude to the Lord's death in the atoning sense, well, it would be a question of the state of one's soul and what would be in one's mind in so doing, and just how much should enter into the time of service in the sense of suffering. So that if one is burdened much, as sometimes we are, one might refer to the Lord's atoning sufferings. He died for us; He died for the assembly.
J.T.Jr. Peter says, "Christ indeed has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might
{209}
bring us to God; being put to death in flesh". Does that enter into the thought of the Christ as dead, and His death for us?
J.T. Quite so. Peter has that in mind.
Ques. Do the types help us in discriminating as to what is suitable on the altar of burnt-offering? The body of the sin offering was burnt outside the camp, but the inwards of the sin offering were burnt on the altar (@Leviticus 4: 8 - 12).
J.T. Well, all these things are right, I am sure, and the Lord would help us at a time like this. We are here, not exactly in conference, but we are here to communicate with one another and to give occasion for ministry, and fellowship too. Therefore all these things should be canvassed thoroughly as we are together, so that the character of Christ should shine out in its features in the closing days of the testimony, and of the service of the assembly.
Ques. I was thinking of the assembly as "the pillar and base of the truth", and therefore as the custodian, in the Spirit, of every feature of the personal glories of Christ. Would not that give great liberty at the Supper to touch on any aspect of the sufferings of Christ that reflected His glory?
J.T. Well, that is good. Therefore the priestly side comes in. It is a question of priestly power, because priestly power is what God has designed as suitable for His service and for those who have part in it. It is not simply a matter of the mind, but the heart is in it too. The mind is in it, of course, especially as it is said: *the calling of Me to mind*. At the same time the affections must be in it too, so that both the intelligence of the saints and their affections are bound up with the Lord's supper.
H.H. On the road to Emmaus the Lord said, "Ought not the Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his glory?", and then it leads up to the breaking of bread.
{210}
J.T. The solemn word comes in there: "O senseless and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken! Ought not the Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his glory?". That is to say, the Lord is speaking strongly of spiritual slothfulness in the service of God, and would spur us to more zeal and holiness in the part we have in the Lord's supper. We are priests unto God, for Christ has made us that, as it says. He has "made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father". The point would be therefore (according to what we are saying now) to stress the idea of holiness combined with intelligence in the service of God. For many years the Lord has been stressing the service of God and what enters into it, and that those who have part in it are made priests unto God. They are *made* that; He has "made us a kingdom, priests to his God".
A.J.G. Would not the increasing recognition of the Holy Spirit result in the holiness and the intelligence which you refer to?
J.T. Quite so. Moreover we are not only priests unto God, we are priests "of the Christ", @Revelation 20: 6. That is, He has His own priests. When therefore we come down to the actual Supper, it is the *Lord's* supper; and He has His priests, so that we might have part in it peculiarly.
S.McC. Would @Genesis 15 help us in that way, as to the service of God? Abraham says, "How shall I know?" and then we have reference to Abraham scaring certain things away, suggesting the power to eliminate and to keep away certain things, and to include other things.
J.T. Quite so. So that the priestly part was there in Abraham. He was a priest, qualified as a priest; and so he makes inquiry from Jehovah. He says, "How shall I know?". A very important thing! We
{211}
ought to know things, so as to be priests and have intelligent part in the service.
W.S. How far on in the service are the references to which we have alluded suitable?
J.T. I think the immediate participation in the breaking of the bread, and the drinking of the cup. It is the immediate use that we are making of the emblems, bringing out the idea of calling Christ to mind. The idea is to bring a proper state into our minds, so that we can touch the heavenly things in a holy way.
E.B.McC. Would you say that eldership is more to be desired than bondmen, because we have in verses 4 and 5: "The twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and did homage to God who sits upon the throne, saying, Amen, Hallelujah. And a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God, all ye his bondmen, and ye that fear him, small and great"? I was thinking that the elders and the creatures were ahead of the bondmen.
J.T. Yes, only when we come to the Lord's supper we have to make allowance for those who are there. All ages are supposed to be there; all qualified as having the Spirit.
J.P.H. Is it interesting that in @Matthew 26 the Lord says as to the cup, "For this is my blood, that of the new covenant, that shed for many for remission of sins"? I wondered if that had a bearing on what you are saying as to the atoning sufferings.
J.T. Well, it does. But what has been remarked is important too, as to the elders, as if they took the place of priests. Would you kindly say what you mean by elders taking the place of priests?
E.B.McC. I was thinking of the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures who fell down and did homage to God at the judgment of the harlot, but then there was a voice that came out of
{212}
the throne saying, "Praise our God, all ye his bondmen, and ye that fear him, small and great". I was thinking that the elders were more in line and were prepared to move immediately, whereas a voice had to come out of the throne to the others.
J.T. When we come to actual facts, we have all ages of brethren, and therefore we have to make allowance for certain states, so that they are not shut out by any matter of real experience in some. The fact that they are believers and have the Spirit qualifies them to have part in the Lord's supper and in the service of God, because the idea of the service of God begins with the Lord's supper, and that must include all the saints, all those who have the Spirit.
J.C-S. So that there is not a state present in any one that cannot be met in the emblems.
J.T. Just so; it is for them. However young they may be, if they have the Spirit they have liberty to have part in the Lord's supper, and therefore to proceed into the full thought of the service of God.
C.M.M. Could we have a word as to the Holy Spirit's place at the Lord's supper?
J.T. Well, He must have a part in it. The Holy Spirit must have a part in the service of God. He is the power for everything in that sense, subjectively, because He is here. The great point is that the Holy Spirit is here, as a Paraclete, to take charge of everything for us, so that nothing is out of keeping with God Himself, whether it be God in Christ, or God the Father, or the Spirit, for that matter.
F.J.F. Would it be appropriate to address Him before the partaking of the emblems?
J.T. If you view Him as One of the divine Persons, and He is a divine Person. He is in a position to be addressed according to the thoughts or principles that govern the assembly and the service of God. We ought to be free to address the Spirit
{213}
at any time, but there are principles that govern the service of God, and I believe they begin at the Lord's supper, and that it is the Lord's supper. It is not the Spirit's supper, although the Spirit *augments* the service, but the beginning of the service of God involves the *Lord's* supper. It is *His* supper; it is not the Father's supper, nor the Spirit's supper, it is Christ's supper. There are priests that have part in it and should know how to do so, but we become instructed. The young people become instructed by what they observe in others; so that there is always teaching; "they shall be all taught of God". The principle of teaching runs right through, in all things.
S.McC. Your reference just now to the Spirit *augmenting* is exceedingly helpful. Would we see the idea of augmenting in a special way, in relation to the cup, as drinking into the same Spirit, and also in @2 Corinthians 3?
J.T. The Lord is said to be the Spirit in @2 Corinthians 3. So that there is nothing at all to interfere with the Spirit being brought in, because He is here in that connection. He is here to look after things. Even before we leave our houses, in looking after our children, the Spirit is ready to help us, in the sense of promoting holiness and righteousness in the houses of the saints, as we proceed in the morning, on the first day of the week, to partake of the Lord's supper.
H.H. It says, "Through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father". What you have been saying in connection with the morning meeting, would that be from beginning to end of the service?
J.T. Well, the Spirit would be there, whether it be in what relates to the Lord Himself or in what relates to the Father. That passage in Ephesians would, of course, undoubtedly allude to what we say is the second part of the meeting. It would allude to Him because "through him" (that is,
{214}
through Christ) "we have both access ... to the Father".
R.W.S. Would the titles by which the Holy Spirit might be addressed be governed by the phase of the service in which we are?
J.T. Well, quite; but whatever may be needed. The Spirit graciously lays Himself open, as it were, to be usable to us in the service of God, according to whatever may be needed. But then, of course, there are, in general, the principles that govern the service of God, which begins properly with the Lord's supper. The Lord has the first place, in that sense. It is not the Father's supper, nor the Spirit's supper; but the Spirit is ready to serve us, to help us, so that the service should be all the more acceptable to God Himself, to the Father.
Ques. What is your mind as to prayer or thanksgiving or a hymn addressed exclusively to the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Well, I think if the Spirit is here to help us, the simple thing would be to leave Him, in a holy sense, in the place He has taken. He is sent, of course; the Lord Jesus has sent Him, but then the Lord asked for Him too. The point therefore would be to leave the Spirit in the place that He has taken in His own infinite intelligence, to leave Him where He is ready to help us.
W.S.S. So that the reference to the wife making herself ready would all involve the service of the Holy Spirit.
J.T. It would. Very good. So that we might as well proceed now to that point, because the verses in the beginning of chapter 19, running on to verse 5, refer negatively to what preceded; that is, the destruction of Babylon, as if God would glory in it. It is spoken of twice, according to the word: "And a second time they said, Hallelujah". The matter is therefore left there, and then in verse 6 it says,
{215}
"I heard as a voice of a great crowd, and as a voice of many waters, and as a voice of strong thunders, saying, Hallelujah, for the Lord our God the Almighty has taken to himself kingly power". So that God has come into the whole matter now, and then the next thing is, "Let us rejoice and exult, and give him glory; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready". Well, now, the Spirit, of course, would be ready to aid her as a bride; a very touching thought! He would aid her as a bride. How much attention, in a literal sense, a bride requires! And we may bring the feminine thought into it too; what attention there is needed to make her suitable for her husband! When you apply that to Christ, you can see how the Spirit would readily come into it.
J.T.Jr. Is the assembly viewed in that way therefore a collective thought, that the wife is making herself ready?
J.T. It *is* a collective thought. "Let us rejoice and exult, and give him glory; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready". The word 'wife' refers to the assembly, and that, of course, is collective.
J.T.Jr. Do you think what worked out in Corinth would come into that, the assembly acting in regard to having things right in the locality?
J.T. Just so, I would go to Corinth for all matters relative to the order of the assembly and the order that governs the assembly in the service of God.
A.J.G. Do you think the wife making herself ready would refer largely to faithfulness to the interests of Christ in a suffering scene, and then the bride refers to the refinement that would constitute adornment?
J.T. Quite so, I think what you say is clearly indicated in the idea of the wife. The end of
{216}
Proverbs shows how she attends to things, "Her husband is known in the gates"; she attends to everything as to the household.
Ques. Would the fact that Esther required nothing but what Hegai gave her bear on this matter?
J.T. It does. He was, as it were, in masculine charge, so to speak, of a wife, a prospective wife; he was in charge of her. He supplied her with what was needed, and that may be taken to be a symbol of what the Spirit can be to the assembly, in view of her relation to Christ as His wife, as His bride.
E.A.L. Has it not been said that the service of God should be made right in a locality? I am thinking of what has happened in regard of this matter of addressing the Holy Spirit and of what is taking place in certain localities where a brother is holding up the brethren generally in not seeing what the Lord is doing among His people in the way of bringing in truth to help us. Do you think that such a matter should be brought into the care meeting? Then too, in this area, there is such a thing as young brothers who have addressed the Spirit being rebuked by older brothers.
J.T. Would you state, in a very few words, what you are alluding to, and what was actually done?
E.A.L. I am told that there were two young brothers who addressed the Spirit and that they were rebuked by older brothers. Do you think that matter should be brought up in the care meeting immediately?
J.T. That is what I would say, immediately. Are the brethren here who are responsible? We are not, of course, here to execute judgment on a local assembly, but we might as well examine the thing that you bring forward.
Rem. Brethren from the place are here, and locally it is an exercise, and it is going forward.
J.T. Well, then, we can leave it there.
{217}
W.C. Would the reference to what the fine linen is confirm that the readiness is on the line we are speaking of; that is, matters of judgment? The same word is used earlier as to the righteousness of God (@Revelation 15: 4).
J.T. Well, that really comes to what we are speaking about. Do you not think that is in line with what our brother was speaking about? Is it right that we should bring it forward, or can we leave it to the local brethren?
W.C. I think the brethren need strengthening, because it has happened in more than one locality, to my knowledge.
J.T. Then it becomes a question for us here, as to what is suitable in these matters. It says in verse 7, "Let us rejoice and exult, and give him glory; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready. And it was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure; for the fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints". The question of righteousness must therefore come into this matter. Is it so that the brethren will not allow the Spirit to be used or mentioned in the service? Is that so, in any gathering? It is clear that the assembly should be marked by righteousness, and righteousness should cover the order and the conduct that enters into assembly service. Therefore what is said here includes that.
Eu.R. If there is a definite issue as to righteousness or holiness in any local assembly, would not that be a matter of concern to all the local assemblies?
J.T. It would; only that we do not want a matter of administrative action, in the way of penalty, brought up here. We want to be dealing with the bride. First we have the wife of Christ, and then she is called the bride later. The question now is whether we have clearly before us what these garments are, "It was given to her that she should
{218}
be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure; for the fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints". Therefore the question of righteousness must enter into anything done with any local brother or sister who is not right.
Rem. In chapter 2, the Lord says, "But if not, I am coming to thee". That is to say, if Ephesus does not repent. But here it says, "his wife has made herself ready". I wondered whether the Lord expects us to take up matters, and whether the righteousness, the preparation, would involve that.
E.C.M. Does @Matthew 22 have any bearing on it? The king comes in there to see the guests and saw a man not having on a wedding garment.
J.T. Just so. Therefore the whole matter that is mentioned now comes into what we are speaking of. It is a question as to what is suitable in the wife of Christ; that is, to be practical, what conduct is suitable to ourselves as we think of the wife of Christ in relation to Him.
W.S.S. Is what we have in chapter 18, verse 20: "Rejoice over her, heaven, and ye saints and apostles and prophets; for God has judged your judgment upon her", a background, so to speak, to what we have in chapter 19? Does it show that a right moral judgment has been come to, by the Spirit, in regard to all these moral questions?
J.T. Well, quite so, and, of course, that is what we are considering now in chapter 19; the question of the Lamb, and the Lamb's wife, "Let us rejoice and exult, and give him glory; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready". Well now, these matters that have just come up imply readiness in view of the Lord's coming. The question is whether these matters that have come up before us, are true or not, and whether brothers have been rebuked, or are being rebuked for speaking to the Spirit, I think this ought to be
{219}
taken account of, and that we all should see to it and to the principles that govern the service of God in relation to the Spirit of God, and what part He has in it.
L.E.S. Does not the footnote to the word 'righteousnesses' help? It says, 'Possibly here as in Hebrew the plural of acts expressing a quality (here righteous acts) is used for the abstract quality itself'.
J.T. And then *our* judgment, we should all come to it now. This question now comes up as to how the wifely qualities are seen at the present time amongst us, and whether they lead up to and correspond with eternal conditions.
Ques. What would you say about a care meeting deciding when there will be liberty for the Spirit to be addressed? I have been told that at a certain place the care meeting decided that no one should address the Spirit until all were free about it.
J.T. I should object very strongly to the care meeting taking on any part like that, because it is a question of authoritative judgment, and that does not belong to the care meeting. The care meeting is just consultative, taking counsel together with a view to anything that may or may not be done in the assembly.
Rem. I had in my mind that the care meeting, in administration, cannot decide such a matter. It is an issue of truth which should govern us as soon as it is clear to us.
J.T. I would say that, definitely. The care meeting does not go beyond consideration, or taking counsel together with a view to assembly matters and to keeping things right authoritatively. I heard that the matter came up in Australia, but I did not think it was continued, nor that any care meetings now are assuming to have assembly authority. I should be very thankful to hear whether the brethren are accepting that or not.
{220}
Rem. That is generally accepted, I think.
J.T. If it is clear that the brethren generally accept that the care meeting has not assembly authority, one is thankful, and I hope it is so and I believe it is so, too.
J.T.Jr. I think there is a meeting in Germany that thinks that they must all wait till the care meeting has decided on a point. It is just to help our brethren on the Continent in regard of these things that one raises the matter, because in most meetings on the Continent they do not have the ministry meeting, nor do they have a special collection. We all ought to be of one mind universally in these things, so that what is done in one place is done in another, in the same light.
J.T. Well, there are brethren from the Continent here. Are they ready to speak and tell us whether they have care meetings, and if so that they are not regarding them as assembly meetings.
J.S. I come from D, I quite agree that the care meeting is not empowered to make decisions but when we have to make these we call all the sisters together as well. The sisters do not, of course, speak, but they bring support to what the brothers say. I can speak for the meeting where I am, but I am not able to state positively if that is the case in all the meetings in Germany.
Eu.R. I think it would be right to say that in some parts of Germany they are greatly held up by saying that things should not be arrived at till every individual brother and sister is happy about them, and that holds matters up.
J.S. When one desires to be in fellowship with us we speak about it first as brothers in the care meeting, and when all the brothers are free we make an announcement in the meeting and wait for a week to see if all are free. Then if anyone has to be withdrawn from, the matter would come up in the care
{221}
meeting first, but we do not decide there what to do, but we bring the matter before the whole assembly. We know, of course, that we cannot call the whole assembly together because that includes all christians in the place, but we call those who are available as in fellowship with us in the breaking of bread.
J.T. I should like to know what Mr. W, has to say on these matters, and whether in general what has been said as to the care meeting not being regarded as an authoritative meeting is accepted.
A.W. We regard the care meeting only as consultative and all things requiring any action must be brought into the assembly. If there is a case of withdrawal, we would first have a care meeting about it and then an assembly meeting.
J.T. Well, I am sure we should all say that is quite correct, and we can count that God will use Mr. W, and Mr. S, and others to get the truth disseminated amongst the saints.
We can now proceed with chapter 21. It says: "And I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea exists no more. And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband", 'Prepared'; but she is now seen "as a bride adorned for her husband". Therefore it is, you might say, a figure, but the full thought of the assembly is in mind, and that she is to be adorned. Then it proceeds further, "And I heard a loud voice out of the heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men". It is now a question of God Himself "with men". It is not with Jews by themselves, but with men, and that is evidently going into eternity. The state implied on to the end of verse 8 is an eternal condition and shows what the assembly is to be eternally.
{222}
P.H.H. Does this reinforce the feminine thought, as being eternally true of the assembly?
J.T. I would think so. She is to be viewed as female; the feminine idea governs the whole matter. It is Christ *and* the assembly, which means that Christ Himself is the full thought of the masculine and the assembly is the feminine.
F.W. Does the thought of 'wife' relate to time, and the thought of 'bride' relate to the eternal state?
J.T. Well, 'wife', I think, would relate to time, but it comes in in relation to the bride also. You might therefore say that the wife and the bride are synonymous; only the wife refers to what the assembly is to the Lord in caring for His interests here below and running on into the eternal state. We are to prepare ourselves now for the eternal state at any time, morally; only that the idea of the assembly is to run on to the end under the heading of 'wife'. A wife cares for her husband's interests.
Eu.R. The city is called 'the holy city', and would not part of the preparation be the obedience to the exhortation at the end of @2 Corinthians 6?
J.T. Well, just so. But the first thing is, "I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea exists no more". And then, "I saw the holy city". It is as if the idea of holiness is to permeate the whole matter until we come to verse 8, and then it is taken up again in verse 9, running on to the administrative side in the remainder of the chapter. Then we move to chapter 22, where we have the Lord saying, "*I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star". And then "the Spirit and the bride say, Come".
A.E.D. You referred to the full thought, "God himself"; would that be linked with the expression, "God ... all in all", as involving the full thought?
{223}
J.T. Well. Himself, quite so.
J.C-S. Is the assembly the medium by which this great thought of tabernacling is brought in?
J.T. Quite so. It is "with men". It is not any longer among the Jews by themselves, it is "with men".
J.C-S. And the assembly only will have the feminine idea; the other families will not share in the feminine thought, will they?
J.T. Well, I should think not. The assembly is exclusively the bride of Christ, and so she appears as the city later at the end of the whole matter.
F.J.F. I have heard it said that God is the Husband here, and not the Lord Jesus. That cannot be right, can it?
J.T. No. The Lord Jesus is the Husband of the assembly.
Eu.R. With regard to @2 Corinthians 6: 16, "I will dwell among them, and walk among them", is there a reference to the tabernacle there? That is what characterises the heavenly city.
J.T. Very good. Quite so.
S.McC. Does the feminine thought here especially allude to what the assembly is as out of Christ and out of heaven? Mr. Stoney used to say that nothing could be united to Christ but what is out of Christ, and nothing would go into heaven but what came out of heaven.
J.T. Well, that is quite true, of course. We might then go back to @Genesis 2 as to Eve being taken out of Adam, for that is where we get the first idea that we are now dealing with. Eve was taken out of Adam while he was in a deep sleep; that is to say, the assembly is taken out of Christ; she is of Him. These closing chapters in the book of Revelation really connect with the beginning of Genesis; so that the thought of Christ and the assembly is outstanding, the assembly representing the feminine
{224}
thought and Christ representing the masculine. On the other hand, we cannot ignore that the sons of God are masculine too, but they are viewed severally, not collectively but severally.
J.T.S. Would you please help us as to what enters into the word "prepared as a bride".
J.T. 'Prepared' refers to all that is necessary, or all that is suitable, to a bridal condition. Of course, the assembly is seen here now, as we have been looking at it, as a bride, and she is prepared, and we are told what she is allowed to use as clothing, fine linen.
A.J.G. Would it not involve the taking on of all the features of spiritual refinement that are so being stressed in these days?
J.T. I would say that. These are precious thoughts that we are engaged with, and the Lord is helping us, as it were, to extricate ourselves from ordinary matters, as we are in these meetings, to be engaged in these holy matters referring to Christ and the assembly; especially now that we have selected, we believe under the guidance of the Spirit, the subject of the bride herself, the assembly viewed in that light.
Ques. Would a thought in 'the bride' be the reciprocity of affection unhindered, rather than what is administrative?
J.T. Well, I would say it is the relation of the assembly towards Christ, and what affection there is between them. There is, as you say, what is reciprocated, and therefore it is Christ *and* the assembly. We can only get all this doctrinally in looking at the epistle to the Ephesians, and, of course, we have no time for that. We have been dealing with one matter, and that is Christ and the assembly.
Rem. She is called both the bride and the wife in the millennium setting, in verse 9.
{225}
J.T. Yes, but I think the idea of the bride, as we shall see in chapter 22, is what she is *to* Christ; it is not as the wife, but as the assembly herself, according to the purpose of God, for Christ. It is according to the purpose of God when He decreed that He should make man. "Let us make man in our image ... and let them ...". That is to say, it is the man and his wife, "Christ, and ... the assembly". The epistle to the Ephesians is the epistle that affords all the truth, I might well say, as to these holy matters. So that that is the thing to carry away from this reading, "Christ, and ... the assembly" as viewed in the epistle to the Ephesians; and as we have it now in this remarkable book, which is given to Christ, who Himself gives it to John, to testify of all that he saw. The Lord directs him as to the things that he is to write about, and what he is to write about has a great deal to do with the truth of the assembly, first in the form of local assemblies and then secondly as viewed as coming down *from God* out of heaven. That is to say, she is indigenous to heaven, whereas the first part of the book of Revelation is not that; it is what she is here on earth in responsibility.
A.J.G. And the wife connects rather with that latter position?
J.T. That is right. That is what I thought. We began this morning with that thought, so as to bring out the full thought of responsibility here on earth.
Eu.R. It is very beautiful that after a thousand years of reigning with Christ, she should still be as a bride.
J.T. Quite so. We will take that up again.
{226}
THE MEDIATORIAL SERVICE OF CHRIST AND THE HOLY SPIRIT (6)
@Revelation 21: 9 - 27; @Revelation 22: 1 - 17
S.McC. Would you be free, before touching on the passage that we have read, to say a word as to the end of verse 3 of chapter 21? "And God himself shall be with them, their God". In relation to Philadelphia the Lord Jesus refers to God as *His* God, but here it says, "God himself shall be with them, their God".
J.T. The allusion in the opening part of this chapter is to the eternal state, I would say, in which God Himself shines, whereas the verse at which we began to read refers to the millennium. So that we shall have to go back a little in order to get to the question you raise. The beginning of the chapter is, "I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea exists no more". And then, in verse 3, "I heard a loud voice out of the heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he shall tabernacle with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, their God". So that it seems as if, in the opening verses of the chapter, the Spirit of God has the eternal state of things in mind, whereas in the later part of chapter 21 and in chapter 22, we have the millennial world more. But now what is in your mind as to "God himself"?
S.McC. I am asking for help as to what you apprehend is covered in the expression, "God himself". Does it cover the three Persons of the Trinity, as we speak, the Father, the Son and the Spirit?
J.T. I would say it does.
C.F.I. Do we have the three Persons in mind when we speak to God in the higher levels of the service?
{227}
J.T. It is just a question of what the mind of the speaker may be, what apprehension he may wish to convey; but in general when God is spoken of it is God that is to be in mind. But then Christ Himself is said to be God; "He is the true God and eternal life". It is therefore a question, as I said, of what is in the mind, or what may be in the mind, of the person who speaks, what apprehension he has, and whether it is in accord with the Scriptures, or truth, and always remembering the element of inscrutability.
D.J.M. "God ... all in all" would include the three Persons?
J.T. Quite so.
S.McC. May I ask if when addressing God in the light in which He has now been referred to, we can hold concretely three Persons in our minds, or is it that we take account abstractly of the place that the Lord and the Spirit have and address one Person, keeping that in mind?
J.T. We are not equal to Deity, of course, and when the Lord says, "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". He is speaking of the Father as His God, and now ours. The question I apprehend in your mind is whether we are able to take in the idea of the three Persons; and that is a question of light, whether we can take in that light.
Eu.R. But "God is one", and does not that involve, in a certain sense, that when we speak to God as such, the three Persons are unified in our minds?
J.T. But why should we attach the word 'unified'? I think it is redundant; we should just leave things as they are stated. The Deity is God, including three Persons, without saying whether They are unified or not. The three Persons stand out in Their dignity,
{228}
and the thing is, that the whole matter is beyond us really; as to the scope and ability of our minds we are limited, because we are creatures. We are dealing, however, with divine Persons; They are graciously allowing us to have to say to Them, and the Spirit of God supports us in this.
P.L. But the very sense of inscrutability should promote worship, do you think?
J.T. It should; just so.
J.T.S. Would the word in the close of @Ephesians 3 be important, where it says, "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages"?
J.T. That is a phrase that is quite intelligible too. We are to be filled, it says, "even to all the fulness of God", and then the ascription of the doxology.
H.H. Would it be right to say that we think in a mediatorial sense and distinguish, in our minds, the Persons of the Godhead in referring to Them?
J.T. Yes, only the attempt to distinguish is apt to take us beyond our depth; the Trinity is a human expression, but still it fits into the mind of the creature, and the Spirit of God aids him in apprehending it. How could we be, or do, anything in these matters save by the Spirit? The Spirit is here on our side; that is, on the subjective side, and He is here aiding us in everything, but especially in speaking of such matters as are now before us.
A.E.D. Does the declaration of God in @John 1 suggest certain confines, to which, being creatures, we are limited? And what is beyond that we just hold worshipfully? "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him".
J.T. Well, the thing is there; it is a question of the support the Spirit may give us. The thing is there and the Spirit supports us, and, of course, our measure would be corresponding. Take a person like
{229}
Paul; what he would apprehend, and how he would speak of God, or to God. We might then begin to see what possibilities there are even in creatures, but the Deity by Itself is to be regarded, and It is known to faith. It is quite a scriptural idea, and God graciously allows us to move about, so to speak, in liberty, in that which faith apprehends, but it is according to the support that the Holy Spirit gives us. The support that He gives us makes all the difference.
S.R. Would you say a word as to "to us there is one God, the Father"?
J.T. Well, of course, that is specified. What is in mind there is the Father, just the Father, and He is viewed as the one God.
A.N.W. May I ask whether it is not the Lord Jesus Himself that is speaking in verse 7, "He that overcomes shall inherit these things, and I will be to him God". Are they the words of the Lord?
J.T. In verse 6 it says, "*I* am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end". This is the Lord Himself, "I will give to him that thirsts of the fountain of the water of life freely. He that overcomes shall inherit these things, and I will be to him God, and he shall be to me son". That is to say, the Lord Jesus takes the place here of being God to the overcomer. He takes the place of being the overcomer's God. The overcomer is therefore in the position of a worshipper of God, but he is in the liberty that love accords to him.
Ques. Has the assembly in her nearness to Deity, although limited to creature knowledge, a peculiar ability to apprehend something of the greatness of the Godhead, which no other family will have?
J.T. I would say that, fully.
C.A.I. What is involved in the tabernacle of God? Is that the assembly?
J.T. Yes, I think so.
{230}
C.A.I. So that she is the divine abode, in that sense. That would involve great intimacy with the Persons who have come into revelation.
J.T. That is right. So that the assembly has the greatest place of all the families in the heavens and on the earth; the assembly has the supreme place.
F.J.F. When Paul said, "For of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be glory", had he the Trinity in mind?
J.T. I think so. That is, of course, an ascription of praise. It is a doxology and, of course, it refers to God.
S.McC. Can the instructed believer say intelligently, in speaking to God, 'We worship thee Father, Son and Holy Spirit'?
J.T. Well. God is so spoken of, very much spoken of, as in the first Person and the second Person and the third Person. Well, it is simply God if He is so regarded. In the Old Testament it was the same idea; Jehovah's name was one.
P.H.H. Are you referring to, "and his name one"? @Zechariah 14: 9.
J.T. That is it; "his name one". That is what I was referring to. See also @Deuteronomy 6: 4. That does not imply that the three Persons are not there. The three Persons are there. So also, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion". God is there. The 'our' is, we might say, plural; we might say the three Persons are there, but then we have in our minds the idea of revelation in the New Testament; at the same time, the truth is there.
Rem. In @Acts 4: 24 the disciples say, "Lord, *thou* art the God who made the heaven and the earth and the sea, and all that is in them". The footnote says that the word 'God' is Elohim; that is the plural.
J.T. Well, that would be in keeping with what we have said about Genesis l.
{231}
R.W.S. In the order of the service of God, in what we speak of as the second part of the meeting, in the worship of God, do we go then beyond the Father and worship the Trinity?
J.T. Well, I would say in the sense in which @John 20 speaks, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". The Lord begins with the Father, "my Father and your Father ... my God and your God"; the finality is God. It is Christ's God, but then He is our God too; and when we come down to ourselves, if we speak to God we involve the three Persons; we have in our minds the three Persons.
A.A-n. Is that brought out in @John 4, where the Lord distinguishes between worshipping the Father, and then says, "God is a spirit; and they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth"? Is that additional to the worship of the Father?
J.T. Well, I think we ought to take the phraseology in @John 4, for instance, just as it is, I am afraid we are apt to confuse our own minds in not taking it simply as it is, the Spirit being with us to help us in what we say and do, if we are dealing with the service of God.
L.E.S. Does not David, when he is in the presence of Jehovah, in @1 Chronicles 17, suggest something of what we are speaking of, in the spirituality in which he refers to one and another of the appellations of God?
J.T. Quite so, and when we come to the New Testament we have more liberty and latitude than he could have had, but Chronicles clearly intimates that Jehovah was God, "And now, Jehovah, thou art that God" (verse 26).
H.H. The context will help in every place in which divine Persons are mentioned.
J.T. Well, it does; context greatly helps us. So that contextual reading of the Scriptures is of all
{232}
importance. We are dealing with infinite things, but God is graciously allowing us to deal with them, and He supports us too, because He loves us and because we love Him, and so I would suggest that the passage read is almost an appendix to the book of Revelation, corresponding somewhat to the end of John's gospel. Love is so much in the mind of the writer that he proceeds beyond what he had intended to do, and the Spirit of God goes with us in that, and supports us in it. So that when we come to the passage we have read we have come to millennial conditions. In the earlier part of the chapter we really come to eternal conditions, but the Lord seems to have in His mind to delay, or dally, as it were, over the great thoughts of the assembly. The idea of the assembly is so precious to Him that He gives it in full, and links it on with the Old Testament. That is to say, the greatness of the subject covers the Old Testament and the New, as if the Lord would make much of the assembly. And so we get the descriptions, even the tribes of Israel being in mind, as if Jehovah would be brought in according to His eternal thoughts, beginning with Genesis. Then the truth is brought down to the book of Revelation, and we have one writing who is, as we know, the disciple whom Jesus loved. But then he is a suitable vessel, and the Lord is using him. So we have the assembly made much of, more than might have been intended, so to speak; it is to make much of *it*. It is already mentioned in the early part of the chapter, but it is now taken up in verse 9, and someone takes John to a high mountain to show him the bride, the Lamb's wife; to show him that. It is not that she looks like the bride, "as a bride adorned", but she *is* the bride. She is the actual person herself. So the whole of the book, you might say from now on, is to occupy us with this wonderful thought. It is as if the Lord would dwell upon it and enlarge upon it, because He
{233}
loves her. It is a question of love in the Lord's heart to the assembly.
Ques. Would you connect this aspect of the assembly with what we have at the end of @Ephesians 1? I mean that the assembly is really sharing in the headship over the millennial scene.
J.T. That is true. No other family has such distinction as the assembly, because she really shares in the headship, according to that chapter. It is an Ephesian position.
W.W.M. I would like to ask, referring to the wife and the bride, would it be right to say that He loves the wife because of what she has done, but He loves the bride because of what she is? And will that abide eternally?
J.T. Well, just so. And we do well to link on @Proverbs 31 with all that we are saying. The wife there works in relation to the husband, and the husband is known through her. But what I am saying I am sure is right. The book of Revelation, of course, is written by the same person as the gospel of John, but it has that character to it that it has a sort of appendix, as if the mind of the Lord is to enlarge on the assembly, because He comes back to it. It was there, and the Lord had been speaking of it in His epistles, but now He comes back to it again. He comes back to it, not as having any history on earth (I mean fully); but it is now a question of its own place in the divine mind, only that it is in relation to the millennium. It is a question of the millennium, and what God had in His mind to work out and show what He can do in the millennium.
W.C. Might I ask whether the reference, "I will make him a helpmate, his like", goes over into what is eternal?
J.T. Just so. We would do well to begin with Genesis when we deal with this subject, because it is a question of what God had in His mind. It was
{234}
that He would make man in His image, after His likeness, and then the word 'man' includes the woman, the masculine and the feminine. That helps us with what we are dealing with now, one word covering both, as, for example, "so also is the Christ", @1 Corinthians 12: 12, "The Christ" includes the assembly as well as Christ.
W.C. Does that mean then, that there will be assembly service eternally?
J.T. I think so. God had designed that, something for Himself. The whole matter must resolve into what God has designed and what He is going to have, and Christ is working it out for Him.
A.J.G. Is that not what is referred to in the last verse of @Ephesians 3, "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages"?
J.T. Quite so. We have alluded to that before, and it is a wonderful passage. @Ephesians 3 is really a great parenthesis, and it is because the assembly comes into it. There is the thought of the Father, "of whom every family in the heavens and on the earth is named". So that we are in the presence of the greatest possible things in that chapter.
L.E.S. I think we can see what you referred to yesterday as to @Revelation 3, "and shall know that *I* have loved thee", in the presentation now of the assembly here as the choicest vessel for the delight of the heart of Christ.
J.T. Quite so, "And shall know that *I* have loved thee".
Ques. Would you say what is included in "having the glory of God"?
J.T. That shows that she is invested with it. It is not simply "glory" but "the glory of God". She has it; she is invested with that. It says, "And there came one of the seven angels which had had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues, and spoke
{235}
with me, saying, Come here, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife. And he carried me away in the Spirit, and set me on a great and high mountain, and shewed me ...". Notice that, for that is not said in the early part of the chapter. Here it is said that it is carefully shown to John, "He ... shewed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God. Her shining was like a most precious stone, as a crystal-like jasper stone; having a great and high wall" and so forth. The glory of God is what she is invested with; not simply "glory", but "the glory of God". She has that, and that brings up the whole matter of the assembly. We are dealing with that, and the Spirit of God is dealing with it, and bringing it forward, as it were, a second time, because there is so much in it.
D.J.M. Is it what she is substantially, having the glory of God, and having twelve gates?
J.T. It is what she has; what she is invested with, and that she is invested with the glory of God. It is a wonderful thing that the assembly has that great place in the universe. There is no other family like her.
F.W. Does the reference to the twelve foundations in verse 14, together with the fact of the twelve stones being referred to in verse 19, indicate that the assembly is a great basic thought with God?
J.T. Well, so it is. The Lord is coming back to it, as it were. The Spirit of God is coming back to it, from verse 9 onward, and it is the greatest possible thing, next to divine Persons, to be spoken of. It is a glorious thing that the Lord is, as it were, ready to fill us with glory as we come to the assembly, because it is designed for that; its capacity is equal to that.
J.C-S. Would "her shining" imply that she is to be the luminary of the universe?
{236}
J.T. Well, I am not so sure about being *the* luminary, because Christ is the luminary, as it says, "The lamp thereof is the Lamb". The Lord Himself is *the* luminary, but she shines; she is luminous, that is all. She is not divine, but still she is luminous.
J.C-S. Is it that she would take her shining from Christ really?
J.T. Quite so; that must ever be kept in mind.
Ques. What would you say about the place the angels have in the city in verse 12?
J.T. "Having a great and high wall; having twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names inscribed, which are those of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel". The angels are simply augmentary, they are sent out as ministering spirits according to the word: "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?" @Hebrews 1: 14. They are augmentary, therefore, and are, as it were, servants or attendants on the assembly, as persons who are of a lower grade attending on others who are superior. The assembly thus is almost like divine Persons in that she is attended by angels. She is served by them for they are attendants as servants to the assembly.
Ques. Is it interesting to see in the end of @Ephesians 1 the place that Christ has? He is put above every principality and power, and it is in that position that the assembly is united to Him.
J.T. Quite so. Very good. That helps, I think.
J.S.E. What is the force of the numeral twelve, so much in evidence in this chapter?
J.T. It is because it represents administration. The assembly has this wonderful administration.
Ques. Is there not significance in the kind of angel employed to show these things to John, according to verse 9?
{237}
J.T. Well, he is one of those seven angels who had had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues. That is, he is a particular kind of angel, because he had had a certain administration of plagues, in the sense of judgment. It is as if he is suitable to point out the assembly, because the assembly is so important and she comes in for angelic service in that sense.
Ques. Does it involve that there is to be a moral judgment of the vast scope of evil if the true character of the assembly is to be apprehended?
J.T. Well, that is good. So much is made of it that this particular angel is one of those who had had the last plagues. He had had to do with judgment of evil, and, of course, it is a great matter that we have ability in that sense, and a means of dealing with evil, so as to be free of it. I think the Lord intends that; so that in bringing forward the assembly in this peculiar and glorious way, He is pointing out that the evil is also in mind but there is power to deal with it.
P.H.H. Would it be diverting you to say a little about the matter of sonship? The assembly is seen here in an eternal and millennial relation, and in the service of God we have some approach to that; we also have to the matter of sonship.
J.T. Well, it is said in verse 7, "He that overcomes shall inherit these things, and I will be to him God, and he shall be to me son". That is the position, that we come in as sons, "He shall be to me son". That is to say, the overcomer is a son, and, of course, that goes on into eternity, for God is bringing many sons to glory.
P.H.H. I suppose it would not be quite right to speak about an assembly of sons, would it?
J.T. I think it is more that the spirit of Scripture would cause the sons to stand out individually. There are so many, but they are not viewed collectively.
{238}
P.H.H. Severally?
J.T. That is just right.
Rem. We have "the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven", @Hebrews 12: 23.
J.T. That is the assembly of the firstborn, and, of course, that would be the assembly in another view, consistent with the epistle to the Hebrews. It is among the eight things spoken of in that passage that we have come to. We have come to "the assembly of the firstborn". That is to say, persons of that kind who have a firstborn's place; a remarkable thing, for every one is a firstborn. It is not simply that there is a family, but every one a firstborn.
A.J.G. Do you mean that the assembly is to be kept in our minds as the dignified vessel of service and administration, and then the saints individually in their dignity as sons?
J.T. Quite so, viewed severally. God loves to enlarge on the assembly, and to put forward what He has, His very best. The millennium is a secondary thought with Him, showing what He can do with the nations and with Israel, but this great thing is an eternal idea, and the assembly is it. The more we can see that, I think, the more we shall be armed with the truth of the assembly.
Ques. Would you say, before you go on, whether millennial glory comes into the assembly service, and if so, where?
J.T. The assembly comes into the millennium but she is over it. She is not on the earth; she reigns over the earth; she comes in in that way. It is a glorious time, but it is a limited time. It is a thousand years, and the word 'thousand' is mentioned four or five times, which is a remarkable thing; whereas we are living in a dispensation that is not limited in that sense. We are living in a dispensation that has continued almost two thousand years, and is not finished yet.
{239}
Ques. When the assembly is viewed in relation to Christ, is it always the feminine thought?
J.T. I would think that is true.
Ques. Would you please give a link between the assembly as the bride of Christ and as the tabernacle of God, relative to what we are saying?
J.T. It is the same thing, only viewed in two ways.
Ques. Does the tabernacle involve a vessel?
J.T. It does, "The tabernacle of God is with men". The assembly is the vessel, and she is luminous. She is bright, but "the lamp thereof is the Lamb".
J.P.H. In connection with the tabernacle of God being with men, does that word 'men' include the personnel of the assembly?
J.T. It is men, that order of being. It is what God began with in the garden of Eden. He began with men; angels had existed before that. Man is the supreme thought of God, the Lord Himself having become one, a Man.
Ques. These men would be in spiritual conditions, do you think, in eternity?
J.T. I think so. It is abstract. It does not just indicate where they are, or what special characteristic is true of them; they are just *men*. And, of course, God had in His mind such beings, and the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, that is, God Himself, became Man. What could be greater than that thought?
Ques. May I ask a question in regard of @Hebrews 2? "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises". How do you regard the assembly there, femininely or as composed of those who are sons?
J.T. The assembly is viewed by itself, I would say, in @Hebrews 2, "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises". Then there are other things said there that ought to be read with it, if you would kindly read them, beginning at verse 10.
{240}
Rem. "For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings. For both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren, saying, I will declare thy name to my brethren; in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises".
J.T. So that we can see what a cluster of great things there is in that passage, and how the idea of the assembly is just what the assembly is itself, taken from its concrete idea at the beginning; what the assembly is; and the Lord is using it. He is using it in that wonderful way, that it is the sphere or vessel of the praises of God Himself. The Lord is the sweet Psalmist of Israel there, we might say. Just what David was in the Old Testament, the Lord is here, "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises". So that what I am endeavouring to say is that we should dwell on such wonderful things as are indicated there, so as to get the great thoughts of the assembly, and one of the great thoughts is that it is the vessel of the divine praise.
R.W.S. So the appendix in John's gospel, chapter 21, is so wealthy concerning the millennium, but this appendix seems so wealthy concerning the assembly, even to bringing in what the Spirit and the bride say together.
J.T. Very good, we are coming on to that. But if we just dwell for a moment on the section in chapter 21 we can see how the assembly is in mind, and what it is, inclusive of the fact that the names of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel are inscribed on it. Israel has its place in relation to it, and therefore it is a millennial thought. It is a glorious thought, and it is as if the Lord would show how He is ending up with glory. That is not the eternal
{241}
thing, but this particular thought, this matter of the whole of the thousand years.
S.McC. May I ask, if in the parallel to this on the earthly side in the Song of Songs and the second book of Psalms, there are certain feminine relations there which will terminate with the millennium?
J.T. Yes, I would say that. The Old Testament is full of the thought of the millennium.
S.McC. The feminine thought will not go through in Israel, but only in the assembly?
J.T. Well, the feminine thought may go through in Israel, but then we have to settle the question as to how Israel and the nations are to be changed over into the eternal conditions. That is something perhaps that we have to reserve each one for himself, as to how what is flesh and blood properly, as we might say, has to be brought into eternal conditions. That must take place between the two periods; that is to say, between the millennium and the eternal conditions. It must take place there, and God can do it. It is a question of what God can do. It is within His province, for He can do all things, as Job says, "I know that thou canst do everything". We are to see how this is to be done, because the millennial conditions will surely change; they will surely cease, but still God is pleased to keep them on for a thousand years.
Eu.R. Is it this glorious vessel that alone maintains the distinctive character as bride of Christ and tabernacle of God throughout eternity? All other families are merged in the word 'men'?
J.T. I would not say that.
Eu.R. "The tabernacle of God is with men".
J.T. Yes, but then that cannot exclude the assembly, because they are men too.
Rem. Solomon's glory seems to prefigure the millennial state of things, whereas the tabernacle is brought in in connection with what is eternal.
{242}
J.T. We have to analyse that, "The tabernacle of God is with men", and I would think the tabernacle of God there is the assembly itself.
Rem. Quite, but I wondered whether the germ of the idea would be in the Old Testament. God dwelling with men is there in the tabernacle system, where God spoke to men from the mercy seat, and the provision is made for God to dwell with men, and for men to draw near to Him.
J.T. But then we are dealing here with the New Testament, with @Revelation 21 and 22, and it says: "The tabernacle of God is with men". The tabernacle clearly is the assembly, and they are men, themselves. It is not a question of approaching God at all. It is a question of where God is, where He dwells, "The tabernacle of God is with men". It is where He is, and He is with men.
A.E.D. Would you carry the thought of the families over into eternity, "every family in the heavens and on earth is named"?
J.T. Quite so.
A.J.G. While the tabernacle itself is the assembly, do you regard the men, "the tabernacle of God is with men", as including those of the assembly and all those who have part in the eternal scene?
J.T. It is a great general thought here, in verse 3, an abstract idea; "men" is just abstract, and it includes the assembly itself. It would include others too, who are men, and even perhaps angels, but the point is, "the tabernacle of God is with men".
J.C-S. The word 'tabernacle', I understand, is in the feminine.
J.T. Well, that would help us in what we are saying.
F.J.F. Is the section from verse 9 the answer to what we have in Thessalonians, when "he shall have come to be glorified in his saints, and wondered at in all that have believed"?
{243}
J.T. Yes, quite. So that I would suggest that we proceed with the examination of the facts of the assembly beginning with verse 15, where it says. "He that spoke with me had a golden reed as a measure, that he might measure the city, and its gates, and its wall". And then "the city lies foursquare". All these things are most precious, but they are all linked together and the whole matter is founded, not on Paul, but on the twelve apostles of the Lamb. It is a question of what began at Pentecost; the Lord is dealing with the beginning of the assembly.
H.W. What do you understand by the length as set over against the breadth? What would the two measurements convey to us?
J.T. And the height. It is a cube.
H.W. The length and the breadth are mentioned first, and then height afterward.
J.T. Well, it is just to bring out that it is a solid idea. It is not a mere shell; it is a solid idea.
H.W. Would you connect the one with the thought of revelation, and the other with the answer to it?
J.T. I would take the whole thing together, as one idea. It is a cube, a solid matter.
C.A.I. Would you say a little more as to the point of its not being the assembly in the light of Paul, or with reference to Paul, but the twelve apostles?
J.T. Well, just because the Lord is pleased to go back to the beginning. What a precious time He had with what He began with! He is dealing with that now, but then I am sure He is not omitting Paul, because Paul comes in later and enlarges everything, and beautifies everything.
Ques. Are not the twelve apostles of the Lamb particularly connected with the foundations? Would Paul's ministry be connected with the superstructure?
{244}
J.T. Well, the interior, too, I would say, the affections.
Ques. Would not the substance that is in the city be conveyed to us in the epistle to the Ephesians?
J.T. Very good; the quality of the saints. So that you have to go back to the beginning of the assembly at Ephesus, and all that was said of it, to bring out the quality of the saints, and how much they were to Christ at that time.
S.McC. Is it helpful to see too that in 1 Kings where the heavenly side of the system is more before us in type, in contrast to Chronicles, it is specifically said of the oracle that the breadth and the length and the height are equal. In Chronicles the height is missed out.
J.T. That would help us to compare the Old Testament with the New. We have something like that here; we have the cube here.
P.H.H. Did you connect Paul's ministry with the adornment?
J.T. Yes, quite so, and what is in the interior. In a building we may find something, perhaps, in the external thing, but then what there is in the interior. What places of affections there may be!
P.H.H. Largely taken up with the matter of the precious stones, which are named.
J.T. They are named-just so. It is all to bring out the preciousness of the matter; the intrinsic value of the whole matter. Everything is measured, and all is perfect; there is nothing imperfect in it. What a great relief it is, when we have so much to do with what is imperfect, and contrary to God! All this is to relieve our souls and make them restful in what we are brought into; we are part of it.
W.S.S. I was thinking how wonderfully this shines out in that way. After all the breakdown that has been referred to in the book, we have this
{245}
most beautiful description of the assembly to encourage us and make us restful.
J.T. Very good. So that in the opening chapters, that is, up to chapter 3, there is much to distress although much to encourage too. Here everything is perfect, as if the Lord is saying, 'Well, let Me show you what is perfect, what I can do, and what I am going to have, for one thousand years I am going to have all this'. And then it is not going to cease, it is going into eternity too. It all belongs to Christ. So the Lord is saying to us, 'See what *I* have; what *I* can do, I have it for Myself too, and I am going to use it for God, for His pleasure and glory'.
A.J.G. Is this the Lord's answer to Paul's confidence in Him when he said, "I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep for that day the deposit I have entrusted to him", @2 Timothy 1: 12.
J.T. Quite so, "I know whom I have believed". The Lord would be pleased with that word, and that Paul could say that he knew whom he believed. It means that he knew the Lord Jesus as One he could confide in and trust.
W.S.S. Is what we have here the wonderful positive results of Paul's ministry and the Spirit's work?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord is showing us, telling us even now, this very day, what He is doing, and what He can do, because He is still working at the assembly. The assembly is His masterpiece.
W.S.S. I was thinking of the word of God that has been referred to. Does that bring into view the perfection of the Spirit's work?
J.T. Well, quite. The Lord Himself is said to be the Word. His name is called "The Word of God".
J.T.S. Would this be the complete fulfilment of the Lord's word. "On this rock I will build my
{246}
assembly, and hades gates shall not prevail against it", @Matthew 16: 18?
J.T. Exactly. It is in the assembly gospel that He brings that out.
H.H. Our brother has referred to the gates of hades. Would you say a word as to the gates of the city in this chapter?
J.T. No doubt the reference is borrowed from the book of Ezekiel. That is to say, the scriptural writers are available to each other. Of course, the Spirit of God is handling everything, overseeing everything, so that what we get in Ezekiel works out here. All is perfect, and the gates would be the entry into the things, and so forth. It is the way in. All is perfect, beautiful and suggestive, and full of instruction for our minds. This wonderful book is intended for our minds. It is that which God gave to Christ to show to His bondmen things which must shortly take place. It says, "He signified it, sending by his angel, to his bondman John, who testified the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, all things that he saw". Then, at the end of the chapter, He tells John what to write, so that our minds are much in view in this wonderful book, and it is most precious that the Lord is pleased to devote the whole thing to us; He is thinking of us at the present time.
W.S.S. You were going to refer to the verse, "And the Spirit and the bride say, Come"?
J.T. Well, we have come to that now, and we can touch on it. The Lord is intimating that He is thinking of them, and so He says in verse 16, "*I* Jesus". It is beautiful, and I was thinking of these personal features; first of Jesus Himself, and then here also John; "I, John". It is the persons, "*I* Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies. *I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star. And the Spirit
{247}
and the bride say, Come". That is to say, the bride is with the Spirit. She is great enough, as it were, to be in companionship with a divine Person, and both are saying the same thing. The Spirit says it and she says it. It is to bring out, I think, the peculiar place the assembly has, that she is a companion, in that sense, of a divine Person, and a divine Person is a companion to her. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come".
J.T.Jr. Do we need to take account of the assembly in Corinthians and also in Ephesians, to arrive at this thought as to the Spirit and the bride saying, "Come"?
J.T. Well, quite so. Corinthians is the local idea, the truth of the assembly worked out locally; whereas Ephesians is the whole idea, the whole idea of the assembly. In that epistle it says: "Christ also loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it".
Ques. I suppose the thought of what is bridal in character is not absent from the local idea? Paul says to the Corinthians. "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ". Does not that involve what is bridal in character?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord, as it were, would afford to Paul that advantage in dealing with the assembly, because he had to do with it in all its parts, in all its forms.
W.C. Is that why He puts it in this way, "to testify these things to you in the assemblies", rather than the assembly as a whole? It has to work out in the local position.
J.T. It is a local matter. The Lord is recognizing it by affording Paul, or any one of us, an opportunity to work things out, in love for the assembly, and to be set for the promotion of the truth of the assembly, because the Lord is so taken up with it; it is so dear to Him.
{248}
P.H.H. Is it of significance that the title here is "the Spirit"? "And the Spirit and the bride say, Come". In @Genesis 24, is it more perhaps the *service* of the Spirit, typically, but here, is it more emphatically His *Person*? The Spirit and the bride are together.
J.T. Well, quite so. It is the Spirit Himself; He is a divine Person under that term. That is His name, you might say, not "the Spirit of God" but just "the Spirit". That is His name in the same way as we might say the Father and the Son.
S.McC. Would you say what, in your mind, is the distinctive feature in connection with what is feminine in regard of the assembly?
J.T. Well, of course, the first idea of it is in Eve. Adam was alone for a while, however long we cannot say, a very few hours perhaps, and then Eve had to come in. At first, when the thought of Man is mentioned, Eve is included, as if God said, I want the full thought; so that the full thought is in Eve added. So that the word is, "but as for Adam, he found no helpmate, his like", and then God undertook to make up what was needed. So that he says to Jehovah, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman [Ishshah], because this was taken out of a man [Ish]". That is the way it is presented, because she is taken out of Ish. The two ideas must therefore be there; it is as if God would say, 'They must be there, and they are there. They are in the very design I began with'. They are there, because they both are included in the word *Man* in verse 26 of @Genesis 1.
Rem. In @Genesis 5 it says, "In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him. Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created".
{249}
J.T. So that the word "Adam" covers both, just as "the Christ" in @1 Corinthians 12: 12: "So also is the Christ".
C.M.M. Would "Come" include the rapture and the appearing?
J.T. I think the appearing. That is the thought that is generally in the Scriptures, but there is what He has in the transaction, "The Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first", and so forth. What the Lord Himself has in the thing must be considered. What a joy He has in the transaction, which has in view His appearing, and His saints with Him.
R.W.S. Would it be too familiar to address the Holy Spirit as "Spirit"?
J.T. I think it would. It is better to say 'the Holy Spirit' or 'the Spirit', "The Spirit and the bride"; that is what we have here. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come".
H.H. Would you apply what you have said as to the appearing, also to @John 14? It would hardly be the rapture there, would it?
J.T. When the Lord says, "I am coming again and shall receive you to myself" (@John 14: 3), that is the rapture.
F.J.F. Would it be right to say that this beautiful picture is Eve seen in her administrative character? You were saying that this is a perfect picture, and is that also seen in what the woman was, Ishshah? She was perfect, and this is also perfect, but it is, as you are saying, administrative in the millennium. Is that right?
J.T. That is right!
Rem. Would you say a word as to the way the Lord presents Himself: "*I* Jesus ... *I* am the root and offspring of David"?
{250}
J.T. Well, it is remarkable that David is brought into it. It shows that David represents certain perfections in the Scriptures; things are presented perfectly. David is the supreme thought in that sense, and the Lord is the Root of David and the Offspring. That is to say, Christ is a divine Person speaking thus, but He is the Offspring of David.
A.M. Does David represent lovability?
J.T. Just so; the word would mean that, and his lovableness is involved in what is said. David means that.
Rem. He is a man after God's own heart.
J.T. Quite so. He is a beautiful person, a most delightful person. That was the idea, and, of course, that must apply to Christ in His delightfulness; so that we are never tired of speaking of the Lord Jesus. As it says, "the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread", "The Lord Jesus". Let us say that.
Ques. Is verse 17 responsive to the presentation of Christ in verse 16? It begins with the word 'And'. There is the emphatic presentation of Christ twice in verse 16. "*I* Jesus", and then "*I* am the root and offspring of David", and then it goes on, "And the Spirit and the bride say, Come".
J.T. Well, quite.
H.P.W. Is there a very precious touch here as to the Lord Himself? There are three calls, "Come", "The Spirit and the bride", then "him that hears" and then "him that is athirst", and then it adds, "he that will let him take the water of life freely". It is as if there is an unchanging attitude in this blessed adorable Person.
J.T. You almost wonder about the whole paragraph. We begin with "*I* Jesus". It is a most touching expression, and the Lord is pleased to use it of Himself, speaking, as it were, in a personal way to us. Then, what He says is, "*I* Jesus have sent mine
{251}
angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies. *I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come". Well, that is, I would think, the saints with the Spirit desiring the Lord to come. It is their desire expressed that the Lord should come, I would like to get what is in your mind fully.
H.P.W. Well, it goes on to say, "let him that hears say, Come", as if that was another class. Then "let him that is athirst come" and then, as if there was an unchanging attitude in Christ, "he that will, let him take the water of life freely", I was only wondering as to whether it does not add to the glory of Christ, and the glory of the assembly, that it ends up with "whosoever will".
J.T. As if there would be evangelical material in these last days, and an appeal to hearts as to the Lord's coming.
W.H.W. In @Genesis 2 the Lord in type says what the woman is, but here, in the last chapter of the Bible, He says what He is. Is there an intelligent response on the part of the bride to that, in saying, "Come"? I was wondering if she was here the complete finished product of the Spirit's work, intelligence as to what Christ is, marking her.
J.T. You might say that, but still the finished product is not as great as the Lord Himself. They are saying to Him, "Come". It is the Lord Himself that is in mind. They are saying to Him, "Come", to that Person, the Lord Jesus.
{252}
THE INTRODUCTION OF THE GOSPEL AMONG THE GENTILES (1)
@Acts 9: 32 - 43; @Acts 10: 1 - 20
J.T. What is in mind is to call attention to the introduction of the gospel, or christianity, among the gentiles. The passage in chapter 9 is read to help us to judge as to Peter's ability and commission, and to see how he became qualified for what the Lord said of him, "I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens", @Matthew 16: 19. So it is, that in the list of apostles in @Matthew 10 Peter is put first: "first ... Peter". The passage in @Acts 9 indicates how he had qualified and how he was serving effectively and approved by the Lord, making way for Cornelius, representative of the gentiles, as we shall see. We might allude first to Paul, who appears in the history of the truth in the book of Acts before the gentiles were admitted. His conversion is recorded in chapter 9. Peter, however, has the leading place, and so he introduces the gentiles, according to the Lord's word that he would have the keys of the kingdom of the heavens, that whatsoever he should bind on earth should be bound in heaven. There is thus liberating power and binding power entering into the moment; I mean into Christianity.
Ques. Why do you begin with the incident of Aeneas?
J.T. Just to link on the man and the woman in the chapter. They are subjects of the healing power of God, even to the raising from the dead, showing what enters into the truth of Christianity physically, but particularly leading up to the spiritual side, which we shall see presently. What is to be noted perhaps at the outset is that the man and the woman are in mind. There is no indication that sisters or women were segregated from men for the services,
{253}
in the proclamation of the truth, especially the ministry. The question is whether we have been guided aright since the practice of segregating sisters and brothers became habitual. It is now for us to think of and see whether it is right, and whether we should not make way for sisters in all our assemblies of an enlarged character, called conferences, but properly special meetings for ministry of an extended character.
P.L. Would the reference to the hundred and twenty in the upper room in @Acts 1, and the allusion to the women there, confirm that?
J.T. I would think so. There were "several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus". Many of the epistles include the idea of women, especially that to the Philippians, as Paul says, "Those women which laboured with me", @Philippians 4: 3.
Ques. Would the scripture, "Neither is ... man without woman, in the Lord" (@1 Corinthians 11: 11) also be confirmatory of that?
J.T. It is confirmatory of it. The word "Man" in @Genesis 1: 27 includes the male and female.
P.L. God asked for Sarah at the tent door in relation to His communications (@Genesis 18).
J.T. Quite so. What she says, in @Galatians 4: 30, is called Scripture, showing how a sister may be used in that sense, and there are other instances of the kind.
Rem. In the case of the Lord Himself and His going from city to city, it says, "The twelve were with him, and certain women", and then some are named: "Mary who was called Magdalene ... and Joanna, wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many others", @Luke 8: 2, 3. Personality was found amongst the women as well as amongst the twelve.
J.T. Well, all that is confirmatory of what we have said.
{254}
S.McC. One of the difficulties that has been largely in the minds of the brethren in regard of these meetings that have been referred to is the numbers, but there seem to be great numbers in the beginning of this book that we are looking at, do there not? It was linked with the open air, of course.
J.T. Quite so. It was not in a building, evidently. The word in the second chapter is, "And breaking bread in the house", which would be a limited position, as over against the temple.
Ques. Are you not making any room for conferences?
J.T. I do not know whether the idea of conference is quite scriptural. In chapter 15 of this book we have what might be called a council of the church, as the Roman Catholics would say, and it would look as if women may have been there, because the whole multitude is mentioned. There is every likelihood that the women may have been there of times. It was a question, of course, of doctrine to be considered, and no council of the kind has ever been held since practically, except among the Roman Catholics.
Ques. In @1 Corinthians 15 it says, "Then he appeared to above five hundred brethren at once". Would that bear on it?
J.T. The word 'brethren' would include both brothers and sisters, I would think.
Ques. Is it in your mind to carry forward the principle of selection in relation to women, as well as to men, to sisters as well as to brothers?
J.T. I would think so, I do not see how we can avoid it, and I think the truth would show that it should not be avoided, I am questioning too (there are no very old men here among us) whether the idea of a conference limited to brothers was current in Mr. Darby's time or in Mr. Stoney's time, or even in Mr. Raven's time.
{255}
Ques. The meetings at Quemerford included sisters, did they not?
J.T. They did. The room there, of course, was small. It would not accommodate more than three hundred.
W.G.T. It says in @Acts 17. "But some men joining themselves to him believed; among whom also was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman by name Damaris, and others with them".
J.T. Showing that both sexes were there.
Ques. In that connection is it interesting that in the earlier part of chapter 17, at Thessalonica, it says, "of the chief women not a few", as though the idea of outstanding personality is there?
J.T. Of course, it is said in @Acts 4: "The number of the men had become about five thousand". It is a question of what that may mean. Why should it be mentioned thus? It could not have been mentioned as covering the number of persons who assembled in a building.
Wm.H. We have generally regarded the so-called conferences as somewhat based on @Nehemiah 8.
J.T. Yes, but the beginning of that passage implies men and women. If you look at it you will see it.
P.L. It says, "All the people gathered together as one man to the open place", @Nehemiah 8: l.
J.T. "As one man", meaning that the women were included.
P.L. And then "both of men and women, and all that could hear with understanding, on the first day of the seventh month".
P.H.H. Do you mean that the second day referred to in verse 13 flowed out of that?
J.T. That is what I am speaking of. If you read that it will indicate what we are saying.
{256}
P.H.H. It says, "on the second day were gathered together the chief fathers of all the people, the priests, and the Levites", @Nehemiah 8: 13.
J.T. That is to say, it would be a number of persons that could be reckoned on to deal with doctrines, or with principles, but the whole occasion involved women.
P.L. So that of the spiritual women, the daughters of Zelophehad, it says, "They stood before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and before the princes and the whole assembly, at the entrance of the tent of meeting", @Numbers 27: 2.
J.T. Very good. A good deal more could be said of that.
P.L. I was thinking that they are persons of distinction, for the name of each of them is always given when they are mentioned.
J.T. And "The daughters of Zelophehad speak right", it says. They spoke right, showing how important they were; they could speak right in a crisis.
Ques. Would Chloe be one who spoke right, and the apostle Paul honours her for her exercise (@1 Corinthians 1: 11)?
J.T. Yes, and then Phoebe also ought to be linked with her.
P.L. And "the elect lady" too?
R.W.S. I want to ask if the discrimination which you speak of has tended to hinder the sisterhood from functioning as would be normal?
J.T. Yes, and perhaps hindered in the acquirement of the truth, which all ought to have. They are not to be regarded as secondary, or of little account. They belong to the first line, so to speak.
E.A.L. Do you think it is significant that our local assemblies are mostly made up of more sisters than brothers?
J.T. The assembly itself is made up of brothers and sisters; in fact, it is most unusual to find a
{257}
meeting that has the status of the assembly, that has not brothers and sisters.
A.P.B. Do you think at the closing point of the assembly's history, it is especially needed that all the sisters should be equally with the brothers in the truth?
J.T. It is quite evident that the early meetings of the brethren, or the saints, included women. We have already quoted from the first chapter of the Acts, where we have several women, including Mary herself.
P.H.H. Does it seem, from the mention of Dorcas, that some particular living feature would come in with the sisters? Peter presented her alive.
J.T. We read from this passage, and it says in verse 40: "But Peter, putting them all out, and kneeling down, prayed. And, turning to the body, he said, Tabitha, arise. And she opened her eyes, and, seeing Peter, sat up. And having given her his hand, he raised her up, and having called the saints and the widows, presented her living". So that the idea of life is there. Of course, it might be literal in the sense that she was alive in a different sense, but I think there is more than that in it.
P.L. Would the fact that her name means *gazelle* bear on this great closing feature of graceful agility in the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. I think @John 20 would point to that.
P.L. 'The hind of the morning', @Psalm 22 (title).
J.T. Yes; just so.
Ques. Is it important that the prophetic gift among sisters might be developed on the lines suggested?
J.T. Well, how are we going to find out about Philip's daughters and how they prophesied? In @1 Corinthians 11 the woman is not to pray or prophesy with her head uncovered; there is to be a
{258}
covering on the head to show the subjection of the sisters. At the same time there is nothing to interfere with what we have said already, that the sisters need instruction. They need to have power to teach their children and so forth.
H.F.N. Is there anything in the fact that in Matthew's record of the Lord feeding the multitude they are spoken of as "those that had eaten were about five thousand men, besides women and children"?
J.T. They were there, anyway. At the same time it is a remarkable thing, as we have quoted from @Acts 4, that there were five thousand *men*, "Many of those who had heard the word believed; and the number of the men had become about five thousand".
Ques. Does not Peter himself refer to "holy men" and also "holy women"? The women as examples of the truth.
J.T. I would think so. He makes much of women too in his instructions as to wives, or women.
D.J.M. Would Aquila and Priscilla support what you are saying; they "unfolded to him [Apollos] the way of God more exactly"? @Acts 18: 26.
J.T. One is mentioned first as often as the other; the wife is mentioned as often as Aquila, showing that she was, in herself, possibly equal to her husband in instruction. We have a reference to Paul lodging with them.
Ques. Would what you are now saying have any bearing on the care meeting, or do you regard that still as a matter exclusively for brothers?
J.T. Well, there is a basis for the care meeting. That is to say, brothers have more wisdom for these matters; more experience, more authority. But there is nothing in the care meeting to support ecclesiastical action, or actual discipline. There is nothing in the care meeting for that. It is only a matter of
{259}
inquiry, and the assembly has to be reached before we do anything. We shall see in @Acts 15 that the whole assembly had to come into the action.
Ques. Would it be right to say that the references in the book of Judges to Deborah and Jael, and the woman who crushed the skull of Abimelech, show the important part which women may play in the conflict for the truth?
J.T. Quite so. In the sense of war they were decidedly in the lead in it; at the same time it has to be remembered that Deborah is not mentioned in @Hebrews 11; Barak is mentioned only.
W.G.T. Three sisters are mentioned as standing by the cross in @John 19.
J.T. That is very touching.
F.E.S. Would it be right to say that we can have temple conditions without the sisters?
J.T. We cannot have assembly conditions properly without the sisters.
J.T.Jr. Would the inauguration of the Supper being only in the presence of men, be only to establish the authority of it?
J.T. That is right; that is what I would say, "And when the hour was come, he placed himself at table, and the twelve apostles with him", @Luke 22: 14. It is a question of apostleship in Luke.
Ques. Would you explain in what setting sisters may prophesy?
J.T. I cannot do that, I was just saying that we have to find out about that, about the four daughters of Philip, how they prophesied; but clearly they did prophesy.
Eu.R. In the reign of Josiah they went to the house of Huldah, the prophetess, to obtain the mind of God (@2 Kings 22: 14).
J.T. I had thought of that.
S.McC. In this section that we began reading, does it suggest that some adjustment is needed on
{260}
the side connected with the man in our localities before proceeding to the sisterhood in the latter section?
J.T. That is why I suggested it should be read. The man's name is given, which is to be noticed, and the point is that he was to rise and make his bed. He had been lying for eight years upon a couch; he was paralysed, and Peter said to him, "Aeneas, Jesus, the Christ, heals thee: rise up, and make thy couch for thyself. And straightway he rose up". Why should he have to make his couch? That ought to be enquired into, too. Then the next point is the woman who actually died. She, probably, would represent the idea of moral death, so as to bring out the fulness of it. Then, we see how Peter acted, and how prayer entered into it. He put out certain influences that would have interfered with the action, some unspiritual influences. How to eject unspiritual influences on such an occasion is another thing to be noticed.
A.J.G. Is it to be noted that it is possible to be full of good works and yet not to be living spiritually?
J.T. I thought that. That is another thing to speak of, being "full of good works", and yet wanting in spirituality. So that it is not simply what you have in your pocket, but what you have in your heart in the way of love.
Ques. Why is the extremity of death brought in in the woman and not in the case of the man?
J.T. It is perhaps in keeping with what we are saying as to the man and the woman. Scripture begins with the man and the woman, and now, in this case, we have it, as if both are implied, or included, in what God is doing. Why then should we keep the sisters all out at any given time? Of course, we have referred to the care meeting, but that is a question of wisdom and not anything more
{261}
than that. It is not a question of being taught, but of wisdom, to know what to do or say in a crisis.
Ques. What is involved in "make thy couch for thyself"?
J.T. Well, to show what he could be; he would be a household man. It is an important thing that a man should know what to do in a house, as well as the wife. There is nothing more in this, as far as I see, than the dual character of the race. It is masculine and feminine; because, when we come to sonship, and God is bringing many sons to glory, we must include the sisters as well as the brothers.
A.J.G. It is rather striking that when Saul began to persecute it says, "if he found any who were of the way, both men and women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem" (@Acts 9: 2), as though Satan's attack was on the full thought.
J.T. Quite so.
P.H.H. And in the Nazarite's vow, in @Numbers 6, the woman is brought in as well as the man.
J.T. Well, I submit to the brethren now that what we have said already is established by Scripture. The question now is how we can bring it about, how we can make it work out to the end of this dispensation. Of course, it is not the thought just to dwell exclusively on this question of man and woman, but to proceed to chapter 10; that is to say, to what happened in the case of Cornelius, because it is a question of Cornelius, the man himself, in view of the introduction of the gentiles. He was evidently representative of the gentiles; he was taken up in that sense.
Ques. Before we go on, do I understand you to mean that we could hardly arrange another such gathering as we had last week?
J.T. Well, I could not say. It is a question of what the brethren may say. We are all here. It is a question of all the brethren. We must take counsel
{262}
about it, think over it, and see what should be done, because it is a real matter to be adjusted.
J.T.Jr. Would what has been done in the brothers having been alone for so many years, bring out into relief now the feminine side, so that perhaps we should have the thing properly in mind?
J.T. Quite so. I believe it takes time to weigh it over, because it is somewhat far-reaching. The Australian brethren in their meetings two years ago did not have the sisters. They followed what we do here. They could have had them, I suppose, but they did not have them. In America and in the Colonies, I mean to say, in the West Indies and other parts of the world, we never think of excluding the sisters. Only in one instance, in London, Ontario, we excluded them and it did not work at all; it was not profitable at all.
G.H.W. Were you thinking of the value of the subjective spirit, as represented by the sisters?
J.T. Quite so. The way subjection is spoken of in @Ephesians 5 would indicate that. The idea of subjection is encouraged there; the sisters are to lead in it, and, in that sense, to represent the assembly in the feminine sense when it is fully understood. Christ represents the masculine, and the assembly, the feminine.
E.A.L. I noticed at the last meetings we had in London in 1946, at the beginning of the evening address, you thanked the Lord for the beneficial element that we did not have during the day; that was, the presence of the beloved sisters.
J.T. I am sure I would say that, 'Beneficial' is the word to use. The sisters bring a beneficial element.
Ques. Referring again to this principle of selection as regards the sisters, do I understand that that would not be necessary where the numbers are not beyond our capacity?
{263}
J.T. I do not think it would be necessary. If the numbers *are* beyond our capacity, reduce the numbers; that is what we have done in regard to local meetings. We reduced the numbers composing the meetings, but increased the total number of the meetings themselves, and so we have more meetings on that principle. We have more meetings and therefore more for God, more for Christ, and more for the Spirit, because we have the sisters with us.
J.P.H. If sisters are selected as sisters, would it be apart from the merits of their husbands? Would a sister be invited on her own merits or as the wife of a worthy brother, with her husband?
J.T. Well, that is a small matter. The brethren would invite the husband, surely, if they invited the wife.
Eu.R. Tabitha is referred to as a certain female disciple.
J.T. Well, that word 'certain' is only a sort of classification. She was just ordinary; she was not a person of special distinction like Phoebe.
H.S. Would the movements of Paul into Europe be the public working out of the section we have read? I was thinking of the vision of the Macedonian man, and the first reference we have as to the working out of it is to the women who had assembled by the river, and then we have Lydia.
J.T. Well, it is remarkable that they appear there. Of course, the work of God now, since that time, has gone toward the west, and its outgoings. It is not in the east specially, not in Asia specially, although, at the beginning, the work of God began in Asia. It moved out to Europe which, with its outgoings, is now the sphere in which God is working, and the material for the assembly is being secured from it. There are very few Jews left; it is almost entirely a gentile matter now.
{264}
Ques. Have you noticed that the word for "men" in @2 Timothy 2: 2 is a word that would include male and female?
J.T. I had not noticed that, I am glad to hear it.
P.R.C. Is it in mind that the inclusion of sisters would add spiritual power to an occasion?
J.T. It would, if they were spiritual. At the same time, the actual idea of sex ought to be there, because God intended it. The man should go with the woman, "It is not good that Man should be alone", @Genesis 2: 18.
A.N.W. Does the change in the mention of the names of Aquila and Priscilla, and the order in which the apostle mentions them, denote sometimes that Priscilla may have the priority?
J.T. Well, I am not sure. Have you examined that Priscilla has the distinction in that sense, or are they not mentioned equally? I think they are mentioned first equally.
A.N.W. Three times Aquila is mentioned first, and three times Priscilla is first.
Ques. Would @Romans 16 illustrate the idea of selecting brothers and sisters? In the list that Paul gives in his salutations there are quite a number of sisters to whom he attaches spiritual distinction as a reason for including them in the list of salutations.
J.T. Are they more or less? There are between twenty and thirty allusions in the chapter, as far as I remember, and the question is now how many sisters and how many brothers there are.
Rem. I thought it might be significant that the only persons in the chapter referred to as labourers are sisters. He mentions Maria, and he mentions Persis, and Tryphaena and Tryphosa. All are persons who laboured in the Lord, and therefore had a distinction that entitled them to inclusion in this list.
{265}
J.T. That is good. The only thing to be added is how many sisters were there altogether?
Wm.H. There are seven names, but there are nine sisters in all, referred to.
J.T. Well now, the passage in chapter 10 ought to be looked at, and it says, "A certain man in Caesarea-by name Cornelius, a centurion of the band called Italic, pious, and fearing God with all his house, both giving much alms to the people, and supplicating God continually-saw plainly in a vision, about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming unto him, and saying to him, Cornelius. But he, having fixed his eyes upon him, and become full of fear, said, What is it, Lord?" We shall see that Peter uses the same term, 'Lord', when answering the voice from heaven, but the angel here is addressed as Lord by Cornelius. And then, "he said to him" (that is, the angel said to him), "Thy prayers and thine alms have gone up for a memorial before God. And now send men to Joppa" and so forth. That is the man who is to be introduced into christianity. Cornelius is a godly man already; he has a name already in heaven. It shows that God is thinking of real conversions, persons who come into the truth, even though they may be gentiles.
F.T.P. Is it not striking that Cornelius prayers and alms had gone up for a memorial, his alms apparently being acceptable, whereas the alms deeds of Dorcas are somewhat ruled out, I should like your thought as to that.
J.T. Just so, I think God intended that the introduction of the gentiles should represent a real work of God; the mere nominal idea of christian is of no value at all. We must have reality, and Cornelius had reality, even before the angel visited him. God was working with him.
A.J.G. You mean there was new birth there showing itself.
{266}
J.T. I would think that. Therefore @John 3 would come into it.
Ques. Was there a good deal in his household? It says, "having called two of his household and a pious soldier of those who were constantly with him". His household is under control, and with him in regard of God.
J.T. It shows the value of households in relation to the assembly, as we shall find later in the epistles.
G.H.W. It says in @John 3: 21, "but he that practises the truth comes to the light, that his works may be manifested that they have been wrought in God". Would Cornelius represent that?
J.T. Just so. They were "wrought in God". Cornelius was a real man. God was working with him, and it would indicate that the profession of christianity is of no value unless there is a real work accompanying it.
Ques. Would the evidence of that be seen in the expression, he was "supplicating God continually"? That is not said in regard of Dorcas.
J.T. I think Cornelius is made much of, and he is already recognised in heaven; he had a memorial in heaven, which is a remarkable thing. I wonder of how many that could be said; that they had a memorial in heaven. His was based on his alms and good deeds and so forth, and the piety of his house.
J.T.Jr. His employment, being a centurion, did not interfere with his relations with God?
J.T. Very good; showing that a man might be an officer in the army and maintain his relations with God.
J.H-s. Would you say that what was lacking was the recognition of the presence of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Well, it was lacking because he had not had the gospel preached to him. It would be there if he
{267}
had the gospel preached to him. So this afternoon probably we shall have the remaining part of the chapter, to show what Peter did preach to him. It is also in mind to show how Peter went through the matter of the ecstasy. That is a matter which we hardly know anything of now in our day, and the question is, why should we not?
P.H.H. Would you say something as to the vision? You have spoken of the ecstasy, but it says of Cornelius that he saw plainly in a vision. I was thinking of the word in chapter 2, about the pouring out of God's Spirit upon all flesh; it says, "and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions". Does that mean something specific, or does it mean that we are beginning to see things generally as they ought to be seen?
J.T. I would say the latter.
P.H.H. In @Revelation 1 John says, "I turned back to see the voice".
J.T. Yes. What was said about the incoming of the Spirit too, and now we are going over it again. It brings out what we are saying, only that the verse quoted from Joel does not give the full thought of the book of Acts, which has more in mind than the prophet Joel. In the book of Acts it is the full thought of the Spirit coming in, and the characteristics of the Spirit coming in.
P.H.H. Could I ask alongside of that, what importance you attach to the dreaming with dreams?
J.T. Well. Pharaoh and others, had visions from God through dreams. It is clearly indicated that God has a means of communicating with men through dreams. What do you say to that?
P.H.H. Well, I am thankful for your reference, I was thinking perhaps one of the key words in Genesis is the word 'interpretation'. God gives the
{268}
dream, having an interpretation in mind which He will give.
J.T. Yes; showing that these readings of ours are valued by God, because if we are saying anything that is right, it must come from God, but the enlargement of the thing is given to us by the Spirit of God. Whatever ability we have is given to us to enlarge on things, but everything begins with God.
F.C. Is the full thought given in @2 Corinthians 12, "I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord"? The passage reads, "Well, it is not of profit to me to boast, for I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord, I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago, (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows;) such a one caught up to the third heaven. And I know such a man (whether in the body or out of the body I know not, God knows;) that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable things said which it is not allowed to man to utter. Of such a one I will boast, but of myself I will not boast, unless in my weaknesses. For if I shall desire to boast, I shall not be a fool; for I will say the truth; but I forbear, lest any one should think as to me above what he sees me to be, or whatever he may hear of me. And that I might not be exalted by the exceeding greatness of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn for the flesh".
J.T. That is the point we want to come to; what was given to him in the flesh, to humble him. It shows how humiliation in our circumstances comes about through discipline. It comes about so that we might be better and more effective in our services. So therefore Paul says, "Most gladly therefore will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may dwell upon me". That, of course, enters into what we are talking about, for Peter was humbled here, and he demurred to the Lord that he
{269}
should eat anything common or unclean, as he called it. But then he says afterwards that God had showed him that no one should be called common or unclean.
S.McC. This thought of ecstasy is linked with him going up to pray. In a general way would ecstasy be linked with our relations with divine Persons?
J.T. Quite; showing too of what value prayer is. He was hungry, he was waiting for his dinner really, and he used the time for prayer, and God seized the opportunity for the ecstasy, so that He should bring out fresh light to him, and the fresh light is this matter of the gentiles in Cornelius.
Ques. Would this link with the great truth that Paul brings out in Ephesians, Jew and gentile reconciled to God in one body by the cross?
J.T. Very good.
Ques. Should ecstasy be a commoner experience?
J.T. I do not know that it should. It is not viewed as common, but still it is there, and we have to admit that we do not know anything about it, at least that is so as far as I am concerned, but it may be that there is want of more waiting upon God, and perhaps even if we do not get ecstasy, we might increase our spirituality anyway. That is the great point in these meetings, to increase our spirituality, not only our instruction, but our spirituality.
A.M. Is Paul referring to ecstasy in @2 Corinthians 5: 13, when he says, "For whether we are beside ourselves, it is to God; or are sober, it is for you"?
J.T. Surely that is what we are saying, that God is the Author of everything and He has results too, in what He is doing, but if He wants a thing to be enlarged on, then He uses gift. He uses persons whom He has fitted for it; and that is what we get here in Peter. He was fitted for this matter.
F.J.F. Does the ecstasy become the power of his ministry?
{270}
J.T. I would say so. It gives a touch to it. We were referring just now to Paul, he is a man that was in heaven. Well, that is an immense thing, for very, very few have been there. It was very exceptional; he says it was fourteen years ago, showing that it is not common.
{271}
THE INTRODUCTION OF THE GOSPEL AMONG THE GENTILES (2)
@Acts 10: 21 - 48
J.T. The context in this passage would indicate that Peter had spoken to the Spirit, and then the Spirit spoke to him. The voice to him, according to verse 14, said, "Rise, Peter, slay and eat", but then it says in verse 19, "But as Peter continued pondering over the vision, the Spirit said to him" and so forth. That would indicate that the voice that spoke to Peter at first, telling him to rise and eat, would be the voice of the Spirit.
Ques. Would it be thus the voice of the Spirit drawing attention to what had come to pass before God through the death of Christ? That is, Jew and gentile reconciled to God in one body by the cross, as being the basis of this approach to the nations? (@Ephesians 2: 16).
J.T. Well, just so.
Ques. Would the second verse which rebuked Peter be the Lord's? In verse 15 of chapter 10 it says, "There was a voice again the second time", and in verse 9 of chapter 11, when Peter is rehearsing the matter, he says, "a voice answered the second time out of heaven". I am enquiring if that might be regarded as the Lord's voice, rebuking Peter for not listening to what the Spirit said.
J.T. But then it was God that was really showing Peter; as it says, "To *me* God has shewn to call no man common or unclean", @Acts 10: 28.
Ques. You mean that it is really the voice of God.
J.T. Yes; that is what I thought. The Spirit is God.
E.A.L. I believe you have said elsewhere that we could not say that it was not the Spirit's voice because it came from heaven, otherwise it would
{272}
imply that characteristically the Spirit is an earth-dweller, which would not be right.
J.T. No. The Spirit is God, and He belongs to heaven as God does, in that sense, only that He has come down to earth. He has been sent down, it says, which is remarkable. He was sent down, according to an earlier passage, by the Lord Jesus, and then the Lord asked the Father to give another Comforter; so that the two voices here can hardly be said to be other than the Spirit's. The fact that He speaks, as it were, here instead of from heaven does not imply that He is not God. It is God's voice and it is the voice of authority, the same as the voice of the Lord Jesus would be; in fact, any of the divine Persons has authority with Him, in anything that He says.
Eu.R. Peter recognises that in saying to the Spirit, "In no wise, Lord".
P.H.H. Do I understand that you are saying that it is the Spirit's voice each time, and in verse 15, the voice saying, "What God has cleansed", is the Spirit's voice, and is really indicating that *He* is God, that it is God's voice?
J.T. Quite so. The Spirit's voice is God's voice. Of course, if the Lord Jesus said it, it would be the same, it would have authority too; but I think it is only a question now for us to decide as to whether the voice to him is the Spirit's voice.
A.J.G. The Spirit says to Peter, "*I* have sent them", and the angel employed for that purpose is stated to be an angel of God, in verse 3; whereas in chapter 12 we have an angel of the Lord.
J.T. Well, that would be in keeping with what we have said.
S.McC. Do you have a similar thought in @Revelation 14: 13, where it says, "And I heard a voice out of the heaven saying, Write, Blessed the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth. Yea, saith the
{273}
Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; for their works follow with them"?
J.T. That would mean that whosoever's voice it was, it was a voice speaking to the Spirit, confirming what has been said over and over again, that the Spirit may be spoken to, "Yea, saith the Spirit". The Spirit answers "Yea" as if He is answering what someone says.
F.J.F. So they are holding conversation with the Spirit?
J.T. That is just the point; as Mr. Darby says Rebecca, as a type of the assembly, held conversation with the eldest servant of Abraham's house, who is a type of the Spirit. Mr. Darby has not come forward very much to say anything to us at any time about the Spirit being spoken to as we have had it recently, but he said, 'Eliezer, type of the Holy Spirit, talks to Rebecca, during the journey, of that which there is in the house of her bridegroom's father, precious conversation for the soul ... she has left all; and, conversing with Eliezer, she occupies herself with what interests her heart'.
S.McC. All these directions are linked with Peter and his service. In the first instance he went down of himself to Lydda; in the second instance, Lydda being near, he was asked to come; but in this chapter he is governed in his service by the Spirit's direction. Is there something in that for us?
J.T. It is just in keeping with what we have said already. The Spirit is speaking to Peter, and Peter is speaking to the Spirit, and that may go on now in our own times. It is in order to bring out the liberty in which we have come to see that the Spirit is acting, and that we too may act in that same liberty, that we may speak to Him. There is no need that we should make much of it beyond what the scripture says, but it is right that we should make something of it and have the truth as to it. We must have
{274}
the truth before us, and the Spirit of truth. We read of the love of the Spirit, too. That is another thing to keep before us, the love of the Spirit and the fellowship of the Spirit.
P.H.H. It was evident that Peter could detect that it was the Spirit speaking. Does that raise the question as to our learning to detect the voices of divine Persons?
J.T. I think it is very important that we should be able to identify divine Persons as They speak. They are intended to be identified, and what we have been saying would show this. We should be able to discern which divine Person it may be who is speaking at any given time.
W.C. Will you say a word about verses 3 and 4, the angel speaking to Cornelius by name, and then his reply, "What is it, Lord?"
J.T. Cornelius would think that he was entitled to respect. He was evidently a divine messenger, to say the least. He was an angel, and he was entitled to respect. At the same time angels are said to be "ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation". They are therefore, in that sense, subordinate even to the Lord's people, to ourselves. But if an angel is acting in authority, as representing a divine Person, of course he is entitled to the respect that belongs to that.
Ques. What would be the means of detecting the voice of each?
J.T. Spirituality, I would think. It would require the power that spirituality has in any of us. We are not to be as ordinary or common people.
Ques. Would the pondering enter into that? It says, "as Peter continued pondering over the vision".
J.T. Quite so. It shows he was not self-willed. He wanted to be right, which is a very important matter. Pondering would mean that he discerned
{275}
that there was something that he had to know and should know, and he was evidently acquiring the knowledge that was suited at the moment, spiritual knowledge. At a time like this we are actually in the realm of spirituality, and we should expect to be able to discern any voices that speak or are expressed.
R.W.S. Would the Lord's speaking be more frequent than the speaking of the Father or the Spirit?
J.T. I do not know, except that the Lord Jesus is made Lord and Christ. That is another point; He is made Lord. The Spirit is not made Lord. Then the Lord Jesus uses the term "Lord" to the Father, "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth", @Matthew 11: 25. The Father is called Lord, and the Spirit is called Lord, and the Lord Jesus is called Lord, but the Lord Jesus is said to be *made* that. God has made Him that, which is something to be thought of. He has a peculiar place of authority here on earth, and in heaven too. He is now in heaven, of course, but then another thing comes in in that connection, and that is, the Lord has a right to come out of heaven, as it were, I do not say that He comes out literally, but He has a right to take the ground of coming out anyway. In coming to us, on the first day of the week. He comes to us from the sphere of testimony. It is not simply out of heaven but from where the testimony is.
J.T.Jr. Would that be confirmed at the end of Matthew, "Behold, *I* am with you", @Matthew 28: 20? The Lord is viewed there as in support of the testimony.
J.T. Quite so, "*I* am with you all the days", He says, "until the completion of the age", showing that He is in testimony here all the time.
L.E.S. Do you feel in all this the need for the awakening of our spiritual sensibilities?
{276}
J.T. That is just the point. It is a time of spirituality. It is not simply a time when so many persons, five hundred, or seventeen hundred, or more, are together in any given place; it is a question of the spiritual power that is there.
Ques. Do we see from @Matthew 16 that Peter had already known what it was to hear the Father's voice and also the Lord's voice? "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father", @Matthew 16: 17.
J.T. Peter does not say that; the Lord Jesus says that. Why do you say that Peter knew it?
Rem. Well he had received the revelation from the Father.
J.T. I know, but you cannot say that he knew the voice. The Lord told him that it was the Father.
Rem. And then the Lord says, "and *I* also, I say unto thee".
J.T. Well, quite so. It is a question of what the Lord says, but *He* determines what voice it is. Peter had not the Spirit then at all.
J.E.B. In his second epistle, Peter says, "For he received from God the Father honour and glory, such a voice being uttered to him by the excellent glory", @2 Peter 1: 17. What does that mean?
J.T. Peter's epistle is written in the power of the Spirit; it was an inspired epistle. You would expect that what he would say would be right.
P.L. Does the allusion to the thought of "many kinds of voices in the world, and none of undistinguishable sound" (@1 Corinthians 14: 10) show the need for the circumcised ear that would discern the sound?
J.T. I would think the apostle would be speaking of general principles. We know how voices are to be discerned even now, but that does not mean that in each case we have true spiritual discernment. I would think the apostle's allusion to voices would be general, and that every voice is a distinguishable
{277}
sound. Who distinguishes, is not stated; it is just that the sound is distinguishable.
P.L. I thought it was just an incentive, so to speak, to have an ear that will discern, I am not applying the scripture to divine Persons speaking. It is a great matter, as you say, to catch the strain, the sound and tone of each of the divine Persons.
J.T. It is a great matter, and, of course, that is the point that we are endeavouring to make. At a meeting like this, and all such meetings, it is not simply that there are so many persons present, but that they have spiritual ability and are being taught. Being taught implies that they are spiritual; they have power to take in the idea of a spiritual voice, and discern it.
G.H.W. Would you mind saying why you think there is a comparative absence of references to speaking to the Spirit, in view of the many references to the Spirit speaking to us? I was thinking of what was brought before us last week, the Spirit speaking to the assemblies.
J.T. The Lord is saying that the Spirit looks after things, and what the Lord says to the assemblies is said in just a few words comparatively, but the Spirit is speaking all the time, as it were. The whole matter is made known throughout the whole dispensation by what the Spirit is saying. He is saying something all the time to us, as in contrast to the small amount recorded that the Lord says. What the Lord says is authoritative, but the Spirit keeps on speaking, and therefore we can count on the Spirit being here today and in all such meetings. He is here to speak to us, according to the word: "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies". We can count on the Spirit saying things to us at a time like this.
A.J.G. Would the speaking of the Spirit to the assemblies be through a servant, but does this chapter
{278}
show that the Spirit may speak directly to one of the saints?
J.T. I would say that. Why should He not? According to @Acts 13, the Holy Spirit said, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". That is what the Spirit said.
Ques. Do we need the Spirit in us to detect His own speaking?
J.T. I would think that.
Rem. I was thinking of the need of making this a wholly spiritual matter rather than bringing our natural senses forward.
J.T. It is a time of spiritual influence, as well as speaking, at a meeting like this. Therefore it ought to tax us that we should be spiritual, and not merely natural, as people are often at meetings like this. What a change a meeting like this may be, and is, from the things that are generally carried on in public halls. That shows the importance of the change to spirituality, in what christians have, as over against what the world has.
L.E.S. The conscious sense of the presence of the Spirit would warrant reciprocity in relation to the matter, would it not? We would be free, in liberty.
J.T. I should not like to use the word 'reciprocity' between us and the Spirit, in relation to ourselves sitting here, and the Spirit with us. At the same time, there is the idea of each taxing himself to *be* spiritual, because it is a time of spirituality; it is a time for spiritual instruction and influence.
F.J.F. Would the reference, "the voice of the turtle-dove is heard in our land" refer to the Spirit? (@Song of Songs 2: 12).
J.T. Just so. The turtle-dove is a figure there, of course. Whoever the speaker may be in the Song of Songs, the voice of the turtle-dove would be a figure of what is spiritual. It says it "is heard in our land", no doubt referring to the millennium, the
{279}
time for the influence and power of what is spiritual. The turtle-dove would be a figure of spiritual influence and intelligence, so we have the same principle when it is said that "they shall be all taught of God" (@John 6: 45); that would come into the millennium too. Of course, it is true now also, and these meetings should be on that principle, that we are "taught of God".
Ques. Does "nothing doubting" suggest that the spiritual influence was to operate in Peter's heart?
J.T. I would say that fully. The Spirit was appealing to him, that he should not be doubting, and that he should go with these men "nothing doubting", for He had sent them.
A.P.B. Might I ask whether we might expect the Holy Spirit to speak to us as to where we are to go in service, as He did to Peter, and might that affect our booking up for a long time?
J.T. I would, I think, check booking up for a long time. I do not think the Spirit would tell us to go to a certain place a year from now. I do not think the Spirit would say that to us, but there is the thought of acquiring spiritual understanding, and if the brethren in any place send an invitation to come and serve them, then I would say that normally the Lord is guiding in the matter. I think we are entitled to take that ground in a proper way, that the Lord's voice is in it. But I certainly think we should be concerned about taking invitations a year hence, in the things of God, or even six months hence.
A.P.B. Do you think we might directly refer to the Holy Spirit to help us as to all this?
J.T. I think I should. Why not? He is a divine Person and here to attend to us. He looks after all we have to do, spiritually. I should not ask Him anything about my business, or things like that, but I should certainly ask Him about spiritual things and what refers to the things of God.
{280}
Ques. Would you say what is in your mind as to arranging meetings six months or twelve months ahead?
J.T. That is another matter, because of the difficulty of finding halls and the like, and we may *have* to do it. It is only a question of wisdom, and of what God would approve. I know well enough that it is difficult to get halls. I suppose it is difficult here as it is elsewhere, but we just have to do, as it were, the best we can, but God is helping us in a general way. We are not making any point of it, for no brother would make much point of the fact that the Lord told him, or guided the brethren, to hire this hall for six months ahead or the like. I think we just simply act in a general sense of intelligence, and do what is suitable, and comely.
Ques. What about the Lord in regard to directing our service? Does the Spirit act on behalf of the Lord, would you say?
J.T. Well, at times; but in general the Lord is over things, as I was remarking. God has *made* Him Lord and Christ. He is given that peculiar place, and I would refer to the Lord for all these things, or, of course, to God Himself, but Christ is made Lord and Christ, by God.
A.J.G. Would you say a word as to the distinction between chapters 9 and 10, because chapter 9 is very much a matter of the Lord's administration and chapter 10 seems to be very much a matter of the Spirit's administration or direction.
J.T. It is, very largely, only that Peter says, "To *me* God has shewn to call no man common or unclean". Therefore I would put God, as it were, in the same position as the Lord, and the Spirit has graciously taken a more subordinate position and we therefore have to regard Him in that light, but we must not say that we cannot speak to Him, because the Scriptures prove that we *can* speak to
{281}
Him. The word in @Numbers 21, "Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it" is a word to the Spirit, directly to the Spirit. So also in @Revelation 14, "Yea, saith the Spirit" in answer to some voice, the Spirit is answering it.
R.W.S. Is "the communion of the Holy Spirit" (@2 Corinthians 13: 14) an individual matter, or is it to be enjoyed collectively?
J.T. I would say individually or collectively. Fellowship is having things in common. It is both.
W.B.H. Would the word in @Luke 15 confirm that? The woman says, "Rejoice with me" and calls together her friends and neighbours.
J.T. I have no doubt she is a type of the Spirit, and therefore what you say is right.
P.H.H. It says, "the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all" @2 Corinthians 13: 14. Does that mean it is an active matter, involving speaking and communications from the Spirit to us and from us to Him? That is, it is not just a title of fellowship, but it is the communion of the Holy Spirit *with the saints*. I am wondering whether the communion of the Holy Spirit *with us* is to be regarded as something active.
J.T. I would say that. It is, of course, a general way of bringing in the three Persons by the speaker. "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all". It is a general way of bringing in the three Persons in order to impress us with spiritual understanding and activity. It is Paul's gracious way of dealing with things, to make them general, and the whole influence pervading the saints. It is a collective thought there, I would say.
P.H.H. And would therefore be characteristic of the Corinthian saints?
J.T. They would be capable of taking that in. We have to regard the Corinthians as a sort of
{282}
representation of the local assembly generally, because the local assembly is in mind in the letters to Corinth.
W.L.C. Would you help in regard to the early part of chapter 16? When Paul was going to Asia he speaks about "having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia" (@Acts 16: 6), and the next verse says, "they attempted to go to Bithynia, and the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them". Then, after the vision of the man of Macedonia, it says, "concluding that the Lord had called us to announce to them the glad tidings", @Acts 16: 10.
J.T. That shows that divine Persons are acting together, in infinite unity. The Father says something, or the Lord says something, or the Spirit says something. It is a question of the divine Persons acting in unity, and I might add, *infinite* unity. What One says, They all say, or would say.
R.H. Why does the address to the well in @Numbers 21, "Rise up, well! sing unto it", come in in a military setting?
J.T. It is a call to believers, I would say. "Sing unto it". Sing to the Spirit, in other words. It is quite true that there is generally a military tone throughout the book of Numbers, but not always so.
Ques. Would the verse in Numbers, "Rise up, well! sing unto it", be a warrant for a hymn specially to the Spirit?
J.T. Just so. Dear Mr. Revell wrote a hymn on it. We used to have it in our houses, and some of us have it yet.
Rem. There is some doubt in the minds of brethren as to whether it would be appropriate to address the Spirit in a hymn that does not contain a reference to the other divine Persons, or to one of the other divine Persons.
J.T. Well, I would allude to @Numbers 21. That is a hymn, whatever we may call it, I do not see
{283}
why it should be said that we must address the other Persons if we address One. Why should we? If it is right to address One of Them, why should we not do it? There is nothing amiss about that.
Ques. You do not think then that every prayer should include addressing the three Persons of the Godhead?
J.T. There is guidance in the epistles as to that-"Whatever ye may do in word or in deed, do all things in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father by him", @Colossians 3: 17. The Spirit is not mentioned there, and if He is left out there is nothing wrong at all. It is quite all right. The Spirit of God is saying that.
Ques. Would you always bring in the name of the Lord Jesus?
J.T. That is what it says, I think, "Do all things in the name of the Lord Jesus", "If ye shall ask anything" the Lord says, "in my name, I will do it", @John 14: 14.
Rem. Even in speaking to the Spirit, I mean.
J.T. You mean we should bring in the name of the Lord Jesus then too? I would think that is right too.
A.J.G. Is not the Spirit sent in Christ's name?
J.T. Just so.
P.J.B. Why is it stated in @Numbers 21, that it was by the direction of the lawgiver? When we come to @John 1 we get the statement, "the law was given by Moses: grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ", @John 1: 17.
J.T. The scripture says, "Thy commandment is exceeding broad", @Psalm 119: 96. If the scripture says something that refers to a type in the Old Testament that is applicable now, well, it is quite all right to follow it, and the lawgiver now would be the Christ. If we use the word *lawgiver* in any of
{284}
our hymns now it would be Christ. He is the Lawgiver. He is made Lord and Christ. In general He is the One. "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", @1 Corinthians 14: 37. That is how Paul spoke of it. So that if we bring in the thought of lawgiver now it would be Christ. Similarly we read of "the law of the house", @Ezekiel 43: 12. That is the Old Testament, but it has an application now to the law of the house of God.
P.J.B. So it is in your mind that when John says, "Grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ", it does not shut out what came by Moses?
J.T. Not at all, and besides there was the time of the law when we were under tutors and governors, but now it is a different thing. The epistle to the Galatians shows that we are in liberty; it is the time of liberty in the Spirit.
J.T.Jr. Peter thought that it was unlawful to rise and eat the things he saw, did he not?
J.T. That was just an allusion to what he thought the law was; that is what he meant.
W.S.S. Is not this chapter which we are considering a liberating chapter itself in relation to the Spirit, a completely new situation having now come in in consequence of the Spirit falling upon the gentiles?
J.T. I would say so fully.
G.H.W. Is not "God's dispensation, which is in faith" (@1 Timothy 1: 4) brought in by John when he says: "Grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ"?
J.T. Faith is a feature of the dispensation. This is the time of faith. The millennium will be the time of seeing, but this is the time of faith, in contrast to that. It says, "Whatever is not of faith is
{285}
sin", @Romans 14: 23. That would show, therefore, how serious it is if we are not in the exercise of faith in what we are saying and doing.
P.H.H. In view of Peter being sensitive to the voice of the Spirit, can we the more easily understand how the Holy Spirit fell at the end of the chapter, "while Peter was yet speaking". Was the way, so to speak, prepared easily for Him?
J.T. Just so. In order to come to that, we might just proceed now from the passage that we read down to what is said in the beginning of verse 24, "And on the morrow they came to Caesarea. But Cornelius was looking for them, having called together his kinsmen and his intimate friends. And when Peter was now coming in, Cornelius met him". We have, in this section, the liberty that servants should have with the persons they serve. "When Peter was now coming in", it says, "Cornelius met him". There was a spirit of liberty between them, and it goes on to say, "and falling down did him homage". Well, he was mistaken there; he should not have done that, "But Peter made him rise, saying, Rise up: *I* myself also am a man". There was great humility there, taking his place just as a man, "And he went in, talking with him", another beautiful touch as to the liberty the servants should have with those they serve. He was "talking with him, and found many gathered together". Wonderful features! What a good opportunity for a meeting it was! "And he said to them, *Ye* know how it is unlawful for a Jew to be joined or come to one of a strange race, and to *me* God has shewn to call no man common or unclean. Wherefore also, having been sent for, I came without saying anything against it. I inquire therefore for what reason ye have sent for me". Now we can hear what Peter had to say, and I think we do well to look at what Peter said to this company of persons gathered in a house, perhaps
{286}
in a drawing-room, as we might call it, to hear what the servant of God has to say.
Ques. Is the attitude of Peter, in verse 29, essential to the understanding of all truth-"having been sent for, I came without saying anything against it"?
J.T. Just so. Anyway, it fits in nicely, for he was ready to come, and therefore he says, "I inquire therefore for what reason ye have sent for me". Then Cornelius speaks; so we might as well listen to what Cornelius said, and then what Peter says in answer to it: "And Cornelius said, Four days ago I had been fasting unto this hour, and the ninth I was praying in my house, and lo, a man stood before me in bright clothing, and said, Cornelius, thy prayer has been heard, and thy alms have come in remembrance before God. Send therefore to Joppa and fetch Simon, who is surnamed Peter; he lodges in the house of Simon, a tanner, by the sea (who when he is come will speak to thee). Immediately therefore I sent to thee, and *thou* hast well done in coming. Now therefore *we* are all present before God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God". We have first of all what Cornelius said to Peter, and he refers to the man in bright clothing, which would be an angel, of course, and the whole passage is very beautiful as showing how things were, as the service of God went on in those days, "And Peter opening his mouth said ..." Peter's mouth is referred to several times, which is another matter in those who serve, pointing to the kind of mouths we may have. And so "Peter opening his mouth said, Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him. The word which he sent to the sons of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, (*he* is Lord of all things), *ye* know; the testimony which has spread through the whole of Judaea, beginning from Galilee after the baptism
{287}
which John preached-Jesus who was of Nazareth, how God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power; who went through all quarters" (Peter had done this too, himself), "doing good, and healing all that were under the power of the devil, because God was with him. *We* also are witnesses of all things which he did both in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem; whom they also slew, having hanged him on a cross. This man God raised up the third day and gave him to be openly seen, not of all the people, but of witnesses who were chosen before of God, *us*" (that is, the apostles) "who have eaten and drunk with him after he arose from among the dead. And he commanded us to preach to the people, and to testify that *he* it is who was determinately appointed of God to be judge of living and dead. To him all the prophets bear witness that every one that believes on him will receive through his name remission of sins". Now, that is what Peter's word was, and I think it is very beautiful. How simple and how practical, and what an evangelical touch there is in it! We might well imitate what he says and how he says it, and the familiar touch or feeling that he had towards Cornelius, in that he did not assume to be anything superior to him, being just a man like Cornelius. Then we have what has been remarked, "While Peter was yet speaking these words the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word". So that we have now the Spirit acting of Himself, as Peter was speaking.
Ques. How do we reconcile the addressing of the Spirit as Lord with the epistles to the Corinthians and Ephesians which both state that there is "one Lord"?
J.T. Well, that means the Lord Jesus, of course, because He is *made* Lord. The application is to Him, not that the other Persons could not be called
{288}
Lord too, because they *are* called Lord. The scripture says, "There is ... one Lord", that one Lord is Christ, "one Lord, one faith, one baptism", @Ephesians 4: 5. At the same time the gospel of Matthew says that the Lord Jesus called the Father "Lord" (@Matthew 11: 25) and then the Spirit is called the Lord; "The Lord is the Spirit", @2 Corinthians 3.
A.N.W. The Spirit quotes in that connection, "And they, having heard it, lifted up their voice with one accord to God, and said, Lord" (that is, 'despot'), "Lord, *thou* art the God who made the heaven and the earth", @Acts 4: 24.
J.T. Very good. Quite so.
Rem. There is a similar reference in @James 3: 9: "Therewith bless we the Lord and Father".
J.T. Besides that, the word 'Jehovah', in the Old Testament, is sometimes translated 'Lord' in the New. It is a question of understanding the truth and following it up, and comparing spiritual with spiritual.
Rem. To apply logical thinking to divine things is disastrous. It calls for spirituality.
J.T. That is good.
E.C.M. Would you say another word with regard to verse 44, "While Peter was yet speaking these words the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word"? Would you regard that as being normal today?
J.T. Even if it is only once, it is there, and there is scriptural authority for it. And this may be compared with how the Spirit came in in @Acts 2.
H.J.E. Is what happens in verse 44 governed by the end of verse 33, "Now therefore *we* are all present before God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God".
{289}
J.T. That is quite true. Very good. And so verse 44 says, "While Peter was yet speaking these words the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word", showing that there is virtue attached to hearing the word. The word is *logos* there, 'the Word'. "And the faithful of the circumcision were astonished, as many as came with Peter, that upon the nations also the gift of the Holy Spirit was poured out: for they heard them speaking with tongues and magnifying God". So that we are now coming to the conclusion of the subject, although in chapter 11 the question is raised again because of Jewish opposition to it; but now the positive side is in these verses, "Then Peter answered, Can any one forbid water that these should not be baptised, who have received the Holy Spirit as *we* also did? And he commanded them to be baptised". Peter raises the question, "Can any one forbid water that these should not be baptised?" Now, in regard of the man that Philip had spoken to, in chapter 8, water was not forbidden. He says, "Behold water" and Philip went down with him into the water and baptised him. Here it is, Peter says, "Can any one forbid water that these should not be baptised, who have received the Holy Spirit as we also did?" But the point he makes is that if the Holy Spirit is given to a man, or a person, why should he not be baptised? He certainly should be baptised. Nobody should forbid it.
Ques. Would you refer to the Holy Spirit in the gospel preaching?
J.T. Certainly. It is referred to here; Peter is really preaching the gospel here.
W.C. Would it be right to say that the gospel is not complete if the Spirit is not brought in?
J.T. I would say that, because the dispensation has to be complete, as you say, and our dispensation is really the dispensation of the Holy Spirit.
{290}
Eu.R. In a day of great profession, it would be good to raise the question: "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" @Acts 19: 2.
J.T. Very good. That was Paul's question to the twelve men at Ephesus. They did not know, they said; and it is the same now; how many people are ignorant of the truth!
Ques. Why were these not baptised in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Because Peter is an apostle, and Peter would have authority and he commanded them to be baptised. He has the authority of Christ; he is made an apostle.
A.P.B. When they were to be baptised, "he commanded them to be baptised in the name of the Lord". That would not shut out their being baptised in the name of the Father, and the Son and the Holy Spirit, would it?
J.T. Not at all. If it says, baptising them in the name of the Lord, then the Lord is God. We must make allowance for God, I would myself always use @Matthew 28, because it is so complete and in the assembly gospel, but both are right. If I am allowed to speak of what I do myself, I quote @Matthew 28 and also what Peter said here, what is done in the name of the Lord, but both are effectual; only what is done in the name of the Lord makes more of the idea of the authority of the Lord. In @Matthew 28 it is, "To the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit", whereas here it is "in the name of the Lord".
Ques. Do you think Peter would be influenced at all by the fact that they had already received the Holy Spirit?
J.T. He certainly is influenced, because it says, "Then Peter answered, Can any one forbid water that these should not be baptised, who have received
{291}
the Holy Spirit". He *was* influenced by it; it was because the Holy Spirit had been given to them that he is asserting that they should be baptised.
F.J.F. And the gift of the Spirit is a pure sovereign gift of God?
J.T. Quite so; only it is based on redemption, of course, and based on faith.
J.H. Had it in view bringing Cornelius and his household into the same liberty with the Spirit which Peter himself had known?
J.T. Well, just so; if we saw that household probably we would be fully impressed by it. At the same time I should not think they had come fully into what Peter had come into; he was further on than they would be even then, I would say. But anyway, what we are dealing with now is that Peter's address to these men, to Cornelius and his house, is the gospel. It is the introduction of the gospel and christianity to the household of Cornelius and to the gentiles, and a very important point is that the gentiles are now brought into christianity.
J.T.S. Did you say that the Holy Spirit acted of Himself when He fell on all those who were hearing the word?
J.T. Certainly.
J.T.S. Would there be some thought of affectionate delight in that?
J.T. Very likely; because the Spirit is God Himself. As we have said over and over again here, the Spirit is God Himself; if the Spirit did it, God did it.
J.T.S. I was thinking of the word in @Luke 15: "His father ... ran, and fell upon his neck", in affectionate delight.
J.T. Quite so. When we preach the gospel from that passage, we take it that the Father did it. Well, if the Father did it, the Son did it; the Son would ratify it, whatever it might be. Any One of the three Persons can act as God.
{292}
J.T.S. In @Acts 2: 33 it says, "Having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which *ye* behold and hear". Now we have the Spirit *falling* on those who receive the word.
J.T. Well, it asserts the power and the liberty that the Spirit has. It asserts too that He is a divine Person, with the same authority as the Father and the Son. We cannot insist on that too much, that He is a divine Person as the Father and the Son are divine.
W.B.H. May I just ask what might be learned from the expression, "the gift of the Holy Spirit", @Acts 2: 38, and then "Have ye received the Spirit", @Galatians 3: 2.
J.T. The Spirit is a gift and they received it.
{293}
THE INTRODUCTION OF THE GOSPEL AMONG THE GENTILES (3)
@Acts 11: 26; @Acts 12: 1 - 25; @Acts 13: 1 - 12
J.T. These passages are read so that we might continue our examination of the book in relation to the progress of the truth of the gospel and, I might say, of the assembly. The end of chapter 11 was read to call attention to the name christian being given to the disciples, for that is an important matter. It was not simply intended to be the name of merely baptised persons, professed christians, but real christians. Then in chapter 12 it is in mind to call attention to Peter's testimony and service, and particularly to call attention also to the youth, young persons being brought into the service, represented in Rhoda. It is an important matter to be considered, that young people should be ready for service, whatever it may be, but service to promote the truth. Then there is also, in this chapter, Peter's incarceration in prison by Herod, and it may be remarked that his deliverance from the prison was an act of the Lord. The suggestion that his sleep was an element of weakness, or want of devotedness is not right; the Lord gave him sleep, and the Lord delivered him out of the prison, sending His angel to do so. His sleep thus is in no way a type of death, but is a symbol of what might be enjoyed by any one of us; some of us have been glad to get it during the past night. It is a question of rest, which God graciously, as Creator, provides for us. So that in a sense Peter's incarceration or imprisonment is a credit to him. He was suffering in the prison, as in the truth, as a testimony to Christ. Then from chapter 13 it is in mind to bring out briefly the position of the Holy Spirit as sending out the servants. Instead of the Lord doing it as He did with the twelve, the Spirit does it. He sends out the
{294}
servants, according to the word, "The Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them. Then, having fasted and prayed, and having laid their hands on them, they let them go". Another thing that is in mind is to call attention to the sinner who opposed the servants of God. This man called Elymas the magician, became blind for a season, pointing evidently to the restriction on the Jews as over against the release of the gentiles. The gentiles are brought into the truth of the gospel; whereas the Jews are blind for a moment, although they will be restored or brought back later. These are the thoughts that are in mind to speak of at this time.
Ques. "First called christians in Antioch"; is that a divine calling?
J.T. It is simply their name, christians. They had been under the instruction of Paul and Barnabas for a whole year, and acquired the character that is implied in the word 'christian'.
Ques. Was it what was seen in them?
J.T. I would think that. It was no mere profession; it was a real thing. It has to be noted that it was after a whole year's instruction by these two servants, Paul and Barnabas.
Ques. Was it what men called them?
J.T. It is just an abstract thought, without stating who called them. They were called christians instead of Jews or Greeks or whatever they might be.
Ques. Is it the substantial effect of the teaching?
J.T. I would think it is just that; the teaching is involved in it.
W.C. Would the idea of suffering as a christian in @1 Peter 4: 15, confirm that? "Let none of you suffer indeed as murderer ... but if as a christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God in this name".
J.T. Just so.
{295}
R.W.S. Does this bear upon those who can help, being in their local position? "For a whole year they were gathered together in the assembly and taught a large crowd". There is the custom of those who can help moving about a good deal, but may there be the need of some of us staying at home in our localities?
J.T. Just so. You mean they were a long time in this locality? It is remarkable that it was a year, and that it was in the assembly, as if the assembly were the sphere of it.
W.B.H. Would the word "christian" be the right kind of renown?
J.T. Well, if you call it renown, just so. I think we ought to dwell a little on the fact that they were in the assembly, the believers were taught *in the assembly*. That is to say, the idea of the assembly was in mind in the teaching. "And so it was with them that for a whole year they were gathered together in the assembly". We should notice that, it is not simply in a building, it is in the assembly, the idea being that the assembly is the environment in which they were taught. They "taught a large crowd" and so forth. And then we have the statement, "the disciples were first called christians in Antioch". I think we have to note all these items to get the full force of the statement.
S.McC. What would correspond with teaching in the assembly now?
J.T. It would be in our local places, if there be gift and the like, but having the assembly in mind, that is, the assembly is the sphere for it. It is not simply that we gather in a building, but we gather in the sense of the assembly, so that the teaching would take on that character and have the assembly in view.
Eu.R. By extension, would not this apply to an occasion of this kind?
{296}
J.T. Yes, but this is a local matter, of course. Here, there are a lot of people, far beyond what is suitable in a local position. At the same time it is a special gathering and it is for the purpose of receiving instruction, or teaching, and we have the assembly in mind.
F.J.F. Has the mid-week meeting helped us in this regard to come together as an assembly in a city?
J.T. Just so; you might extend it to that extent, in that sense.
C.A.I. Would the idea of the whole year involve the four seasons entering into the matter?
J.T. Very good. Sometimes Paul speaks about spending a whole winter with the saints. "Perhaps ... even winter with you", @1 Corinthians 16: 6. It shows that he would spend the time that would be uncomfortable and inconvenient; whereas here it is a whole year; that is to say, all the different seasons.
F.C.H. Would you say a word as to the spontaneity of the work at the beginning? I was thinking of verse 20, "But there were certain of them, Cyprians and Cyrenians, who entering into Antioch spoke to the Greeks also, announcing the glad tidings of the Lord Jesus. And the Lord's hand was with them, and a great number believed and turned to the Lord".
J.T. The Lord's hand was with them, of course. It was spontaneous, but the Lord's hand was with them; so the Spirit of God, of course, was there. If we use the word 'spontaneity' we must remember that it is not simply what goes on in ourselves, it is a question of what the Spirit of God is doing with us, or in us.
A.J.G. God Himself using the persecution to spread the work?
J.T. Quite so. And then the addition of Barnabas and Saul. It says, "And the report concerning them
{297}
reached the ears of the assembly"-that is another thing to notice, that the assembly has *ears*, which is a figure, of course. The report "reached the ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem, and they sent out Barnabas to go through as far as Antioch: who, having arrived and seeing the grace of God, rejoiced, and exhorted all with purpose of heart to abide with the Lord; for he was a good man and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith; and a large crowd of people were added to the Lord". And then "he went away to Tarsus to seek out Saul". We thus have Saul brought into the work, and the work going on for a whole year with Barnabas and Saul in it, and then the result is that they were called christians there. It is as if the character of christianity was expressed in them through the teaching of Paul and Barnabas.
Ques. Does the word 'christian' imply that the anointing was in evidence?
J.T. I would think that. The word 'christian' in @Acts 11 would, but in the habitual use of it today among the nominal christians it does not always imply that. It does not imply reality now at all.
N.K.M. "The disciples were first called christians in Antioch". Would that have a public testimonial bearing?
J.T. Just so. The word 'disciples' would mean that they had been learning or appropriating the teaching of Paul and Barnabas; they were being formed by it.
E.A.L. I think you put it earlier, 'disciplined by the truth'. The disciples were those disciplined by the truth.
J.T. Quite so. Disciples are persons who are subject to a given teaching.
F.J.F. Is there a reproach in that they were not first called christians in Jerusalem? Had the heavenly character come to light?
{298}
J.T. Not yet. The word reproach perhaps, is a little severe because the work of God had been going on in Jerusalem until the time of Stephen.
Rem. The assembly there is accredited with having ears, as you have remarked.
J.T. I think it is important to notice it.
Rem. So that in all our meetings we have the assembly in view.
J.T. Well, the question is, whether we have. Of course, at a great meeting like this we are gathered from all parts of the world to be here and to get instruction, we hope. But what is in mind is that we should be taught in the truth of the assembly.
E.B.McC. Would not the truth of the assembly bring about subjection? That is, they would be christians not in name only but in truth.
J.T. I would say that. The idea of subjection is there. We are enjoined to be subject; of course subject to the Lord, but subject to one another too; the principle of subjection is a great matter.
A.J.G. And especially seen in the divine thought as to the assembly as subjected to the Christ?
J.T. Quite so. The whole passage in @Ephesians 5 would point to that, and especially the wives. They are to submit themselves to their own husbands, but then the husbands are to love their wives. Then, as you say, the assembly is subjected to the Christ. She is not simply subject, but *subjected*, that is to say, it is the mind of God for her.
F.G.C. Is that thought of subjection amongst the brethren themselves seen in the composition of the company in @Acts 13: 1?
J.T. Quite so. We are to be subject one to another, and not only subject to Christ. But the principle of subjection is the thing to get into our minds, the *principle* of it.
H.F.N. Would this connect itself with the whole year that elapsed before the tabernacle was set up?
{299}
It says of Bezaleel and Aholiab that it was put in their heart to teach. Would it correspond with that?
J.T. Do you mean that the people were ready for Paul and Barnabas, and that there was the principle of subjection to teaching?
H.F.N. Yes, and also the fact that there was a whole year after the people came out of Egypt, during which the construction of the tabernacle proceeded, corresponding with this whole year of divine teaching bringing in assembly conditions.
J.T. I think that is very good, a whole year, showing how much teaching is needed in regard of the assembly. We can never say we are complete in the instruction as regards the assembly.
J.T.Jr. In @1 Corinthians 11: 2 it says, "As I have directed you, ye keep the directions". That is the way the chapter begins.
J.T. That shows that they were subject. They were keeping the directions and being subject to the principles, I would say.
Ques. Is there any significance in the expressions, "Now in these days", in verse 27 of chapter 11, and, "At that time" in verse l of chapter 12? I was wondering whether it showed that something definite had been arrived at in the development of the truth, and then we have definite opposition to it in the next chapter.
J.T. Just so. The whole of chapter 11 would indicate that the truth was in progress. There was progress being made through the activity of the Spirit in the teaching. Chapter 12 is to bring out the opposition to that. The whole chapter really has in mind opposition, showing to us how we must be prepared for opposition if we want to stand firmly by the truth. Then we have the thought of getting young people into it, such as Rhoda. She stands by the truth that she announced, even under opposition, and that is something that the young people should
{300}
be reminded of. How old she was we cannot say, but she was evidently young.
Ques. Knowing and recognising the voice of Peter?
J.T. Exactly, and standing by it too, although she was really under persecution. They said she was mad.
H.W.A. They put her in good company, did they not? I was thinking in @John 10: 20 they said of the Lord that He was mad, and in @Acts 26: 24 Festus said to Paul, "Thou art mad". Mr. Darby once said that we are not nearly as consistent as we might be in madness.
J.T. That is good. We have to be, as it were, prepared for such feelings against us, that we are mad. They said of the Lord that He was out of His mind (@Mark 3: 21).
Rem. The "voice" in verse 14 brings out what is before the mind. One was wondering whether the younger ones would not be helped if they set their minds on these things.
J.T. That is what we are aiming at from yesterday morning about sisters, and now young people too, whether they are brothers or sisters. This was a sister, called Rhoda, and she stood by what she saw was the truth; whatever it was, she stood by the truth.
P.L. And in a fragrance of spirit, could we say, suggested by the meaning of her name, 'rose'?
J.T. Just so.
A.P.B. Do you think then that there is something peculiarly precious to divine Persons in youthful freshness, where there is, perhaps, something lacking in what professes His name?
J.T. Well, just so.
F.J.F. Why did she not open the door to him?
J.T. She was wise, I should think. It was a time of fear, as in @John 20 where the doors were
{301}
shut because of the Jews. It was a time of fear of opposition, and I suppose she was wise in doing that, but, at the same time, she contended that what she said was true, and that it was really Peter.
Ques. Was there any reason why Peter went to the house of Mary rather than to the assembly?
J.T. They were at prayer, and I think honour is given to that, to the prayer that was going on there. It says, "Where were many gathered together and praying". I assume it was what we call a prayer meeting at the house of Mary.
Ques. Was that an additional one, do you think, to what is said earlier? It says so emphatically, in verse 5, "Peter therefore was kept in the prison; but unceasing prayer was made by the assembly to God concerning him". And yet in this verse that I am alluding to it is a question of his returning after his release to this particular house where they were also praying, "Where were many gathered together and praying".
J.T. You mean that there are two prayer meetings alluded to? That is very good; there were two of them, I was only referring to one of them, the last one, and undoubtedly God honoured the prayers that were rising up to Him at that time. It is the general thought of prayer, and they are especially praying for Peter.
Ques. Would this in any way indicate that those who are prevented from meeting with us in the meeting for prayer should be engaged in this same way in their households?
J.T. Very good. Let us be engaged in it at all times, for we are told to "pray without ceasing", @1 Thessalonians 5: 17.
Ques. Would you say there was a lack of faith here with those praying?
J.T. There probably was, because they did not believe it was Peter; at the same time. God is
{302}
honouring it, I believe God is honouring it at this particular juncture, so that it is a thought that should be before us now as we are considering the book of Acts in relation to progress in the truth.
Ques. Would there be anything in Rhoda recognising the voice of Peter?
J.T. I think so. We have already referred to his mouth, and now we have the voice of Peter. A person's voice really is himself, in a certain sense; we discern the voice. We often say the Lord's voice is in it, or the voice of God is in it, and so forth. It is really representing the person, and in this case they recognised Peter, and, of course, they ought to know Peter's voice. He was the leading apostle up to this time, and he had spoken to them many a time, doubtless. We should therefore be able to discern the voice of a leading servant.
S.McC. Would you say a word as to the first half of the chapter in relation to Peter and his imprisonment and what he would represent.
J.T. As far as I see it, he is a sufferer, but he was not overcome by his sufferings. He was asleep between two quaternions of soldiers; there is no discredit in the fact that he sleeps here. He was sleeping and it was quite right, for it is something of God that is good for us. The Lord Himself slept.
P.L. "The sleep of a labouring man is sweet", @Ecclesiastes 5: 12.
J.T. Just so. And what I am afraid of is putting interpretations on things that are not just warranted, and yet they may appeal to some who think they are very nice because they are novel; but they are sometimes not true at all. So that it is not true that it was a discredit to Peter that he was asleep.
Ques. Would he have the value of the Lord's own word to him, "When thou shalt be old", @John 21: 18? Would that give him a certain restfulness
{303}
and save him being too apprehensive just at this juncture?
J.T. Quite so. He was not afraid to die, of course. From all appearances he was at the point of death, but he did not die. The Lord delivered him; and that is what a servant may expect.
Ques. Has the blessed Spirit His part in these restful conditions as seen in Peter, as it says, "Blessed are ye; for the Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you", @1 Peter 4: 14.
J.T. That is very good.
Ques. Would it illustrate the Lord's words, "I leave peace with you; I give *my* peace to you", @John 14: 27.
J.T. Well, quite. "I leave peace with you; I give *my* peace to you, not as the world gives do I give to you". Then He says, "Rise up, let us go hence".
F.McE. "I laid me down and slept; I awaked, for Jehovah sustaineth me", @Psalm 3: 5.
J.T. Very good.
A.B-e. Is this sleep in contrast to Peter sleeping in the garden?
J.T. It is. That was a poor thing to fall asleep when the Lord Jesus was about to die. They were not with Him in His sufferings.
A.B-t. Would it be restfulness in the sense of divine care?
J.T. That seems to be the truth of it. He is restful in the sense of divine care, and, sure enough, the care was shown to be there, and he was delivered.
Ques. In @Hebrews 11 we read of those who through faith "died by the death of the sword", and also those who through faith "escaped the edge of the sword". Is the first seen in James and the second in Peter?
{304}
J.T. That is good. So that we are not justified in saying that there is anything detrimental in Peter sleeping here.
Ques. Had not the Lord indicated by what death he should glorify God?
J.T. He had. Apparently he lived a considerable time after this, I would say he lived to be about seventy.
Ques. What would be the import of the smiting of Peter's side?
J.T. I suppose he would be reminded of the Lord's death; it was intended that he should be. It says of the Lord in @John 20, "he shewed unto them his hands and his side". The Lord called attention to that Himself, and I suppose the allusion would be that Peter was suffering now. The angel smote him on his side, as much as to remind him of that and that the Lord suffered too, "For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake", @Philippians 1: 29.
N.K.M. What is the significance of the angel of the Lord being brought in here?
J.T. The angels are "sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation", @Hebrews 1: 14. That is what I would say. They are ministers to all those of us who are christians.
Rem. Angels are not subject to human limitations.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Would you say a word as to the opposition represented by Herod?
J.T. It was the opposition really, you might say, of a gentile; and he was linking himself on with the Jews, I suppose it was to ingratiate himself with the Jews for he saw that it pleased the Jews. He was just a politician, in that sense.
P.L. The moment the assembly appears you have the inveterate hostility of Esau to the purpose of
{305}
God, worked out in Jacob and Israel, and is that enmity continued now against the assembly? The assembly is introduced in the end of chapter 11.
J.T. Do you mean that the assembly would be the cause of the devil's opposition?
P.L. It says that Herod laid his hands on some of those of the assembly.
J.T. Of course, persecution of the assembly existed before. The assembly had been in evidence before that, and, of course, it is coming in here now. It is just the same thought again, only emphasized, and that the teaching is in it for a whole year.
P.L. Does not the Edomite, which Herod represents, stand out in inveterate hostility to what God has particularly before Him?
J.T. Well. Edom's opposition is largely against Jacob there. However, in general what you say is right, only we want to be accurate. The assembly does not appear just here first; it had appeared already, only it is emphasized here.
P.L. I thought it was its operations, and really what is Pauline coming into view, which makes it such an object of attack.
J.T. Quite so; that is true.
D.S.H. Something has been said about Rhoda; would you say a word about Peter continuing to knock?
J.T. It shows that he was assured of himself; he had come to himself already. He was asleep in the prison, and now he came to himself, and he saw that the Lord had come in for him, and so he continued to knock as if he wanted the brethren to hear; he wanted them to know that he was there. Then he made a sign to them to be silent, and said, "Report these things to James and to the brethren".
E.A.L. The point seems to be that Rhoda recognised Peter before she saw him, but the others did not recognise him until they did see him.
{306}
J.T. She recognised his voice, that is the point.
E.A.L. There is a reference to voice in chapter 9 and a note there to the effect that the thing heard is before the mind. The thing was in her mind and she was listening to the voice of Peter because she *expected* to hear him.
J.T. Just so. The prayers had gone up for him. Sometimes one thinks that we ought to expect things on Tuesday because it is the day after the prayer meeting; and we do get things too, even although we do not always believe in what we pray for; but God answers our prayers, nevertheless.
Ques. Was it not imperative that the brethren should be brought into what had happened? So that he says, "Report these things to James and to the brethren". Nobody was to be left out of the great matter that had just happened.
J.T. I thought that. It was to be a general matter of information, which is a great matter now, and is in keeping with what we have said about the ears of the assembly. Things should be told if they are valuable.
A.J.G. Is that to invigorate the brethren to go forward in what God is doing?
J.T. Just so, I always think that Tuesday is the time we should expect things from God, by way of answers to our prayers. The idea of a prayer meeting is here; in fact, as our brother says, there are two prayer meetings mentioned. Who can say how many prayer meetings there are amongst us on a Monday night, and why should we not expect answers?
Ques. Does Rhoda represent the spiritual element on the subjective side, as waiting on the brethren, to take on matters?
J.T. Very good, waiting on the brethren. And then, what we have already said, submitting to the brethren, submit yourselves one to another. But waiting on the brethren is a good idea.
{307}
W.S.S. Speaking of Rhoda further, does it not suggest to us the importance of being ready to receive a word from a young brother or young sister, whom the Spirit may be employing?
J.T. That is just what we were saying yesterday morning, about the sisters. She is a sister, of course, and sisters should be ready to give out information that is profitable. They should not be occupied merely with small talk, as you might say, but give out what is profitable, because there is so much around that is profitable. So if the sisters have something to say about the brethren that is good, something reliable that they have heard, let them say it, and encourage the brethren, and if it is of value to the assembly, a brother can report it.
G.C.S. Would Peter's voice be a shepherd's voice as representing the Lord, and should we recognise the voice of every one who is a shepherd?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord says, "My sheep hear my voice", and of the shepherd, that "the sheep follow him, because they know his voice. But they will not follow a stranger".
A.N.W. The word in Timothy to women is that they are to learn in quietness, not in silence.
J.T. Very good, not in silence, but in quietness and subjection.
S.McC. It says that "she maintained that it was so". Is that not a needful feature, that we should hold our ground in regard to these things?
J.T. I would say that fully. In fact, I have often thought of it about Rhoda, and, no doubt, some of us, as I have done, use Rhoda as a subject for helping young people. It is a very good subject as to young people.
Eu.R. Is there a prophetic allusion in Peter's side being smitten and his liberation to the revival of the truth of the assembly in these last days?
J.T. Quite so.
{308}
Eu.R. It goes on to say after referring to Peter's voice, "but Peter continued knocking". Would that link on somewhat with the Lord's voice and the Lord's knock to Laodicea? "Behold, I stand at the door and am knocking; if any one hear my voice and open the door, I will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with me", @Revelation 3: 20.
J.T. The Lord appeals to us in that sense, "If any one hear my voice", and then there is the promise.
Eu.R. And the word, "I stand at the door". Is it that He stations Himself there and remains in that attitude?
J.T. Very good. It is like a man standing at the door of a house; he wants to get in. People see him doing so and he may become a subject of reproach, but still he is doing it. He is doing it in love for the saints, "Behold, I stand at the door",-not, I have stood, but am doing it.
H.W.A. May I ask if there is not special significance in the fact that just after the verse quoted from @Revelation 3 the Spirit says, "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies". That is, the Lord's voice and what the Spirit says are close together at the end of the addresses to the assemblies. I wondered if it would not bear particularly on what you were saying in London, as to what is specific at the present moment.
J.T. That ought to be repeated, that the Lord's voice is specific. It may be only a few words, but it is authoritative. The Spirit's voice may proceed for the whole dispensation, and it is proceeding at this very minute in this hall. He is constantly speaking to us, but the Lord's voice may be only a few words, as it was in the addresses to the assemblies, but they are authoritative. They contain the gist of all that is to be said by the Spirit.
{309}
A.E.D. Is it striking that despite all this opposition it says, in verse 24, that "the word of God grew and spread itself"?
J.T. Very good. And then that opens the door to chapter 13.
Ques. I would like to ask, before we leave chapter 12, is it not remarkable that this political situation is so clearly outlined in this chapter? Do you think the prayer that was made was the basis for divine intervention, not only in regard of Peter and the ministry, but in regard of the political situation?
J.T. You mean as seen in Herod. Just so. Because he changed his ground and went down to some gentile position. He had been speaking on Jewish ground but now he is moving out to a gentile position, and he is making a great display, and he makes an oration. He wants to be heard, but he is on gentile ground.
Ques. Would the going down one street, after the iron gate had opened, point to the recovery of Paul's ministry, and would the prayer be in keeping with it?
J.T. Well, it says, "They went down one street". He is not confused; he takes the right one, as if there was only one. You might call it one street, as in Damascus, "the street which is called Straight". It leads to the truth, the truth of Paul, as you might say, the whole truth indeed. So it is really the deliverance of Peter, and Peter's ministry, because Peter represents the ministry here. The ministry had been restricted but now it is released, and Peter represents it.
R.W.S. Are not only sisters to be in our consideration in future meetings, but young persons from, say, twelve and up, brothers and sisters?
J.T. That is what I thought we might notice particularly. It is one of the items in the chapters read, and it is a very important item, that young people should come into the ministry, in some sense.
{310}
and be able to do things that are furthering the truth of God.
J.G.H. Is that seen also in Naaman's maid, in @2 Kings 5?
J.T. Very good. Her heart was in the thing. There is an exclamation in what she says, "Oh, would that my lord were before the prophet that is in Samaria! then he would cure him of his leprosy", @2 Kings 5: 3. It is as if she were evangelical herself.
P.L. It says that Moses "sent the youths of the children of Israel, and they offered up burnt-offerings, and sacrificed sacrifices of peace-offering of bullocks to Jehovah". @Exodus 24: 5.
J.T. And they became priests. There were none officially at the time, but they became that; they knew what to do, and that is, of course, an advance on what we are saying. They would be fully thought of as priests, not that they are called priests, but they were that for they actually did the offering.
P.L. The assembly typically is the great theme in this scripture in Exodus, and there is the necessity of fresh youthful material coming into service.
J.T. And, even although they are not acknowledged to be official, yet they are to be used, because there is need for them; there is need for such service as they can offer.
Rem. There are not many young people mentioned in this book, but there is a boy, Eutychus, in chapter 20.
J.T. Very good, I was hoping we would come to that. Tell us about it.
Rem. I was only comparing Rhoda, of whom we have spoken, and her agility and joyfulness, with the sleep that marked Eutychus. I am thinking of the remark that the young people should be brought into matters. Then we have the wives and children who went down to the seashore with Paul, as though the young people are brought into these love matters.
{311}
J.T. Very good.
A.M. Is it not significant that John Mark comes in at the end of chapter 12, as a young man coming into service with great opportunities?
J.T. Quite so. He is the same one as Mark; he is called "John, surnamed Mark", here. It says, "Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, having fulfilled the service entrusted to them, taking also with them John, surnamed Mark". Well, now we have Paul's service opened up to us, and the Spirit Himself in charge of it. It is not the Lord Jesus who is in charge here, it is the Spirit, showing how the divine Persons may be interchanged. So the Spirit takes on the matter here, and the beginning of chapter 13 is a very important part of the scripture that we have had before us. John Mark is thus to assist, or augment, what Paul and Barnabas were doing, showing how young men can do that. They can be ready to take part in whatever service may be going on, without any question as to what it is, but ready to do anything that will promote the work of God.
Ques. Does the word of Paul to Timothy show the possibilities of youth-"Let no one despise thy youth, but be a model of the believers, in word, in conduct, in love, in faith, in purity", @1 Timothy 4: 12?
J.T. Quite so. That is to say, if he is marked by these latter statements, faith and purity, no one should have the power to despise him. It is in his own hands, that no one shall despise him, because he knows what to do. He is marked by purity, especially.
S.McC. In the setting in the opening verses of chapter 13, where the Spirit is free to speak, reference is made to fasting. Do you think that we need to know a little more of fasting in view of these conditions?
{312}
J.T. Very good. That is something that is very little known; just as the service of angels is very little known, but fasting had a great place at the beginning of christianity. The Lord Himself says, "This kind can go out by nothing but by prayer and fasting" (@Mark 9: 29), showing that there is power in fasting.
S.McC. Would it apply literally as well as spiritually, or would you exclude the literal thought from it altogether?
J.T. Well, I am not sure about that, because the literal thought is in mind in the allusions to fasting, both in the Lord's own words and in the reference here. The literal thought is in mind.
Ques. At any crucial juncture, does it not become imperative that fasting, at least morally, should be resorted to?
J.T. I believe so, in the principle of it anyway. In a real crisis or difficulty of the truth, and the like, fasting is an outlet for us. The Lord would never fail to come in for us, when it is resorted to. I remember resorting to it, with others, in 1889, at the time of the difficulty about eternal life, and the Lord helped us.
Ques. Was the whole assembly involved in the ministering to the Lord and fasting, or only the gifted brothers? It says, "as they were ministering to the Lord and fasting".
J.T. "Now there were in Antioch, in the assembly which was there, prophets and teachers: Barnabas, and Simeon who was called Niger, and Lucius the Cyrenian, and Manaen, foster-brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. And as they were ministering to the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said. Separate me ..." and so forth. I would think it is just the persons mentioned.
Ques. Would you say that the Holy Spirit spoke in the assembly, or amongst those brothers?
{313}
J.T. Well. He spoke anyway, I would say He spoke through some brother, but I think it is better to leave it to the text as it is.
Ques. Is not the assembly what may be called an over-all thought here? It says, "Now there were in Antioch, in the assembly which was there", as though it was, in a certain sense, a governing thing.
J.T. Just so. But then they are specifically mentioned by name, and I believe the fasting and prayer was on their side.
S.McC. What did you say about 1889 in regard to the truth of eternal life?
J.T. There was such a terrible crisis, and the devil had attacked brethren, and there were a great number, more, in fact, than remained in fellowship, who were turned aside by the devil, especially in America and on the Continent, in France and Germany. It was a terrible time!
S.McC. Did I understand you to say that you resorted to fasting?
J.T. Yes.
Ques. What exactly do you mean by that?
J.T. We actually fasted. The Lord helped what we were doing. It was a small thing, of course; there were only a few of us, but anyway it was there. It was not a general thing at all, I do not know that they fasted generally, I do not think they did, perhaps there would have been more saved if they had.
Ques. What is meant by the reference to fasting morally?
J.T. The denial of what is right in itself.
Ques. Is that practical?
J.T. Very practical.
Rem. The service sometimes requires it? "They that have wives be as though they had none", @1 Corinthians 7: 29.
{314}
D.J.M. Esther called for it at a critical time, did she not?
J.T. Yes, she asked them to fast with her, not to pray with her. There is not a word about prayer in Esther; it is fasting. That is the point of it; power comes in through fasting.
F.V.W. Is the fasting in verse 3 more general than in verse 2?
J.T. It says, "Then, having fasted and prayed, and having laid their hands on them, they let them go". It is as if the need for power was intensified, so that the Spirit would be in full liberty in regard of these servants. He was sending out servants, and that is the point to see in the passage. The Spirit is in charge of the sending of the servants. We might say, Why should the Lord not do it? Well. He did not; the Spirit did it. So that we had better take what we get in the Scriptures and go by it.
N.K.M. Would fasting deliver us from natural likes and dislikes?
J.T. I think it is more that we would deny ourselves things that are, in themselves, legal and right, for the sake of getting the power. You want the power and that is the way to get it. "This kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting". There is prayer, of course, but then fasting is added to it.
Ques. Is it that kind of thing that Paul has in mind when he says, "All things are lawful, but all are not profitable", @1 Corinthians 10: 23? Is that the principle of fasting in a general way?
J.T. Just so. He denied himself of certain things just for the sake of the power that came to him.
Ques. Here the fasting is put before the prayer. Would that help to give effectiveness to the prayer?
J.T. Yes; in verse 3 it says, "Then, having fasted and prayed", showing the urgent need of power was more in their minds. They needed power at the moment, because the Spirit of God was working and
{315}
He might be hindered. We are not to quench the Spirit, or to grieve Him. They might have grieved Him here, if they did not take great care. He was doing a great work.
Ques. In that they were fasting, and ministering to the Lord, does it suggest that there was a sensitiveness with them as to the imminence of this move of the Spirit in directing these servants to go out?
J.T. Quite so. It was most essential at the time. It was a very critical time, because the Spirit might be grieved, and the service of God might be hindered.
W.C. Would this passage indicate that in service the Spirit should be waited upon particularly, for help and guidance in the ministry?
J.T. Well, quite so. He is to be waited on, and, of course, the Lord is to be waited on too, I think if you have been invited to go to a place, and you are minded to go, you would wait on the Lord; I would wait on the Lord more, because He is the Lord. He is the only One said to be *made* Lord. The Spirit is not said to be *made* Lord, nor is the Father said to be made Lord, but the Son *is* said to be made Lord. Therefore He is the One to wait on in these matters.
E.C.M. How would you understand the phrase, "and having laid their hands on them, they let them go"?
J.T. It is just identification. It is a common sign of identification, whatever it be. Paul was an apostle and he speaks of it himself; he says, "The putting on of my hands" to Timothy (@2 Timothy 1: 6), showing that it is complete identification with Timothy.
R.W.S. Would you enlarge on your last remark as to waiting on the Lord?
J.T. I think it is just. He is entitled to it, because He is the One that is made Lord, and the word "The Father ... has given all things to be in his hand" (@John 3: 35) is in keeping with that. Therefore
{316}
I think we should make much of the Lord, in that sense, if we are going to do anything at a given time or are anticipating certain things to be done.
J.T.Jr. We get both thoughts here, ministering to the Lord, as if the Lord is in view immediately, and then the Spirit in view of service.
J.T. Very good.
Ques. Would you say what the expression "ministering to the Lord" means, please?
J.T. I think it carries its own meaning. We have the thought of the angels even ministering to those that are heirs of salvation. It is "to the Lord", which is clear enough, so that the bearing of it is towards Him.
H.F.N. Would you say a further word in regard to the thought of invitation, and then the direct sending out by the Lord, and then the voice of the Spirit? The great bulk of service in this country is as the fruit of invitation.
J.T. Invitation simply sets you free to go, but you must begin *with the Lord*. If the matter is to be settled, we must go to the Lord about it. We were speaking about this in Rochester, and a brother asked me, 'Why did you come to Rochester?' Well, I said, 'I was invited to come', but at the same time, I had to turn to the Lord for a commission, and I think the word 'commission' should enter into these matters. It is a question of whether we have a commission to go. The command is there. What do you say?
H.F.N. I really wanted to get help. The great majority of brethren in this country are what you may call 'week-end servants'. Very few go and stay.
J.T. It is perhaps well if they confine themselves to week-ends. Sometimes it runs on to a month or even two or three months before they come back. There is great weakness because of that.
{317}
H.F.N. I really wanted to get at what was the divine principle. Here it seems definite that they were sent. It says, "as they were ministering to the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul ..." I wondered whether we should not look for this, having recognised the presence of the Spirit and all the gain to us, and whether this should not open an avenue in service, apart from the question of invitation.
J.T. This afternoon I hope we shall be able to look at the matter of invitations further, for there is an invitation in chapter 16, "Come over into Macedonia, and help us".
{318}
THE INTRODUCTION OF THE GOSPEL AMONG THE GENTILES (4)
@Acts 16: 1 - 40
J.T. I think you had something in mind this morning, Mr. N. that you wanted to raise?
H.F.N. Yes. It was in regard, first, to the question of a servant going on his own initiative, as illustrated by Peter in chapter 9, "Now it came to pass that Peter, passing through all quarters, descended also to the saints who inhabited Lydda". Then, secondly, how the brethren at Joppa *sent for* Peter, as it says, "But Lydda being near to Joppa, the disciples having heard that Peter was there, sent two men to him, beseeching him". That is also seen in what comes out in our chapter, namely, the man of Macedonia beseeching them and saying, "Pass over ... and help us". Then, thirdly, in the scripture before us this morning, we have how the living voice of the Spirit in the assembly says, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". It has been an exercise in the minds of the brethren that we might get the balance between the thought of invitation, and then moving on our own volition, and then the direct voice of the Spirit in the assembly. I feel we should all be very grateful if you would give us some help on that.
J.T. The principal point in your inquiry really is that many of our brethren in this country are moved by invitation in their service. It came to me that this should come up at this time because we have here in verse 6, "having passed through Phrygia and the Galatian country, having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia, having come down to Mysia, they attempted to go to Bithynia, and the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them;
{319}
and having passed by Mysia, they descended to Troas. And a vision appeared to Paul in the night: There was a certain Macedonian man, standing and beseeching him, and saying, Pass over into Macedonia and help us". Here we have the voice of this Macedonian man, and an invitation to Paul to go to Macedonia and help. "And when he had seen the vision, immediately we sought to go forth to Macedonia, concluding that the Lord had called us to announce to them the glad tidings". So that Paul clearly accepts the invitation. At the same time the Spirit of God had to say to it, according to the earlier verses, in that Paul was "forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia". Then it goes on to say, "having come down to Mysia, they attempted to go to Bithynia, and the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them". That is to say, while the idea of invitation is here, we have also to reckon with the Spirit of God, or the Spirit of Jesus, or with the Lord Himself. Here it is the Spirit of Jesus. We have to reckon with divine Persons before we can accept an invitation.
F.J.F. Does that mean you could not answer just at once, if you were asked?
J.T. Just so, I think I mentioned this morning that the question was raised at Rochester in May as to our special meetings there. We were speaking on this same point, and someone enquired, Why did you come to Rochester? I said I came by invitation, and, of course, the suggestion in the inquiry was that I went to Rochester because I was invited. But then I remarked further that I enquired from the Lord about it, so as to be sure that there was such a thing as a commandment or commission for me to go. That is the way the thing presents itself to me. Whilst we may be invited, and thankful for the invitation, yet we may have to wait on the Lord and see what His mind will be.
{320}
Eu.R. It says in regard of Macedonia in verse 10: "Concluding that the Lord had called us to announce to them the glad tidings".
J.T. The word 'concluding' is used; that is, the Lord is kept in mind, and hence one would decide where he should go in the Lord's service according to the Lord's mind. Verse 10 suggests that, "And when he had seen the vision, immediately we sought to go forth to Macedonia, concluding that the Lord had called us to announce to them the glad tidings". Therefore there was a *commission*.
L.E.S. Would it fit in with the word in @Isaiah 6: "And I heard the voice of the Lord saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? And I said, Here am I; send me. And he said, Go".
J.T. Well, there is a good example of it. That is, the idea of a servant would be that he would desire to go, but then he would wait for the sending.
Ques. Would the "concluding", that the apostle refers to, suggest that he took into account all the circumstances?
J.T. I would think so. His mind was on the whole matter. The circumstances laid things on his mind, because he was minded to go before, but the Spirit of Jesus did not suffer him, and that was final. He did not ask to go further on that line. Therefore, when the invitation from Macedonia came to him, the whole matter was raised again, and therefore he did not need to stop any further on this point. The time had now come for the entrance of the truth into Europe, which is a great matter, much greater than that he should go into Macedonia. The fact of the matter is that the assembly ever since has been drawn from Europe and its outgoings.
C.M.M. Might a servant, as directed of the Lord, go on occasion without an invitation?
J.T. I think he might. He might have it laid on his mind; the Lord might lay it so on his mind
{321}
that He wanted him to go to a certain place. We have many illustrations of that from brethren who have been in the Lord's service. At the same time the idea of the commission is right; I am sure of that.
Ques. Is that seen in Philip in @Acts 8? He is called from Samaria to go down to Gaza. It says, "But the angel of the Lord spoke to Philip", (that is, when he was in Samaria), "saying, Rise up and go southward on the way which goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza; the same is desert. And he rose up and went. And lo, an Ethiopian, a eunuch, a man in power under Candace queen of the Ethiopians, who was over all her treasure, who had come to worship at Jerusalem, was returning and sitting in his chariot, and he was reading the prophet Esaias. And the Spirit said to Philip, Approach and join this chariot. And Philip, running up, heard him reading the prophet Esaias, and said, Dost thou then know what thou art reading of?" (verses  26 - 30).
J.T. That brings out first, that the angel of the Lord speaks to him and then, the Spirit's word to him, to approach and join the chariot. There is thus a commandment from the Spirit.
R.W.S. A brother might get two or three invitations for the same time. Would he have to consider them before the Lord and not necessarily accept the first invitation?
J.T. I think so. But the real difficulty is in brethren taking on too much and staying too long in any given place, and forgetting the home front and what is needed there.
F.C.H. Does the fact that the vision was at Troas enter into it at all? Does that stand in relation to the truth of the assembly in some way, having in mind what is said of Troas in @Acts 20, that it was where they came together to break bread?
{322}
J.T. At the end of their seven days at Troas they arrived at the first day of the week. That is the time when the breaking of bread should take place and we should begin again, because the first day of the week, and the breaking of bread entering into it, has in view the service of God, so that we begin with the breaking of bread. The number of brothers that were accompanying Paul is given in that chapter, and then it says the apostle discoursed to them. That is, it was on his own initiative, but evidently he felt there was a need of instruction as to the Lord's supper before the Lord's supper should be begun. That is how the matter stands in that chapter.
F.C.H. So that the truth of the assembly should always be in our minds in regard of service?
J.T. Quite so; the truth of the Lord's supper, involving the assembly, because the Lord's supper is in the assembly. We are not going to reach chapter 20 at this session, and therefore we might touch on it a little, for it is the very heart of the book. It begins with love, and there is love in the middle and love at the end. It is the very heart of the book, and the apostle, of his own volition, at that time, discoursed to the saints, as if he knew there was need of adjustment as to the Lord's supper. That, of course, would warrant one giving a word without having a command, as it were, if he felt that there was the need of it. It was imminent that the Lord's supper should take place, but then was the real state there? Were the conditions there to proceed with the Lord's supper? Apparently they were not, and that, of course, warranted Paul in giving the discourse that is mentioned.
F.J.F. Would it be right to do so now?
J.T. If there is a low state in a meeting and if you belong to the meeting or were there and felt that there was a low state or something that had to
{323}
be corrected, it would be quite right so say something about it, to give a word to bear on it. Because it is the time of the Lord's supper and it would be evident that we should proceed with it. We do not need to ask a command, because the Lord's supper is there, and the Lord's supper is to be celebrated on the first day of the week.
P.J.B. Do you mean giving a word *before* the breaking of bread?
J.T. Yes, evidently Paul did. There was a condition that was not suitable for the breaking of bread, as might happen at any time.
F.J.F. How would you be able to discern that?
J.T. By spirituality, and the Lord would help you. The idea of eldership has already come in in chapter 14 here, and it is in the plural. It is not simply one elder of an assembly, but *elders*, and therefore they would be concerned about the condition of the meeting, in view of the breaking of bread. If things were not right he would have something to say about that. If he were an elder he would be entitled to do it.
Ques. Might that come in where there was a known state of division amongst the brethren, which would hinder them rightly partaking of the Supper?
J.T. That is just what I would say.
H.S. Would the previous seven days enter into that? It says, "We came to them to Troas in five days, where we spent seven days. And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread". Would Paul become acquainted, during those seven days, with the conditions in the locality?
J.T. Well, if you assume that. Very likely he did, but we had better not go in for assumptions just now, we had better go by facts. The fact is that the time for the breaking of bread had come, and it was the first day of the week. The disciples were already assembled. It is not simply that they were gathered
{324}
together; the word 'assembled' is used. Therefore the assembly position is assumed; although we might say it is anticipating, yet I think what we are saying now as to the Lord's supper is of first-rate importance. We may not touch on it again at this time.
Rem. I think what you are saying is very important, because there have been known instances where such conditions prevailed, and it was often said you could break bread with persons you could not shake hands with, as though accepting that situation.
J.T. It may be mentioned that not very long ago the idea of shutting up a meeting or closing it up, because the condition for the breaking of bread was not there, was often alluded to. But what has more recently been seen is that the matter should be dealt with at once. If there is anything wrong it should be dealt with at once; why not? You must get witnesses, so that "in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every matter be established", @2 Corinthians 13: 1. I believe that is the Lord's mind about it. We are not to leave it shut up, as it were, but to deal with the matter according to the facts. While there was nothing wrong, as far as we can see, in the meeting at Troas, yet, at the same time the apostle was there, an apostle having authority, the Spirit of God in power was with him, and what he would do in ministry was quite in order. He would discern the state of the meeting, and it may be assumed that the seven days entered into that, but anyway it was a question of an apostle's judgment, and he discoursed for a long time, as if there was more wrong in the place than had been discerned. Then much more happened; that is, the fall of Eutychus and his recovery; so that love entered into the matter, at the centre of the chapter. Love is active at the beginning of the chapter and it was active at the centre and it was active at the end, as anybody who looks at the chapter would see. The point was, I
{325}
think, that the apostle Paul was right in discerning that there was something wrong, although he does not say so. But he discoursed, and discoursed at length, and the matter came right and then they broke bread. They did not break bread till then; until after the boy was recovered and brought up. Then they spoke long, as if there was conversation about the matter, and then he went away; and they were not a little comforted. It is as if the whole matter was settled, as it were, with profit.
Rem. Love at the beginning of the chapter and in the middle was on the part of Paul, but at the end of the chapter it is on the part of the brethren.
J.T. Very good. It is a beautiful chapter at the end, because their love for Paul came out in a striking way. It is a beautiful passage.
A.J.G. It says, "Having said these things, he knelt down and prayed with them all. And they all wept sore; and falling upon the neck of Paul they ardently kissed him, specially pained by the word which he had said, that they would no more see his face. And they went down with him to the ship".
J.T. So that we may say this is a finished matter. Chapter 20 is a finished matter, happily finished. And now we can come back to chapter 16, verse 6, in relation to this matter of coming into Europe. I think we stopped there. It is a time of the ministry coming into Europe; that is to say: the gospel, or the truth of the assembly, being introduced into Europe and it stays there now; it is there yet. So that Asia is out of the question now, and China is out of the question; it is a question now of Europe and its outgoings. We may as well understand that, and then act upon it, because it is how the truth of the assembly stands, that material is drawn from Europe in a literal sense.
{326}
Ques. Would it be right to say that the testimony had previously reached Europe seeing that there were believers in Rome at this time, although apparently not having assembly status?
J.T. Well, this particular passage is really the one that may be taken to depict the entrance into Europe of the gospel and the assembly. I believe that is the way it should be taken. And then we are told, in verse 11, "Having sailed therefore away from Troas, we went in a straight course to Samothracia, and on the morrow to Neapolis, and thence to Philippi, which is the first city of that part of Macedonia, a colony". That is another point to notice. "And we were staying in that city certain days. And on the sabbath day we went outside the gate by the river, where it was the custom for prayer to be, and we sat down and spoke to the women". Now this brings up the whole question that we had yesterday morning, women themselves engaged in prayer, in the city of Philippi, where we have Lydia, and all that enters into that. So that there were happy conditions for the introduction of the gospel into Europe, and it was established as in Europe, and has remained there still.
Ques. Is there a delightfully unofficial side to Paul in this passage? I was thinking of his being an apostle and a commissioned man, and later it says the woman with the spirit of Python "followed Paul and us", giving him his distinctive place, and yet his entry into Philippi seems to be on a very lowly basis, he was linking on with the women who were assembled for prayer.
J.T. Well, very good; but what about the women? They are very important. Lydia is one of the most remarkable women we have. The Lord had to do with her heart, in opening it, and she attended to the things spoken by Paul. It was a real transaction, and I would think it would be well for us to
{327}
dwell upon this in thinking of what we have had already as to women. Why not stress the idea of the place women may have under these circumstances? Even although Paul was there yet the Lord was acting of Himself to open her heart to attend to the things spoken by Paul. Paul was the man God was using; at the same time Lydia was a very important sister, as the whole chapter shows. Paul and the others came to Lydia according to the end of the chapter, showing how important she was. And this, of course, adds to what we have said about women not being excluded from meetings, that they have a first-rate importance.
J.T.Jr. The man was seen in the vision, but what he sees immediately is women.
J.T. Just so.
J.P.H. Is it your mind that all the saints, sisters as well as brothers, should come under teaching?
J.T. Well, quite so.
J.P.H. I was thinking of divine Persons being engaged in teaching. We have the teaching of the Lord and the teaching of the Spirit, as well as the teaching of Paul.
J.T. I think the women are of first-rate importance. They are the mothers of the whole human race; they are the mothers of the saints. Why should they not be instructed? It is of prime importance that they should be properly taught, and bring their children up properly; and be able even to prophesy if necessary, because women are said to prophesy. The four daughters of Philip are said to prophesy.
A.E.D. Is that the bearing of the word, "pass over into Macedonia and help us"? The "us" including the women.
J.T. Very good.
{328}
A.J.G. Was it these women that the Lord was using in the first place to undermine the power of the Roman Empire as seen in this colony?
J.T. Quite so. That brings up the whole question of the empires, spoken of in Daniel, and that we are already under one of them, because Rome still exists. Of course, we pray for the authorities, in that sense, but then what is prominent, of course, is the idea of the women and their importance in the service.
W.C. Do we get the thought of spiritual instinct both in Rhoda and in Lydia? Rhoda recognised Peter's voice, and now Lydia is really recognising the Lord's voice through Paul. And then in Dorcas there is one who was adjusted. I was thinking of what you were saying about sisters, not only what is general in the women, but there are three named sisters in the passages referred to.
J.T. I think all that is most suggestive, and only adds to what we had yesterday as to women and their place. They are not to be segregated from brothers in the ministry, but they have their own place. Without the women we should be seriously at a disadvantage in any meeting of brothers only.
S.McC. It says here of Lydia, "Whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things spoken by Paul"-not just to hear, but to attend. Is that not important with the sisters?
J.T. Quite so, I am sure you think it is important in your own wife, as all of us do of our wives. It is of prime importance that they should be instructed in every thing that is available in the ministry, to be with the brethren in the ministry.
Ques. Would Lydia's being a seller of purple, have its own significance; purple being the ruling gentile colour? It is thought to be the colour which the ruling Caesars wore, and Lydia would be accustomed to the idea of rule in that way.
{329}
J.T. I do not think there is anything of importance in the colours of an emperor or in what he wears. What is, I think, more important is that she was a *seller*. She accomplished something; she was practical.
A.M. What would be involved in the idea of her being a worshipper; it says she worshipped God. Does she link on with the woman in @John 4, where the thought of worship is introduced?
J.T. Well, it would be a question as to whether worship here, in her case, is quite as strong and full as that. I think it would mean that she was a person who believed, perhaps a Jewess who believed. She was just a believer, the same as the eunuch. It says of him that he went up to Jerusalem to worship; I mean to say, the idea has a common or general significance, I do not think you could assume that Lydia was a worshipper as the woman of Samaria was, to whom the Lord spoke. The Lord did not speak of the woman of Samaria really; he spoke of *worship*, and that the Father sought worshippers. Although she introduced the idea of worship, yet the Lord entered into it in a full way, and He said the Father seeks worshippers to worship Him in spirit and in truth. So that we have the full idea of worship in @John 4, but I doubt whether it is here.
G.C.S. Would her worshipping God be in contrast to the idolatry that marked Rome?
J.T. It would be, but I do not think there is much in bringing Rome into it. It is a question of what would belong to a young believer like Lydia.
F.W. Is it to be recognised that a godly woman has influence? In the beginning of verse 15, it says, "She besought us", but in the end of the verse, "She constrained us".
J.T. That is good. She constrained them to come to her house, which is a very important, practical
{330}
thing. She opened her door to the servants of the Lord, to give them shelter and comfort and the like.
Ques. Is it not significant that in the Philippian epistle the apostle refers to women who *contended* along with him in the glad tidings, and also apparently the only corrective note in that epistle is to two sisters to be "of the same mind in the Lord"?
J.T. Yes, the word 'women' may not be there; although the word used is feminine, but anyway the stress is not on the idea of women.
Eu.R. Priscilla had part with Aquila in unfolding to Apollos "the way of God more exactly", @Acts 18: 26.
J.T. Quite so. She is spoken of as often as her husband. They are spoken of six times altogether but they are both included each time, so that it would look as if Priscilla was equally important with her husband in the sense of teaching.
F.J.F. I would like to ask whether it would be right for sisters to meet in prayer; for instance, in the house privately?
J.T. It is often done, as far as I know, with children and the like. Why not? We are enjoined to pray without ceasing, and that is not specially to men, although it says men are to lift up holy hands without wrath or reasoning, but there is no reason why women should not pray together too, and I am sure they do.
A.H-n. Were you going to say something more about verse 15?
J.T. Nothing beyond what it says: "When she had been baptised" (that is, Lydia) "and her house, she besought us, saying, If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there. And she constrained us". That is to say, she opened her house to the servants of the Lord. It is a great matter to exercise hospitality to the Lord's servants.
{331}
A.H-n. I was wondering about the statement "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord".
J.T. That is a very important word, of course. Being faithful to the Lord was obviously necessary, if the apostles were to go in there. If they judged that she was faithful to the Lord then she says they should come into her house, and she opened her house to them.
J.G.H. Would faithfulness to the Lord involve the reception of Paul's ministry?
J.T. It would, indeed.
J.H. Would you say not only the reception of the truth but giving heed to it? She attended to the things spoken by Paul.
J.T. Quite so. That is very important.
A.J.G. Would you say something as to the fact that on the entrance of the testimony into Europe, houses begin to acquire importance? There are two houses mentioned in this chapter, Lydia's and the jailor's; and houses are mentioned in Corinthians too.
J.T. Very important; we should not pass that over. They seem to come into the thought of the assembly, for the house yields to the assembly. The bearing of the house is to the assembly, and the children are brought up with a view to that.
A.P.B. Is there an opportunity for parents to teach their children the truth in the households in a conversational way?
J.T. Quite so; and see that they go to the meetings too. If parents have influence with them, they see that they do not fail to attend the meetings.
S.McC. Both houses are marked by hospitality. Is it not a great matter that room should be made for the Lord's people and His servants, in our houses?
J.T. Just so; we all know that, I am sure; for the last few days we all know how important the
{332}
housing of those who are visiting here, in London, is, and how much was felt about that; and how many have been housed, too, and well cared for, on the principle of hospitality.
Ques. Is the word 'abide' there important, suggesting that Paul would have a permanent place there?
J.T. That is to say she would not say 'for a week-end'. Sometimes we are invited for a weekend, which means Saturday and Sunday, whereas she did not mean that: she meant *abide* there, stay as long as you wish. I think that is a very good thought, that she said to them, "Abide here", as it were, stay as long as you wish. I value you because you are the Lords servants; I receive you as the Lord. As Paul said to Philemon: "Receive him as me".
P.L. "If a son of peace be there, ... in the same house abide", @Luke 10: 6, 7.
J.T. Very good. I think this matter of hospitality is of prime importance.
A.J.G. And so we are not to be unmindful to entertain strangers.
Rem. Rahab received the spies into her house in the light of Jehovah, and it had far-reaching results.
J.T. Very good. She hid them under the flax.
Ques. Our houses should be held in that way?
J.T. That is just the point in all our remarks just now, that our houses are to be open to the saints to use wisely. And, as I was saying, not simply for a week-end but in the full sense of hospitality for the servant to stay longer if needed.
P.L. And impartially? Gaius, the host of the assembly as well as of Paul (@Romans 16: 23).
J.T. Well now, we might proceed a little further, to the sorrowful conditions that happened next; only in a certain sense they are glorious. (Verses 16 - 25 read.) We can see from the facts stated here
{333}
how important they are and how they bore on the faithfulness of the ministers, Paul and Silas. Silas has taken the place of Barnabas, and so he is Paul's companion there. Then, as we would have noticed, they turned the prison into a praise meeting. That is, the service of God was carried on in the prison, showing how victorious the testimony had become. It was a real victory; not only were these men sufferers, real sufferers, but they were suffering joyfully, and praising at the same time; so that God's service was carried on in the prison. It is one of the most glorious passages we can find in the history of the testimony, in the service of the gospel.
S.McC. Is that what happened on the 'Queen Elizabeth' that the service of God, I mean in principle, was taken on?
J.T. Just so. As it is now, we can travel on the Atlantic, or the Pacific, and have meetings and the service of God, except the breaking of bread, of course.
Ques. Would you say that the singing would be part of the preaching of the word in the open air?
J.T. I do not think there is much in that. I think what tells on people's minds is the truth, the actual truth of the gospel, presented in power. I doubt that there is very much in prayers or praise meetings in the service of God in the gospel. I think the power is in *the word of God*. "Preach the word". If there is to be preaching, preach it; if there is to be a testimony rendered, let it be preached.
Eu.R. This seems to be on a very high level; it seems to be the same word as in @Hebrews 2: 12: "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises" (or "praise *thee* with singing" according to the note), also in @Matthew 26: 30, "Having sung a hymn, they went out to the mount of Olives".
J.T. That is very good.
{334}
Ques. Sometimes at a gospel meeting the word is apparently with power, and after the closing prayer the company will sit on. Should the preacher give an additional word, or does it give the opportunity for others to pray in relation to the distinct power of the Spirit which is felt at that moment?
J.T. I would like to hear how Paul did the thing. I think if we count on the preaching, God will bless the word. It is a question of *the word*, "Preach the word", it says. I am very doubtful about carrying on certain services after the preaching is over. If we have been invited to preach the gospel, then we should preach it; but carrying on after that is questionable, to my mind.
P.L. It says, after the preaching at Athens, "Thus Paul went out of their midst", @Acts 17: 33.
J.T. Very good. That is the idea. Why should we continue on with after-services? I am very doubtful about it. We may think we get results but I think the results that stand are by the word of God, "Preach the word".
Eu.R. If there has been power with the word, that will remain with souls.
J.T. Quite so.
J.T.Jr. When Peter's preaching in @Acts 2 was finished, then the conviction evidently came amongst the hearers, and they turned to Peter and the other apostles and asked what to do. Peter's preaching is therefore a model as well as Paul's.
J.R.U.B. Would it be right for a servant, after completing the service, to leave souls to the local brethren who are there to help?
J.T. Well, there is considerable question about that, I think we should go back to the example that Peter set, and that we are just reminded of. That is to say, first of all, he preached, and preached wonderfully, and at length; he presented the truth, standing up with the eleven, we are told. That is
{335}
another thing, that if we are preaching in the open, we should have all the witnesses we can get with us to confirm what we are saying, and then the next thing is, those who were convicted said to Peter and the other apostles, not to Peter only but to Peter *and the other apostles*, "Men and brethren, what shall we do?" and Peter replies, "Repent, and be baptised every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit", and so forth; @Acts 2: 38, I believe that is the order of the thing. It is a question of the continuance of the preaching, the insistence of it; the preaching of the word, so that people should be definitely presented with the truth of the gospel. It is not simply asking them, 'Are you saved?' and all that, and singing hymns; I doubt very much the importance or point of it. It is a question of the truth. "Preach the word".
E.C.M. It speaks in Mark about the Lord working with them. Do we see something of that here in this chapter 16?
J.T. Quite so. If the Lord does not do the work there will not be anything done. At the same time He uses His servants, and they are to know what to do, following how He did the thing, and how Paul did it. So that the great stress is on the *word*, the preaching of the word.
R.H. Is it suitable for sisters to accompany those who preach in the open air?
J.T. Quite suitable; they confirm what is said.
J.E.B. "The Lord gives the word: great the host of the publishers", @Psalm 68: 11. The word *publishers* is in the feminine.
J.T. Very good.
Rem. I am glad you have stressed that. One has felt sometimes that the open-air preaching would be much more effective if there were more witnesses.
{336}
J.T. I am sure what you say is right. The more witnesses the better. There were eleven who stood up with Peter. It says, "Peter, standing up with the eleven", and that is a principle. So that the more witnesses we have, the more we may hope for results. But then as to the indoor preaching, and, of course, we are including that in what we are saying, we must not be dismayed or discouraged because the results are so little, because even if there is only one that is saved, it is worth the while, one sinner that repenteth. There is joy in heaven, showing that heaven is in accord with all that is going on, and there is joy there over one sinner that repenteth.
Ques. Would the great thing be to have the word faithfully preached and leave results with God?
J.T. Well, quite. If we can move about and ask souls as to the truth, good and well; the more witnesses we have the better.
Ques. Is the character of the preaching in the open air different from what it is in the halls?
J.T. There cannot be much difference. It is preaching the gospel, that is the point; the preaching of the gospel or the preaching of the word, I think the preaching of the word now is a more suitable expression. In a day of small things, it is more suitable to carry on what Paul says to Timothy, "Preach the word". We have changed our notices in some places to that effect.
Ques. Would you say the arranging of an open-air preaching lies with a gifted man, or gifted men, rather than a meeting arranging to have open-air preaching?
J.T. Well, I think that is right. It would be much more effective and more a testimony, if someone is there able to preach, because preaching is according to being sent. "How shall they preach unless they have been sent?" @Romans 10: 15. If we are not sent we have no power to preach, no
{337}
authority to preach. Therefore if we can get a brother with ability to preach in the open air, good; we may hope for something.
F.J.F. The Lord did a lot of individual work, did He not, too; speaking to one soul?
J.T. Quite so. Very good.
L.E.S. Does not Paul furnish a model in the next chapter, at Mars Hill?
J.T. Yes. He secured two people, did he not?
L.E.S. Yes, a man and a woman.
J.T. Very good. That is a good matter; to get a man and a woman is something done. The position, of course, was very important, in the outward sense, Mars Hill, but there were a man and a woman as the result and that was something.
W.B.H. "And others with them".
J.T. Just so.
W.B.H. Would that contribute to the thought of the assembly, the man and the woman?
J.T. Very good; it is assembly material, and, as has just been remarked, "others with them".
E.H. In the singing and the praising there seems to have been no result with the prisoners; the jailor was moved by the earthquake.
J.T. Quite so; but still, there was something for God in the singing and the prayers too, and that is a prime matter. The earthquake affected the man, but that was not all; the earthquake was only a sign. The testimony really was what Paul and Silas said to him. It says, "the jailor being awakened out of his sleep, and seeing the doors of the prison opened, having drawn a sword was going to kill himself, thinking the prisoners had fled. But Paul called out with a loud voice, saying, Do thyself no harm, for we are all here. And having asked for lights, he rushed in, and, trembling, fell down before Paul and Silas. And leading them out said. Sirs, what must I do that I may be saved? And they said, Believe
{338}
on the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house".
Now we are to notice all these items; first of all, Paul cried with a loud voice, he was sincere in the thing. The earthquake did its own work, it was a sign. That is what that was; it was a sign of power; but the words of Paul were, "Do thyself no harm". That was grace. It was pure grace and showed that he was sympathetic with the man, "Do thyself no harm, for we are all here". They had not fled; they did not want to rush away, to get out of his way; they just were there. They were conscious that they were in the Lord's service, and would behave properly in it. Then he asked for lights. Now notice, he does not ask for *a* light. That has often been pointed out, but there are lights, more than one light. There might thus be an opportunity for more than one brother to enlighten him, and there were two. Then the next thing is, he leads them out and said, "Sirs". Notice, he is respectful to them, although they were his prisoners, "What must I do that I may be saved?" And then they said to him, "Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house". The pronoun *thou* shows how intent they were to get at his soul, to get at the man himself. It is "thou and thy house". So that in result the man is thoroughly in line with those that are seeking to serve the Lord in the matter. He is thoroughly in line, and, of course, he would be, for it would be in Paul and Silas mind that he might become part of the assembly; he is assembly material.
Ques. While the earthquake had had its part, is the thought really that they were secured by the word?
J.T. Secured too by the sympathies of the servants when they said, "Do thyself no harm". It shows that there was sympathy there.
{339}
W.B.H. Would those men in that way exemplify what salvation is?
J.T. Quite so. He would come into the circle of salvation.
J.S.E. Is there need for a little more of this feature of sympathy when we are preaching? It is a great matter to get down to people where they are, sympathising with them, rather than classifying them apart from ourselves.
J.T. Quite so. Paul and Silas were not thinking of themselves; they were thinking of the jailor. "Do thyself no harm". They have sympathy with him.
E.T.S. Do you think Paul learnt that from the Lord Jesus in the way He spoke to him, saying, "It is hard for thee to kick against goads"? @Acts 26: 14. Would that be grace there?
J.T. Very good. And again, another thing about Paul is, that he had to go to the city and be told what to do. They told the jailor what to do here. First they said, "Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house. And they spoke to him the word of the Lord". It does not say what word it was, or how much, but it was the word of the Lord. It was what he needed to do to be saved. And so we may proceed now to see what he did, "And he took them the same hour of the night and washed them from their stripes; and was baptised, he and all his straightway. And having brought them into his house he laid the table for them". That is to say he is now in accord with Lydia, in that his house is hospitable too, "He laid the table for them, and rejoiced with all his house, having believed in God". So that it is a clear case of a complete work-a fine piece of work finished. Many times things are not finished, but this is a fine piece of work finished.
F.C.H. Would "believing in God" have the sense that the man realised that God was presented to him
{340}
in a Man, and would it also go on to the greatness of the fact that the very Man in whom God was presented to him was none less than God?
J.T. Very good.
Ques. Should brothers know how to lay the table?
J.T. It was very good that he could do it. We spoke yesterday about Aeneas; he was to make his bed for himself; and why should not a man know how to lay the table? I am sure there are very few brothers here now, who do not, because help is scarce. It is hard to get help and I suppose all of us know something about laying the table, if we invite a brother to our house, to lay the table for him. It is the idea of a man being effective in this sense, that he desires to be hospitable to those to whom he owes so much, that is to say, to the servants of the Lord; and we owe much to all the servants of the Lord.
H.B-n. So that that household became a real support to the testimony?
J.T. That is the idea. And so it goes on, "And when it was day, the praetors sent the lictors, saying, Let those men go. And the jailor reported these words to Paul", and so forth. And then it says, "and having brought them out, asked them to go out of the city". Then it says, "having gone out of the prison, they came to Lydia". We now come back to the real sister here in the place, the one that characterised the whole place. Her heart had been opened by the Lord to attend to the things spoken by Paul, and now we have in verse 40, "having gone out of the prison, they came to Lydia; and having seen the brethren, they exhorted them and went away". Now, someone was saying, what shall we do after? Well, Paul and Silas went away. The time had come for them to go away, and they went
{341}
away. But then they came to Lydia; they had that in mind.
F.J.F. Would these households be like the garrisons that David put throughout all the land of Syria? It says in @2 Samuel 8: 5, "And the Syrians of Damascus came to help Hadadezer king of Zobah, and David smote of the Syrians twenty-two thousand men. And David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus; and the Syrians became servants to David, and brought gifts. And Jehovah preserved David whithersoever he went".
J.T. Just so. That is a beautiful passage; it is a gospel passage. The garrisons would be like Lydia's house.
{342}
THE SERVICE OF GOD AND THE LORD'S SUPPER (1)
@1 Corinthians 11: 17 - 34; @1 Corinthians 12: 1 - 12
J.T. I was thinking of the Lord's supper and the relation in which it stands to the Holy Spirit. It will be observed that the introduction of the Lord's supper here is accompanied by the question of headship in the early part of the chapter, and then the question of the Spirit in chapter 12. These two thoughts should therefore occupy us a little, especially the twelfth chapter; that is to say, the relation of the Spirit in the celebration of the Lord's supper and what part He has in it. In the first place, however, as we have remarked, the idea of headship is seen in chapter 11, beginning with the word, "I wish you to know that the Christ is the head of every man, but woman's head is the man, and the Christ's head God". The question of the covering of the head is thus treated in the early part of chapter 11 prior to the introduction of the Lord's supper. It is as if the dress of sisters (brothers and sisters, but especially sisters) is in mind, and that there should be seemliness in such. There should be deference to the man, and the man to Christ, and Christ to God; so it is the order of these things that is seen in the first part of the chapter, then the Lord's supper following, and then the Spirit in chapter 12. It is thought that we may perhaps look at this part of the subject now, and, in the evening, some sections from the second epistle.
J.F.G. Is it important that this matter of the covering and the principle of headship should be understood by us? Is it suggested here in view of taking the Supper?
J.T. Yes, quite. That is the setting of it. Then the Spirit coming in all through, to give power to
{343}
the celebration of the Lord's supper, because it leads to the whole service of God.
J.P.H. Would you say a word to distinguish the matter of covering in verse 5 from the authority on her head in verse 10? The brethren would be glad of help about that.
J.T. Verse 5 is, "Every woman praying or prophesying with her head uncovered puts her own head to shame; for it is one and the same as a shaved woman"; and verse 10 says, "Therefore ought the woman to have authority"; that is, the word is "authority", "on her head, on account of the angels". It shows that the presence of angels is in mind in view of all this because they are ministering servants sent out for ministry on account of us, as heirs of salvation, and clearly they have a part in the service that we have now in mind.
J.P.H. Is it, or is it not, the same kind of covering that is referred to in each verse, or is the covering in verse 5 more complete than in verse 10?
J.T. In verse 10 what is alluded to is authority, power in the sense of authority. That is to say there is the recognition that there is one above the woman, there is a power or authority above her; whereas in praying and prophesying it is to show respect for order. It is a question of what is seemly in woman's clothing, and especially her head covering. The same idea is attached to the man as to his head being uncovered, but the stress, undoubtedly, is on the sisters, or women rather. The man and woman are the principal theme really in the mind of the Spirit in this part of the chapter.
Rem. So that in the assembly the angels see God's order in creation fully recovered.
J.T. Just so. God's order in creation.
Ques. I was thinking of the relative place of the man and the woman, and how it is so much denied in the world. Is it an object lesson for the angels
{344}
to see that fully recognised, in those who form the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. The assembly is really the greatest family, and it is therefore of supreme importance that there should be no disorder or irregularity in the dress of our sisters, and of the brothers too, especially in the assembly, because that is the point. It comes into the great matter of the Lord's supper, which we have from verse 17 onwards.
J.T-r. Would you say a little further what you have in mind as to the headship of Christ at the Supper?
J.T. There is the divine order beginning with God Himself, and then descending to Christ and then to the man and then to the woman; it is all a question of order. It has often been remarked that the order of creation is in mind. It is a question of what God would bring into it, and how the assembly has part in all that, and how it reflects the mind of God and the order that He will have in His service. It may seem trivial to some minds, but it is remarkable the place that headship has here in this chapter. Then we have the place the Spirit has following on the introduction of the Lord's supper, and power is in mind. It may be mere religious order and practice, but the point is that in the presence of the Spirit there is power.
W.C. Had you in mind that the two passages would run parallel? What is actually done in connection with the remembrance of the Lord, and then the Spirit as the power in relation to it?
J.T. I would say that.
J.P. Is the literal covering referred to a token of the spirit of subjection that the Lord desires to see in His saints in view of the Supper?
J.T. Quite so. It might be well read with @Ephesians 5, only this passage in Corinthians is the
{345}
one that is devoted specially to the *order* of the Lord's supper.
Ques. Do you mean that those in the Corinthian position would be governed by the light of what comes out in Ephesians, that the assembly is subjected to the Christ?
J.T. That is what I would say. As I said, it may be trivial to some minds, but God is pleased to give considerable space to it, and it should be observed.
F.J.F. Would there be any suggestion of the Spirit, as typified by Eliezer, preparing the woman for the meeting of Isaac? I was thinking of the Lord coming in at the Supper and the Spirit having everything in order. The woman, as Rebecca, is fitted for the meeting.
J.T. Just so. So that in @Genesis 24, Isaac observes the camels, which would mean the power by which the saints are carried. Then another thing is the idea of remembrance which is in the Lord's mind. It is evidently the first thought in view of the service of God. It is not a question of ministry or preaching or teaching, but the order of the Supper. It refers to the Lord's own affections and His desires to be remembered. This do *for the calling of Me to mind*, He says, for that is the force of the words He uses.
Rem. And that is said in relation to both the emblems.
J.T. Just so. "In like manner also the cup"; it is only one cup. A long time ago we used to have several cups, but the Lord has helped us to reduce the idea to the primary institution; that is, one bread and one cup.
J.T-r. Would these thoughts you are dwelling on help us as to the order of procedure at the Supper? I wondered if you had anything in mind
{346}
as to addressing the Lord, and how and when the Spirit might come in.
J.T. The first thing to note is that it is for the Lord Himself. It is not God's supper nor the Spirit's supper; it is the Lord's supper. If the Spirit comes in, it is to *augment* what is in the Lord's mind, because it is a question of what is in His mind and what the saints are to Him. It is His assembly.
Ques. So that what is for the Lord is rendered to Him in spiritual power?
J.T. Quite so. Spiritual power is the great feature in the service of God. It is not mere ritualism; it is spiritual power, but nevertheless there is order. The order of the service is not given in chapter 10, where the cup is mentioned first, but the order is according to this chapter, the bread and the cup. It says, "The Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you: this do in remembrance of me". So that I would like to get clear what our brother has in his mind as to the order, for the sake of all of us.
J.T-r. I am only feeling the need of help. If the Spirit is with us, as we so blessedly know, could we enquire what part He takes?
J.T. Well, it is what we do first, for the saints begin the service. It is not the Spirit, but the saints. The brethren come together to break bread on the first day of the week, that is what is in mind as coming together, and, of course, we should do it. It is an act that is well known and it should be done, and done immediately.
P.L. And as gathered in body feelings would that furnish the Spirit scope in His augmenting service?
J.T. Quite so. So that the sisters and brothers would fall into line, as it were, for we are all on the same level in the Lord's supper. The sisters are to learn in silence, of course, in the assembly, but they
{347}
are priests as well as the brothers. While the brothers have to take the lead, the sisters are priests in the same way as the brothers, and therefore should be in line. Let us see to ourselves that we act in a seemly and a holy way, in all that is done.
J.P. Are the emblems to be to our minds as a source of power in our souls for the concentration of our thoughts and affections upon the Lord Himself as calling Him to mind?
J.T. Quite so. We could not have the Lord's supper without the emblems. We do have a service at sea occasionally, but we leave the emblems out. It is not properly the Lord's supper, although there may be help in it. We could not have the Lord's supper without the saints in a locality and without the emblems.
E.B.McC. Do you find it joyous to address a few words to the Spirit before speaking to the Lord on the Lord's day morning, because of His great work in bringing forward the assembly?
J.T. Well, it is Christ's assembly, I do not see that we should be specially concerned about saying a few words to the Spirit, because it is a question of the assembly, and the service of God being worked out in the assembly. Of course, it might be quite right if we could say a few words which would be helpful *to the saints*, but I do not know that I have ever known it to be the case. I think the thing is to think first of all of the Lord. It says, "The first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread", @Acts 20: 7. They came together; it was their action; it was to be done by them.
P.A.F. Do we not proceed as giving place to the Spirit as power with us, yet concentrating on the Lord?
J.T. I think the saints as come together are to be first thought of, because it is for them. They came together at Corinth, but the order was not
{348}
right, and the apostle could not praise them for what they were doing. He says, "It is not to eat the Lord's supper", meaning that it should be; but it was not, because of their conduct. Their conduct was not right.
Ques. Is the statement in @Acts 20 the normal thing, "We being assembled to break bread"?
J.T. Quite so. "We being assembled".
F.R.H. Could that be said of those at Corinth?
J.T. It could not be at this time, because the apostle says, in verse 17, "But in prescribing to you on this which I now enter on, I do not praise, namely, that ye come together, not for the better, but for the worse". So that it could not be said of the Corinthians, and that is why the apostle wrote as he did.
Ques. But did he not reckon that what he wrote to them would have the adjusting effect desired?
J.T. I think it did have the desired effect.
Rem. He is not urging them not to continue; he is recognising the assembly position there and adjusting them to bring them into it rightly.
J.T. He says, "When ye come together in assembly"; that is the first time you get that phrase mentioned.
Ques. Would the clothing that the servant gave to Rebecca have any bearing on what you are saying in regard of the covering on the sisters? "And the servant brought forth silver articles, and gold articles, and clothing, and he gave them to Rebecca; and he gave to her brother, and to her mother, precious things", @Genesis 24: 53.
J.T. Yes, I would say that. He is a type of the Spirit, and what he did is to be regarded in that light. That, of course, belongs to the next part of our subject and we shall come to chapter 12 presently. Chapter 11 is the order of things that happen actually at the Lord's supper.
{349}
G.C.G. In regard to the matter of what is initial, is it not a matter of appropriating one another in love: "We, being many, are one loaf". We take account of one another primarily.
J.T. Just so, appropriating one another. In some countries they might kiss each other, but we here in England just shake hands with each other when we come together. But then we have the same kind of feelings, we think of each other, and the Lord is thinking of us too. So that if we have fifty saints in the meeting, you look around, and the question is, are they all here or are there some absent? You are glad if they are all present. So the presence of the saints is a prime thought, and the Lord knows that. It is a question of the saints first.
Rem. So that the Lord's supper is actually celebrated in an atmosphere of love amongst ourselves.
J.T. Quite so. There is a suitable atmosphere and suitable conditions too, because it says in verse 28 of our chapter, "But let a man prove himself, and thus eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. For the eater and drinker eats and drinks judgment to himself, not distinguishing the body. On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep. But if we judged ourselves, so were we not judged. But being judged, we are disciplined of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world". So that what we are as come together in assembly, on the first day of the week, is of prime importance, and it involves our dress, and our manner, and our appearance, and our attitude in every respect. It must all be according to the Lord's mind.
Ques. And our inter-relations with one another?
J.T. Just so. As our brother says, it is a question of our appropriating one another.
J.T-r. Would you say a further word about coming together in assembly, please?
{350}
J.T. Well, it is not as you would come together on a railway station, for example. There might be just the same number of people, but you are not there in order; you are not there in relation to Christ, and in relation to one another according to what we are as in the Lord's mind. There is a certain order attached to it, and therefore the importance of all that I have said as to our dress, and our attitude, and demeanour, and everything that is done. There is a certain demeanour, a certain order that the Lord approves, and we are thankful to be in it. The Spirit is then ready to take part, for of course He will assist us and support us in the service. The Spirit is here for that purpose, but I do not see that there is any great point in speaking to the Spirit at first, because His time will come. It is with the Lord we are dealing first, and with one another.
Ques. Were you saying just now that if conditions are right we should normally break bread immediately?
J.T. I would say that. It is what we have come to do. Time was when it was different. In the past many things were said and done before the bread was broken, and sometimes the box would be put down on a chair, or something, instead of on the table. There was not proper order maintained; but now there is, for God has helped us on those lines.
Eu.R. Do your remarks as to speaking to the Lord rather than to the Spirit in relation to the loaf apply equally in giving thanks for the cup?
J.T. They would. A hymn is quite in order, and usually comes first when we come together. We greet the Lord, and we greet one another too, happily and freely taking part in it together.
Ques. Do the emblems speak peculiarly of His love in giving Himself in death?
{351}
J.T. Quite so. "This is my body", He says, "which is for you". It is to be appropriated.
Rem. The words, "in remembrance of me", in relation to both the emblems make the matter a very affecting one for our hearts, because it is so personal.
J.T. Yes.
F.J.F. Is it the same as in Jude, "a love feast"?
J.T. Well, I suppose so! I prefer to say "the Lord's supper".
E.B.McC. We address the Lord in a hymn and then we speak to Him. We do not speak to the Spirit.
J.T. No, I would speak to the Lord first. You said earlier that you enjoyed the thought of speaking a few words to the Spirit? Did I understand you?
E.B.McC. That was after the hymn, of course.
Rem. It has been suggested that in view of the fact that the Spirit has served us in locating the place where the Supper is held, "a large upper room furnished", it would be in order to thank Him briefly in relation to that, and that there is warrant for this speaking to Him near the beginning of the meeting, in @Luke 22.
J.T. Perhaps it would be well to read the passage from @Luke 22, so that we can see what is in mind. Matthew and Mark and Luke all have some reference to the Lord's supper; John has not; but the one that is in mind now is @Luke 22.
J.F.G. What our brother is referring to is the man with the guest-chamber. It says. "And he said to them, Behold, as ye enter into the city a man will meet you, carrying an earthen pitcher of water; follow him into the house where he goes in; and ye shall say to the master of the house, The Teacher says to thee, Where is the guest-chamber where I may eat the passover with my disciples? And *he* will shew you a large upper room furnished: there
{352}
make ready. And having gone they found it as he had said to them; and they prepared the passover".
J.T. We are dealing with the passover there, of course, but then the Lord's supper comes in in the next section in the same chapter.
Ques. Presumably it was in that room that the Lord's supper was held?
J.T. I would say that too. But then, what do you mean further about that?
Rem. The Spirit has served us as master of the house as He served the disciples here. He showed them where it was, "a large upper room furnished", and it has been suggested that that is warrant for our thanking Him briefly, you might say, in passing.
J.T. Well, but I think the order that we proceed with is, that it is just an ordinary room, an ordinary meeting place. The spiritual side has to come in immediately, but it is what *we* do first. We come together to break bread. That is the first thing to be done. What part the Spirit will have would remain to be seen, but we come together to break bread. That is what we do. We have the order, we have chairs, we have a table, and so forth, but there is nothing more than that at the outset. It is only when the Lord takes His place, or when we begin to speak to the Lord, that we come to the spiritual side. The Lord is assumed really, in His Supper, not to be in heaven, but in the sphere of testimony. That is where He is, and He comes to us. He comes to many places, thousands of places, all over the earth. It is not a question of the Lord in heaven, but as in the sphere of testimony, and He says, 'This do for the calling of Me to mind'. There is thus a testimony in it, and we begin with that. But then, as I have said, we have to proceed to do things, and then we shall find the power of the Spirit coming
{353}
in to aid us in what we are doing, so that we do it properly and do it with grace and power.
Ques. Is it important in that way that we do not add to the order as given in Corinthians? I was thinking of how in the history of the assembly much has been built around the Supper, in what the systems have made of it, that has been false.
J.T. I think there has been a lot out of order, but God has helped us to correct that, so that I believe we have come back to the order of it according to this chapter.
Ques. If we were all, in every place, governed by what Paul says in @1 Corinthians 11, would it not greatly simplify matters and make for more directness?
J.T. Yes, it is a remarkable thing that Paul does say so much. He is the one that had the order of the assembly given to him. John does not touch it at all; Matthew, Mark and Luke do touch it, but Paul is the one from whom we are to take instructions to begin with.
Ques. Is it noteworthy in Paul that he gives the truth of the feast of unleavened bread connected with the passover in chapter 5, and says no more about it in chapter 11, as though to distinguish clearly between the two in his mind, and in ours?
J.T. Very good, I would say that fully.
J.T-r. Would you also add a word as to the Spirit coming to our aid.
J.T. Well. He does. The Lord says, "I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever". He is here to help us in all things, but, above all, in the service of God on the first day of the week. He gives effect to everything, so that there is meaning to it.
Eu.R. And your thought is that in giving thanks for both the loaf and the cup, our address would be to the Lord Himself.
{354}
J.T. Exactly.
Rem. And He would be in our minds, too, in a particular way.
J.T. Quite so.
E.B.McC. Has it not been said that we are free to go to the Spirit as we feel the Spirit is prompting us?
J.T. We are ready to go to Him at any time, for that matter, but if we feel He is prompting us, well then there is something very distinctive. But I would say the first thing in order is the saints themselves, their attitude and what we think of each other, and what we are to each other. There is love amongst us, and the Lord comes in regard of that. He comes to us, but He comes in relation to His own supper too; first the bread and then the cup.
Ques. And would you say He comes in relation to the local assembly, because we are on assembly ground when we are gathered?
J.T. Just so, it is in relation to the local assembly.
P.L. "He himself stood in their midst", @Luke 24: 36.
J.T. Yes, quite so.
Rem. The Spirit would not urge us to do anything out of order.
J.T. Of course not.
W.C. Where would the type of @Numbers 21 come in, if at all, in a practical way at the Lord's supper? "Then Israel sang this song, Rise up, well! sing unto it", @Numbers 21: 17.
J.T. That is to the Spirit; you mean singing to the Spirit? I do not think that is a matter of the Lord's supper, at all.
W.C. I said, 'if at all'. If it does come, where would it come in?
J.T. I should not like to say, because it is a question of the Lord. It is not a question of the
{355}
Spirit, nor of the Father even. It is the Lord Himself; it is the Lord's supper, 'This do for the calling of Me to mind', definitely not the Spirit, but the Lord.
Ques. Would you say that the Lord would fully reveal Himself in the giving thanks for the loaf, or would it involve the complete thought of the breaking of bread?
J.T. It is one Supper, with a dual character. The first is the bread, of course, and the second feature is the cup.
Ques. Have you not said, helpfully, that the cup augments what has already come to us in the remembrance of the Lord in the loaf?
J.T. Well, it is one Supper. That is all, just one Supper, but in two parts.
Ques. Would you amplify a little what is in your mind as to the Lord coming in from the sphere of testimony?
J.T. That is what is in mind. It is the scene where He suffered, and although we do not say He comes literally, yet He does come, according to the word, "I am coming to you", @John 14: 18. We are made to feel that He comes. It is a thing you would expect Him to do at the time of the celebration of His Supper, because it is a question of the remembrance of Himself. You would expect Him to do it.
Ques. Can we regard the Lord as near to us in that way?
J.T. Well. He comes to us, and when He comes to us He is near to us. He is in the sphere of testimony; that is the idea of it.
Ques. May I ask in regard of the earlier part of @Luke 24. The Lord evidently came there, although it does not say that He came, but that He stood in their midst. He had already served the two going to Emmaus, and Peter, so that it seems as though
{356}
He had previous contact with those who were gathered. Does that have some bearing on the local position?
J.T. Well, they went to Emmaus, of course, and He was constrained by them to go in. They, of course, would prepare, but then He took the bread and vanished from them.
Rem. I was thinking of the distinction you are making between the Lord coming from the testimonial position, and not exactly from heaven.
J.T. Well, I think it is important to see that the service of God must be in relation to the testimonial position. It begins with it, but, of course, we go on to the Father. What we are dealing with now, however, is the Lord's supper and the relation of the Spirit to it, as seen in chapter 12.
Ques. Do you mean, as to the testimonial position, that from that point of view the Lord is always here?
J.T. According to Matthew, He is always here. "Lo, I am with you alway", He says. It does not say in Matthew that He went up to heaven, and that is the assembly gospel too.
Ques. Could we have what is in your mind as to the way in which chapter 12 flows out of this?
J.T. Apparently the Lord, or the apostle, had it in mind, because of the word 'but'. "But concerning spiritual manifestations, brethren, I do not wish you to be ignorant. Ye know that when ye were of the nations ye were led away to dumb idols, in whatever way ye might be led. I give you therefore to know that no one, speaking in the power of the Spirit of God, says, Curse on Jesus; and no one can say, Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit". I think that is the normal connection with the Lord's supper, in chapter 12. We have the two expressions, "Lord Jesus", and then "Curse on Jesus", which the devil would use. It says. "No
{357}
one can say, Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit", and you feel that that is what you might expect at the Lord's supper. It is not a question of God, or the Spirit, but the Lord Himself, and I think these verses in the beginning of chapter 12 connect with the Lord's supper.
Ques. Would he have in mind what he had already said, "That the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up ..." Would he expect that the affectionate way in which he mentions that term would be continued in thanksgiving?
J.T. Just so, I think it is just beautiful to see it there. It is ornamental, so to speak.
E.B.McC. Where the apostle says, "*I* received from the Lord", would that be authoritative?
J.T. It would be. He is impressing on the Corinthians that he did receive it directly from the Lord, and that it was important for them to abide by it, and pursue the course that is indicated.
Ques. Is there some suggestion that he did not get it from the apostles?
J.T. I would think so. I think that is just the suggestion. Although the apostles had it, for we are told that they broke bread in the house, yet Paul greatly enlarged on it.
Ques. I was thinking it might elucidate for us the way in which the Supper is removed from the household setting at the beginning of Acts, and placed in the assembly by Paul's ministry. Would his having received it direct from the Lord give the authority for what was done?
J.T. It did. It ought to affect us all, and particularly where there is a desire to break bread. Of course, many young people are coming into the fellowship now, and it is a great matter that they should have the right thought as to it, and all that has to be done, because it is the one thing that is marked by ceremony, you might say, I use the word
{358}
*ceremony*, for there are certain ceremonial things to be done. At the same time it is a question of reverence.
J.T-r. Why do you think the Lord felt the night of the delivering up so plainly or feelingly?
J.T. Well, the expression is very touching, "the night in which he was delivered up", the night He was betrayed.
P.L. Does He look to the saints to reverse, in that sense, in love, the act of hatred?
J.T. Just so.
Ques. He says in the Psalms, so touchingly, "It is not an enemy that hath reproached me then could I have borne it", @Psalm 55: 12. Does that strengthen, in spiritual power in our souls, the desire to be faithful in the time of His absence?
J.T. Just so, and it is especially important that young people should know what to do. They see the elder brethren and these ought to be very cautious so that they do not set a bad example. The elder brethren should lead in everything, and when the young come in they will know what to do. It promotes reverence.
H.P.W. So that you think loyalty with the young people is a very great thing, and greatly appreciated by the Lord.
J.T. Very good. It is a great thing to keep them in loyalty to the Lord, because it is His own Supper; it is what He has instituted Himself in relation to Himself.
H.P.W. I was thinking that the Spirit helps us in that. If we desire to be loyal to Christ, do you not think the Spirit would help us immensely?
J.T. He would indeed.
H.P.W. And bring about sensitiveness of soul, as to matters such as the covering of the head, and all those things you spoke of earlier. The Spirit
{359}
would help us in that, would He not, so that we should be pleasing to the Lord.
J.T. I am sure it preserves our families too. Of course, that is a secondary thought, but it is a very important thought, that the families of the saints should be preserved. The Lord's supper is where they should learn, and get their understanding as to how to do things in the presence of God. So many young people have been lost to us, because they have not been brought up in the truth of the Lord's supper.
A.E.M-o. Would you normally refer to the Lord's sufferings at the Supper?
J.T. I would, but I should refer to them very lightly, I do not think it is a matter to be enlarged on because it is a question of the Lord Himself, and His own. It says that the twelve were with Him; everything is to be authoritative because the twelve were there and saw what He did.
C.F.I. Is it your thought here that what takes place at the beginning of chapter 12 is to be in the *power* of the Spirit, but in addition to that does the Holy Spirit have some place objectively in the service?
J.T. I would think so. The idea of the Spirit being presented objectively is distinctly in the book of Acts. He says to Peter, for instance, "*I* have sent them", and so forth; and then again, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". So that the Spirit is there actively and in authority.
Ques. You mean, in what flows out of the Supper subsequently?
J.T. Just so.
J.P.H. Would you be free to say at what stage in the service on Lord's day morning you would be free to speak to the Spirit directly, briefly and spontaneously?
{360}
J.T. Well. He is the Spirit of adoption, so it would come in particularly in the second part of the service, which is the Father's part.
P.L. Could He be addressed also as the Father's Spirit?
J.T. I think so. He is said to be that.
Ques. Do I gather that your concern is that what flows out of the Supper subsequently is contingent upon the place the Lord Jesus has with us at the time?
J.T. It is a question of the place the saints have to begin with, or the assembly; because that is the idea, the matter happens in the assembly. The Lord says He will praise the Father in it too; He praises the Father *in it*. It is thus quite clear that we have to begin on those lines. The place the Lord has in our hearts, of course, will enhance what we do and say, because we are thinking of Him as He is thinking of us, 'This do for the calling of Me to mind', He says, both in regard of the bread and in regard of the cup.
J.T-r. You referred just now to the Spirit objectively. Would that lead to a spirit of worship to Him?
J.T. Well, it would. The Spirit is God Himself, so that He is to be worshipped, of course. Anyone who denied that would deny the truth. The word is, "The name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". They are all there on that platform, but it is the same name, one name.
J.T-r. We are all desiring a little help on this great thought, feeling, as we blessedly do, the presence of the Holy Spirit in our coming together to break bread, but one would desire to reach a more conscious impression of how He moves and serves on that occasion.
J.T. Well, what has been said over and over again is true, that it is not the Spirit's supper, nor
{361}
the Father's; it is the Lord's supper. But then the Spirit and the Lord Himself would lead to the Father. He would lead to the Father, and the Spirit would support that too.
W.C. In view of the type in @Genesis 24, and the great service of the Spirit in relation to securing the assembly for Christ, would there not be something due to Him in that setting as well as subsequently in the service?
J.T. I think so. I think we ought to read @Genesis 24 more than we do, because it leads up to what we are speaking about. The Spirit typically there takes a subordinate place; that is the thing. He is Abraham's eldest servant, of course, but still he is a servant; I mean to say, he takes a subordinate place at that time. He had the assembly in mind; in fact, it says he wondered at Rebecca.
E.C.M. Does the title, Lord Spirit, link with the Lord's supper?
J.T. We shall come to that in the next meeting; for that is in the second epistle. He is called "the Lord the Spirit", there.
J.P. In verse 26 it says, "For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come". Is that the testimonial position, and what coming would you say it is? Is it the manifestation of the Lord?
J.T. It is not exactly His coming for us, but His public coming. The Lord's coming is a well-known term in Scripture, and it is His public coming, "Until he come" means His public coming.
Ques. You mean, it is the appearing, as we usually term it, and not the rapture so much?
J.T. Yes, the appearing is the word; "all who love his appearing". It says also that He "shall appear to those that look for him the second time without sin for salvation", @Hebrews 9: 28.
{362}
F.R.H. Would the spiritual manifestations be more or less private? You spoke, in connection with the Lord's coming, of what is public?
J.T. More or less private, yes. The part we shall have tomorrow (God willing) will be a private matter, but still the order of the assembly, or whatever is ministered in the Spirit, is a testimony. There is a testimony there, so that a person who is sitting behind, as we say, can see it, and it is intended for them to see it. The order of the assembly is a wonderful thing.
F.J.F. So it is sacramental as well as thanksgiving?
J.T. Just so; sacramental.
Ques. Does drinking into one Spirit have a place in the Supper? "*We* ... have all been given to drink of one Spirit".
J.T. That is just to bring about unity. It is the idea of all drinking into the same thing. The idea is to promote unity. It is one Spirit, as we sometimes sing:-
<blockquote>'One Spirit, glorious Lord! <br>O blessed, wondrous word! <br>What heav'nly light, what power divine, <br>Doth that sweet word afford!'  (`198:1)</blockquote>
Ques. Does the cup symbolise that?
J.T. Just so. It certainly does. "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of the Christ?"
Eu.R. "Baptised into one body", too. Is there a reference in that to our having partaken of the loaf?
J.T. "Baptised into one body". That would be the action of the Spirit in putting us into the body. That is what is in mind there; He puts us into the body.
{363}
Ques. Do I understand that whilst all these things have their part, what is primarily before us is the remembrance of the Lord Jesus at the Supper, and all that flows out subsequently really flows out of the manifestation of Himself in love and power?
J.T. Very good, I think it is remarkable that the Supper should be enclosed within these two great subjects, headship and the Spirit of God. That is the enclosure, and what it encloses is the Lord's supper.
K.H. You referred to the Spirit of adoption. Why is it a spirit of adoption in @Romans 8? Is it characteristic?
J.T. That is right. It is "a spirit of adoption". That is, it is characteristic.
{364}
THE SERVICE OF GOD AND THE LORD'S SUPPER (2)
@2 Corinthians 3: 1 - 18
J.T. This second epistle to the Corinthians affords much encouragement as to discipline, for the results of the discipline recorded in the first epistle are evidently quick. They are, in fact, quicker than the apostle himself had indicated. So that there seems to be an opportunity for us to take account of discipline, wherever it is needed, and not to fear to execute it, if necessary, and there will be results accordingly, as we see in the second chapter of this epistle. The apostle says in verse 3 of chapter 2, "I have written this very letter to you, that coming I may not have grief from those from whom I ought to have joy; trusting in you all that my joy is that of you all. For out of much tribulation and distress of heart I wrote to you, with many tears; not that ye may be grieved, but that ye may know the love which I have very abundantly towards you. But if any one has grieved, he has grieved, not me, but in part (that I may not overcharge you) all of you. Sufficient to such a one is this rebuke which has been inflicted by the many; so that on the contrary ye should rather shew grace and encourage, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with excessive grief. Wherefore I exhort you to assure him of your love. For to this end also I have written, that I might know, by putting you to the test, if as to everything ye are obedient. But to whom ye forgive anything, *I* also; for *I* also, what I have forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, it is for your sakes in the person of Christ; that we might not have Satan get an advantage against us, for we are not ignorant of *his* thoughts". Discipline comes in
{365}
here in a peculiar way, as, perhaps, on the one hand defeating the devil in his efforts, and, on the other hand, to the restoring of an erring one and that quickly.
P.L. Does that attach to the principle of the valley of Achor becoming a door of hope? It is where the discipline was exercised.
J.T. Just so. The valley of Achor becomes a door of hope, so that we may peruse this third chapter with a view to coming to the glory of the Lord, and seeing how it comes into the meeting on the first day of the week; "looking on the glory of the Lord". What we shall see, I believe, is the interchange of thought as to the divine Persons and how They may be referred to interchangeably. Here the Spirit is called the Lord, and in James the Father is called Lord too, but the Lord Jesus is the only One said to be *made* Lord. So that when we refer to the Lord, we rightly refer to the Lord Jesus. But the Father is Lord too, and the Spirit is Lord, showing how the idea of authority enters into all these matters, especially discipline.
Eu.R. What is the bearing of "the Lord is the Spirit"?
J.T. Well, just that the title attaches to Him. In verse 16 we have, "But when it shall turn to the Lord, the veil is taken away. Now the Lord is the Spirit", and then again, "but where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". So that there is clearly an interchange of thought as to the word *Lord*, and it refers to the Spirit here. We have to take account of that, and it will prove a greater advantage than we have understood, if we discern that something is directly of the Spirit and that the Spirit will deal with it. In the beginning of the chapter it is a question of letters of commendation, and the apostle alludes to it as if the Corinthians might have suggested that he needed one; but they were his letter,
{366}
written in his heart, "known and read of all men". It is as if it was universal so that wherever he went he spoke well of the Corinthians, which is a good sign. It is a good sign if a brother speaks well of the saints; speaks as well as he can of them. I should think that Paul must have gloried in the work at Corinth, and spoke of it wherever he went.
Rem. Their very place in christianity was a proof of his apostleship.
J.T. Of course, there is apt to be a good deal of criticism of the dear brethren who serve the Lord, but I think people should be warned not to be critical of those who are serving. There may be reason for it, but certainly not to be unduly critical, for they deserve our care.
S.C.T. And our prayers.
J.T. Quite so, I have not known a time in which there has been so much prayer, at a given time, as there has been over the last few months. God has owned it too in a remarkable way. I believe there has been need of adjustment too, in customs that have been pursued and perhaps there is meant to be attention paid to any corrections that the Lord is giving, especially as to young people and as to the time of their coming into fellowship, so to speak, and breaking bread.
J.F.G. What have you in mind there?
J.T. The young people, I think, are kept too long. When they wish to break bread they are sometimes held back too much.
P.L. Have we some thought a little in line with it in @Ezekiel 16: 8, "thy time was the time of love". While Jerusalem, of course, is in mind, could we apply that in that sense? "I said unto thee, in thy blood, Live! I caused thee to multiply". Would that be a right attitude towards the young?
J.T. "The time of love", just so. They should not be allowed to wait unduly through our saying
{367}
they are too young, because you can never tell what the Spirit of God may do. We know that there have been persons very young brought into the circle of fellowship, and have gone on in it too.
S.C.T. Is it not a great preservation to them to be associated with the saints in love?
J.T. They are not to be regarded as sitting outside, or sitting back. Young children ought to sit with their parents.
F.J.F. When the apostle baptised the household of the jailor, was that in view of them all being in the fellowship?
J.T. I would think so.
F.J.F. And does the Lord desire all the family to be remembering Him?
J.T. Of course He does. Marriage is in the Lord, and children, because they are in the Lord and the Lord claims them, should be held for Him. They should be held for the assembly.
J.P.H. Would you mind saying what you would personally look for in a young person, so that he or she might be received?
J.T. I would say a good sign is that they keep with the elder brethren. They are not seeking younger ones because they are young. It is much healthier to keep as much as possible with the elder brethren. Young people are apt to become clannish. If they seek the company of the elder brethren it is an evidence of the operations of the Spirit.
A.M. That is a test to the elder brethren themselves, that they may be attractive.
J.T. Yes.
P.L. Jacob dwelling in tents with his father and grandfather. Would that help?
J.T. It was Abraham that did that, "Having dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob".
P.L. That is what I mean, but that would bring Jacob in, would it not?
{368}
J.T. Quite so, and Abraham was the great father.
Rem. It says, "Samuel ministered before Jehovah, a boy girded with a linen ephod", @1 Samuel 2: 18. Is that what you referred to as the young coming in?
J.T. Very good. "Girded with a linen ephod". He was taken care of by his mother, for she brought him a coat every year. But as to Abraham, he is a great father; he is father of a multitude eventually. There is thus good encouragement to bring the young in and to increase their number.
J.T-r. Had you some thought to link this chapter up with the thought of announcing the Lord's death till He come?
J.T. Yes, I suggested this chapter to link on with what we had this afternoon, namely, the eleventh chapter of the first epistle.
J.T-r. I believe you remarked something about the testimonial side, too, did you not? Are you linking up the announcement of the Lord's death with these letters of commendation, and their being the epistle of Christ, and so on?
J.T. Quite so. "Do we begin again to commend ourselves?" he says, "or do we need, as some, commendatory letters to you, or commendatory from you? *Ye* are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men", showing how widely he spoke of them. It would indicate that the ministers are to be prone to speak well of the saints, and, on the other hand, the saints are to be prone to respect the elder brethren, and especially those who are serving them, and ministering food to them.
J.T-r. In connection with the letters of commendation, and the beautiful way the apostle could speak of the Corinthian saints, is there an application to ourselves that we, as having partaken of the Lord's supper, should carry an impression of that precious death and Himself as we move about amongst men?
{369}
J.T. Quite so. The celebration of the Lord's supper seems to be the very centre of things in the divine mind. It is never called any supper but the Lord's. It is not the Spirit's supper, nor the Father's, but it is the Lord's supper, and He would come into it in due time. The Spirit would come into the service in due time, and the Father would come into it in due time, but it is the Lord's supper we begin with.
E.B.McC. Referring to the competent ministers of the new covenant, would the teaching help the young people? It says, "not of letter, but of spirit". You were saying we should be more in the spirit of it.
J.T. Well, quite so.
Ques. Would you say a word on verse 3: "Being manifested to be Christ's epistle ministered by us, written, not with ink, but the Spirit of the living God"?
J.T. I should think the apostle is referring to his own service, and it is a very strong expression. "Being manifested to be Christ's epistle ministered by us, written, not with ink, but the Spirit of the living God". It is a very strong expression, and then again. "Not on stone tables", referring to the law, "but on fleshy tables of the heart".
Rem. I wondered whether it would bear on the character of Paul's ministry at Corinth, as he speaks of it "in demonstration of the Spirit and of power", and whether that sets the standard for all ministry, although this would be particularly apostolic.
J.T. Quite so. So that we have an example in him, Paul, specially raised up for that purpose. It was evidently not an after-thought, but it was in the Lord's mind. He came in long after the twelve, clearly to fill out the idea of the assembly. He says it was given to him "to complete the word of God", @Colossians 1: 25.
{370}
W.C. You spoke just now of beholding the glory of the Lord on the first day of the week, would you say a little more as to that?
J.T. I think it refers to the divine service, "*We* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". I believe this is the divine service par excellence; the first day of the week is where the service of God begins and finishes, as it were, but we begin with the Lord's supper.
Ques. Does the glory of the Lord, in your mind, stand related to the glory of the Lord Jesus?
J.T. That is what I was just remarking. It is remarkable the phraseology you get at the end of the chapter. So that it says, "But when it shall turn to the Lord", that is to say Israel in the future, "the veil is taken away", that is the hope of Israel, but then it says, "Now the Lord is the Spirit, but where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. But *we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". So that it seems to me the Spirit is called the Lord there two or three times. The allusion is to our being able to discern the Spirit when things have to be done; whether it is the Spirit that has to do them or the Lord Himself. So the thing that has become very prominent in many minds is the discerning of the divine Persons when They speak; which One it is, and to be able to see why it is either the Father or the Son or the Holy Spirit.
J.T-r. Just glancing back to the thought of writing on the heart, is that the present service of the Holy Spirit to us, or is it in the past tense?
J.T. "*Ye* are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men, being manifested to be
{371}
Christ's epistle ministered by us, written, not with ink, but the Spirit of the living God". So that it was a current thing, at that time any way, in the apostle's ministry, and, of course, we could transfer that now to ourselves. We have to take up Scripture and use it as it can be used, giving it a present application.
J.T-r. "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit", @Romans 5: 5. Has it any link with that at all, do you think?
J.T. Quite so! It is a current thing all the time. The Spirit has been here all these centuries, and that is the sort of service He is rendering. He is shedding the love of God abroad in our hearts; it is by the Holy Spirit.
Ques. Why, in this third verse, is the Spirit alluded to as the "Spirit of the living God"?
J.T. It is a strong expression, as we were saying. It is the idea of life carried into it; "the living God".
F.J.F. Is not the term 'living' connected with all three divine Persons? "The living Father", "the Son of the living God" and here "the Spirit of the living God".
J.T. Just so. It shows the stress given to life as applied to all divine Persons.
Ques. In Timothy the assembly is called "the assembly of the living God". Would that be the result?
J.T. Quite so.
H.P.W. Do you think that the whole idea of writing is intended to emphasise that it should be legible by all? The question is thus, Is it Christ's writing on our hearts? Is it not a very great thing that it should be read and be intelligible to all?
J.T. Quite so. It should be legible, as you say. The youngest believers in the family are to be taught how to read the Scriptures spiritually, because the Holy Scriptures are their inheritance. Paul says to Timothy, "From a child thou hast known the sacred letters", @2 Timothy 3: 15.
{372}
There may be weakness on those lines, and I believe there is generally, but parents should take up things. We used to have Sunday Schools, but we do not have them any more; at the same time children have to be taught and parents ought to do the teaching. They ought to carry the Spirit of the truth into the house, and the children should drink into it.
H.P.W. Do you think that the writing of the Spirit of the living God can be read easily? It carries its own features and its own power.
J.T. I am sure that is right.
H.P.W. It speaks about "not with ink". We understand, do we not, that the idea of our writing in ink is that it shall be easily legible, but when the Spirit of God writes in our hearts, it is legible.
J.T. Yes, quite so. That is helpful.
J.T-r. Do you connect this writing, in the early part of the chapter, with looking on the glory of the Lord at the end?
J.T. That is the great end, I should think, that comes into the Lord's supper on the first day of the week. I believe the first day of the week is in mind in all this, because it is the time of the service of God. It was the first day of the week, according to @Acts 20, when it says, "We being assembled to break bread". But then it says Paul discoursed for a long time, which means that there must have been something to be done and corrected in the town.
W.S.S. There would be no limit to the thought of the glory of the Lord in this last verse?
J.T. Well, it is the glory of a divine Person, of course; but it is the Lord, and I believe the Spirit is in mind, the active Person of the Deity as making it effective. He is the active Person who is here in the assembly. I do not say here on earth, but in the assembly, for that is the area or region where the Spirit is active.
{373}
W.C. So that the letters of commendation are part of the glory. They describe the work of the Spirit in the saints?
J.T. Quite so. Therefore we ought perhaps not to be too liberal with our commendations of brethren. All may not deserve the letters that we hear read. We ought to be careful that what we say is just the truth.
P.A.F. Did I understand you to say you do not look upon the Spirit exactly as being on earth, but in the assembly?
J.T. He is in the assembly, that is where He is.
P.L. "A habitation of God in the Spirit", @Ephesians 2: 22.
J.T. Quite so. That is good.
D.J.M. Would "the same image" suggest that we are like the Lord, and that there is a sameness about the saints; they are like one another?
J.T. I would think so. Why not! He is our Head; He is our Leader; He is a divine Person, and He is a quickening Spirit. The Lord is a quickening Spirit.
Ques. Are you connecting beholding the glory of the Lord with our occupation following the Lord coming in at the Supper?
J.T. That is what I believe develops out of the Supper. The Lord comes in, and, of course, the fact that He does come in is the leading thought. It is not exactly that He comes in from heaven, but that He is here in the sphere of testimony, and He comes in accordingly, and sees and values that we are remembering Him. I think it is proper to speak of Him in that way. He is the One who suffered, and died, but the thought of being in heaven is, as it were, another line of things. It is a question of the Lord being with us here, where He has been and where He suffered, and now where He is remembered. We remember Him; and He values our remembering Him.
{374}
A.T.G. Does the thought that the Spirit quickens in this chapter have peculiar force at the particular point in the service that we are now referring to?
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Would the glory of the Lord be over against the suffering that is indicated in the Supper itself?
J.T. I would think so. There is a word that we have been speaking of elsewhere, that bears on what we are saying. It says in @Romans 8: 11, "But if the Spirit of him that has raised up Jesus from among the dead dwell in you, he that has raised up Christ from among the dead shall quicken your mortal bodies also on account of his Spirit which dwells in you". That is to say the quickening of our mortal bodies is preliminary to our being caught up; what we call the rapture. I should be glad if the brethren would comment on that, as to whether they agree, but that is what I believe is the truth, that you must have a preliminary action, by the Spirit, to prepare us for being caught up. The Lord Himself shall descend from heaven, but the Spirit quickens us.
E.C.M. Is the thought of quickening in view of going from glory to glory?
J.T. Well, I would connect "glory to glory" with the service of God. From the beginning to the end of it is "from glory to glory". The fact of the matter is that the first day of the week is a day of glory. God has ordered it so that we can be together and proceed on those lines, "from glory to glory".
Ques. Do you mean that there is a certain progression to be expected?
J.T. I do.
Ques. Do you think the Spirit is the Author or Source of that progression?
J.T. Well, quite so. At the same time the Lord is Head, properly speaking. He is Head of the assembly.
{375}
F.R.H. Would you say a little as to what is meant by "the ministry of the Spirit"?
J.T. It is in contrast to something else. "But if the ministry of death, in letters, graven in stones, began with glory, so that the children of Israel could not fix their eyes on the face of Moses, on account of the glory of his face, a glory which is annulled"; now there is the contrast-"how shall not rather the ministry of the Spirit subsist in glory?" The ministry of the Spirit and what subsists in glory is the contrast to Sinai. It may, of course, be by the gifts or the like, but it is the ministry of the Spirit, nevertheless, and it subsists in glory.
J.S.E. Is all this intended to enhance the assembly as the greatest possibility in glory on the earth at the present time? I was connecting in my mind the word, "we all partake of that one loaf", and here, "*we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord". I wondered if the two expressions "we all" would not serve to enhance the greatness and uniqueness of the assembly.
J.T. Quite so. The "we all" alludes to the end of the meeting rather than the beginning, "*We* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory". I believe that is the end, so to speak.
A.M. Is there a certain correspondence between the coming of the Lord for us at the rapture, and His coming to us now and our being in a sense rapt away or transformed in the power of the Spirit?
J.T. Well, quite so, if we do not assume too much. It is very likely we never realise the idea of being rapt away. I doubt whether any one of us has.
A.M. Well, I meant the idea of change, change of place. I think you have used that expression.
J.T. Yes, I have. It is a question of what comes in, and what is possible after the breaking of bread, the change of state and place. Ephesians contemplates
{376}
our being raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies. That is place, but the change of state precedes that, that is to say the working of the Spirit in the heart.
J.T-r. Thinking of the reference again, "The glory of the Lord", is it a comprehensive thought of the glory or does it refer to some particular phase of it?
J.T. I think, as we were saying, the Lord's supper is in mind and what comes out of it. We behold the glory of the Lord. The Spirit is brought into that, and that is a thing to be noticed. The Lord is the Spirit so that we have the interchange of the divine Persons, how it can be discerned in what takes place in the assembly.
J.P.H. Is the service of God helped greatly as the Spirit of God has His right place in our minds in His greatness? It says, "Now the Lord is the Spirit", and then it says, "But where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". I wondered if it was in your mind that as we give the Spirit all that is due to Him, the service of God will be enriched and great liberty brought into it.
J.T. I think that is just what is happening. We have been denying Him a great deal, but He is now coming into what belongs to Him. I believe this passage is peculiarly that; "the Lord the Spirit". "The Lord is the Spirit", it says.
F.J.F. Would that bring about a contrast to what is in the Old Testament, where the priests could not minister because of the glory that had come into the house?
J.T. Quite so. There are several contrasts here in this same passage, between the present time and Sinai.
H.P.W. You made a reference to preliminary work. Is the Spirit going on with that in each one of us now, before actually the rapture takes place?
{377}
J.T. Well, I do not say it is with each one of us now. I believe it is an occurrence according to 1 Thessalonians, chapter 4, "The Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first". Then we shall be caught up to be with the Lord, but there is not a word about quickening. The quickening is by the Spirit, according to @Romans 8: 11.
H.P.W. Do I understand also you are linking it on with this passage in @2 Corinthians 3, "*we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit"?
J.T. That is what I understand. What do you say about it?
H.P.W. I am wondering about @Philippians 3; it speaks about "*our* commonwealth has its existence in the heavens, from which also we await the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour, who shall transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory, according to the working of the power which he has even to subdue all things to himself". I was wondering whether you are linking the service of the Spirit with that.
J.T. I think that great passage in @Philippians 3 must include the work of the Spirit.
H.P.W. So that really the Spirit and the Lord Jesus are working hand-in-hand in the matter.
J.T. That is exactly what I understand. It is glorious, do you not think so?
H.P.W. I think it is a wonderful thought. It makes you adore Him for what He is doing for us and in us, so as to prepare us actually to see the Lord and receive Him.
J.T. Quite so. What a wonderful time it will be! We shall be all here together, I take it, however
{378}
short a moment. The Spirit will change us and the Lord will take us up, and "thus we shall be always with the Lord". That is how it is put.
Ques. Does not the passage in Corinthians show that a change in all is imperative? Nothing is said about being changed in Thessalonians. It just says, "*We*, the living ... shall be caught up"; but in Corinthians it says, "We shall not all fall asleep, but we shall all be changed, in an instant, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet; for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and *we* shall be changed". Does not that mean that the change involves incorruptibility?
J.T. Quite so. But the change in @Romans 8 is of our *mortal* bodies; not our dead bodies. That, I think, is a thing to be noted.
Rem. I was thinking that the *all* would include both dead and living, the dead will need to take on something, and the living need to be changed just as much.
J.T. Yes, the Lord Himself shall raise the dead-"the dead in Christ shall rise first". But as regards the change of the living, the mortal, it is the Spirit that does that according to @Romans 8: 11.
G.C.G. Would that appear to be the final direct action of the Spirit at the end of this wonderful day of the assembly?
J.T. I suppose it is the last great action of the Spirit.
P.L. A suited crown to all His patient and glorious service.
J.T. Yes; just so.
J.P.H. As we read the Scriptures very carefully now, do we find that in everything divine Persons have acted in unison together, from creation onwards?
{379}
J.T. I think it is a great matter to seek to find out which Person is speaking, because it can be found out; it is discernible. We should discern who the Person is that is speaking; whether it is the Spirit or the Lord Jesus or the Father.
C.M.M. Would the verses you have referred to in @Romans 8 fit in with your thought as to referring to divine Persons in an interchangeable way? We have there, "if Christ be in you" and "if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you". Would that be a similar line?
J.T. Quite so. And another thing to be noted is that you could not change the order of @Matthew 28; it is the Father, the Son and the Spirit. That is to say the economy remains. What divine Persons were before, we cannot say, but the economy remains as it is now, and that is because the incarnation makes it possible.
L.A.C. Would you help us as to the exact meaning of the expression, "on account of", as appearing in @Romans 8: 11, to which you have referred? It says, "He", that is, God, "that has raised up Christ from among the dead shall quicken your mortal bodies also on account of his Spirit which dwells in you".
J.T. Your point is, that it is God that does it, which is true; but it is by the Spirit. It is on account of the Spirit.
A.E.M-o. Does it include the dead in Christ, or only those who are alive when the Lord comes?
J.T. It does not include the dead in Christ. It is the mortal ones; those that are alive. Our *mortal* bodies, it says, not our dead bodies.
A.T.G. Is it in mind that this change is to be touched now in our spirits in the service of God?
J.T. Well, I would prefer to leave it just as it is, I believe it alludes to the actual action of the Spirit in view of our being caught up, of our being raptured.
{380}
It is, you might say, the crowning action of the Spirit, done for us.
Eu.R. Would you say something as to the successive glories, "transformed according to the same image from glory to glory"?
J.T. Well, it is the magnificence of the thing. It is beyond human words to go into or to describe fully. It is the magnificence of the thing and it belongs to God. We are dealing with the things that belong to God; with divine Persons directly, and ourselves the subjects of Their thoughts. How can we compass what God is doing? We can compass something of the economy into which the divine Persons have come; but what They were before we cannot say. Apparently They were equal.
P.L. "Blessed be the glory of Jehovah from his place!" @Ezekiel 3: 12.
J.T. Quite so.
J.T-r. Is this thought also connected with our being "conformed to the image of his Son", @Romans 8: 29?
J.T. That is another magnificent statement. How magnificent it is! You feel really you are just lost in it; that we are to be transformed into the image of His Son! We cannot be dealing with anything greater than what we are dealing with now. The question is whether we can take it in, and think over it, because it takes time to take it in. We are coming to the end of the dispensation, and I am sure the Lord is preparing us for it, and giving us thoughts suitable to it.
A.M. Is part of the teaching of the transfiguration of the Lord Jesus in the gospels to show that men can be made suited to be with Him, on that level of things? Two men appeared with Him in glory, and then Peter speaks of it in his second epistle.
{381}
J.T. Just so. That is a very nice thought.
A.M. Has it a bearing on us now?
J.T. I think it has. It is a question of what man can come into. The Lord has taken on this matter that we are in now, in the end of the dispensation. The question is whether we are able to seize it, because He is giving us suggestions to enable us to participate in the glory when we are raptured.
P.L. Could a present application be made to an expression found in the Psalms, "after the glory, thou wilt receive me", @Psalm 73: 24?
J.T. Well, just so.
P.L. That is, the glory is just the imminence; it links up with the imminence of the rapture.
Eu.R. Does this "from glory to glory" involve the different phases of the service? The glory of His brethren, and the glory of the bride, and the glory of sonship?
J.T. I would say that. It is "from glory to glory". You cannot say just what the limits of it are. They are infinite really. We are dealing with infinite things; at the same time we are to have part in them.
Ques. Is there any link with @Philippians 3, "The Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour, who shall transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory, according to the working of the power which he has"? Do you think that would include what He does by the Spirit?
J.T. Well, I think so. The Spirit is the Agent down here, all the time, in the assembly, and He is working with the other divine Persons. He is the actual One down here where we are. He has been here for nineteen hundred years, as we say. Wonderful that it is so! Now, I believe, He is asserting Himself, and claiming what belongs to Him, as it were, but it is for our good too. It is the time of our glory.
{382}
C.A.I. Would the glory of the Lord involve not only what was seen inherent in the Lord Jesus here, but what has been here in the assembly?
J.T. Well, Ephesians refers to the assembly as "his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". That is what is said of us, and it is marvellous. That is part of His glory, of course.
H.S.S. Referring to verse 17, it does not say the Spirit is the Lord, but the Lord is the Spirit.
J.T. It says, "Now the Lord is the Spirit, but where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". Well now, what is the question there?
H.S.S. We cannot separate between the Lord and the Spirit, the Lord acts through the Holy Spirit.
J.T. Well, quite so. We have already spoken of the interchangeableness of divine Persons, how They can be interchanged, as it were. It is wonderful, and that we are brought into it, for that is what enters into these last two verses.
J.P.H. Does not verse 17 mean, simply, that the One who has authority down here as a divine Person is the Spirit; "the Lord is the Spirit"?
J.T. "The Lord is the Spirit"; that is what is meant. It is to bring the thought of the Lord into the action of the Spirit. The Spirit is never said to be made Lord. The Lord Jesus is said to be made Lord and Christ, but the Spirit is said to be Lord here, very plainly. He is acting in relation to the Lord Jesus at the same time.
N.K.M. Do you link that on with the ministry of the Spirit, so that it is authoritative?
J.T. Quite so. It might be the gifts that are here on earth serving the saints.
P.L. The Spirit disposing of them as He pleases.
J.T. Just so. As it says, "Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men". How many are there? They are
{383}
effective in their actions, in their service, and the Spirit is using them.
H.P.W. Would it be right to say that the Spirit's service to us is, at any rate, two-fold. First of all, it is bringing the glory of the Lord before us. That is, in a way, objective, is it not? But then, transforming us according to the same image from glory to glory; is not that the other side? So that He brings the light and glory of Christ so attractively to us, but it is in order that He may form the replica of that in the saints of the assembly.
J.T. Just so, I would say that, fully.
F.J.F. I would like to ask whether after the breaking of bread, when we have the thought of the bride before us, it would be suitable to praise and bless the Spirit for having brought us to the heavenly Isaac?
J.T. Well, quite so. Of course, we ought always to remember that He has the third place. He has been given the third place in the economy and we cannot ignore that. The Father is the One that we finish with in the service. I would always regard the Spirit as *augmentary*. The Father is the great Objective after the part for the Lord Jesus in the service. The Spirit is always supplementary. He graciously takes that place.
Rem. He is none the less glorious to us because of the place He has taken.
J.T. Quite so. Divine Persons, or at least God, has to say to us in that light. We have the spirit of things, and we know what to do and say; we know how to treat things.
Rem. So that you would have in your mind, do you think, as a kind of governing thought what the Lord says to His disciples in @John 20: "My Father and your Father ... my God and your God".
J.T. Quite so.
{384}
A.M. Does the action of *looking* in verse 18 involve the Spirit; our being able to use Him to see?
J.T. Quite so. The Spirit is within us, of course, and He acts accordingly. We have the expression, "full of the Holy Spirit". That would have a great effect on anybody of whom it was said.
E.C.M. Would @Exodus 24 suggest the liberty? Moses sent the youths of Israel and they offered burnt-offerings and sacrificed peace-offerings, and then we have the seventy elders going up and then it says the nobles "saw God, and ate and drank". Would that be the result of the Spirit, in this way?
J.T. Well, I suppose it would, in so far as it could be in the Old Testament. Of course, we have to remember the Holy Spirit was not yet. That is a peculiar formation of words in @John 7, which we have to remember, "The Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified". The Old Testament therefore does not afford as much fulness as to the Spirit as we have now.
Ques. Do you think the reference to the individual side in "vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared for glory" (@Romans 9: 23) would involve the work of the Spirit in preparation?
J.T. I think so. "Prepared for glory".
Rem. I was thinking of the ability to take on the glory substantially. It is not merely as presented to us, but that we take it on, inwardly.
Ques. "Looking on the glory of the Lord"; how often is it our privilege to do that?
J.T. When we are in assembly service, I would say. That would be on the first day of the week properly.
W.S.S. Should we not come together on the first day of the week expecting that these glories would unfold?
J.T. I think so. I think that is perfectly right. Do we look for it? Are we looking out for the
{385}
matter, and preparing ourselves, on the first day of the week, for it? Because that is the idea.
W.S.S. As the glory of the Lord opens up to us, would that lead to the glory of the Father? I am thinking of the word in @John 17, "Father ... glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee".
J.T. I think that is what is in mind. It is not simply what is in heaven. It is what is going on now, because the idea of the divine service is wonderful. God has arranged it, so that there is such a thing as the divine service, and it is carefully started with the Lord's supper.
E.C.T. Although the glory is so great we are not to hold back, are we, but we are to use great boldness.
J.T. So that we glory in our dispensation; it is ours. The millennium is for the Jews; it is a future one, but it will not be anything like ours; it will not be as good as ours.
Ques. As to the word, "Now the Lord is the Spirit", is it your thought that the Spirit takes charge of the service authoritatively, at the Lord's supper, or have you in mind a blend of authority, in the Lord and the Spirit?
J.T. Well, that is the way I would take it, in this peculiar passage. The third chapter of 2 Corinthians is a peculiar chapter, for the blending between the Lord and the Spirit is remarkable. But the Spirit, it is clearly asserted, is the Lord: "Now the Lord is the Spirit".
Ques. How do you link that with the next phrase, "Now the Lord is the Spirit", and then it says, "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty"?
J.T. It is the same thing, only it is another presentation of it.
{386}
J.P.H. So that in the service of God we have to be sensitive to the Lord and to the Spirit for impressions and guidance and leading?
J.T. Quite so, and the whole matter lies in the economy. We cannot tell what went before the economy. It is mysterious; it is beyond us. But we can speak of the economy with a measure of intelligence as having part in it.
Rem. So that what is outside the limits of the revelation is inscrutable to us.
J.T. It is inscrutable; that is the word to use.
Eu.R. Are both the Lord and the Spirit before us in an objective way?
J.T. Yes, that is right. I would say that, in the sense of the wording in this passage.
Eu.R. I think you said this afternoon that we would know the Spirit as the Spirit of adoption and be free to speak to Him towards the close of the service?
J.T. I think so. The service goes on, it is from glory to glory, and the glory of the Spirit must enter into it, but the supreme thought in the economy is the Father. You cannot reverse the order of @Matthew 28.
Ques. Would that link on at all with @Ephesians 3? The strengthening by the Father's Spirit in the inner man and then the love of the Christ and then the power that works in us, finishing with "glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus". Is this all leading on to that grand end?
J.T. Quite so, "Unto all generations of the age of ages". That is the greatest thing you can get, as defining in terms of time, what is really eternal.
Rem. Then is it your thought that, in this part of the service we are speaking of, there is liberty to address the Spirit in the sense of His authoritative position right through, but in an augmentary way, not in a principal way?
{387}
J.T. Authority to address Him, yes, in a suitable way; but as I was saying, we must recognise the order of @Matthew 28 which is the assembly gospel. There it says, "the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". It is only one name used for the three, so we must accept that.
J.P.H. In @Revelation 20 it says, "they shall be priests of God and of the Christ". Are those two services what control and govern us on the Lord's day morning?
J.T. Well, quite so. "Priests of God and of the Christ". So that the Lord Himself has priests, as it were, His own; a peculiar thing. All these things only remind us of the greatness of the things we are dealing with, and to which we belong, too.
J.P.H. There is no priestly service towards the Spirit.
J.T. That is quite so, but that is quite in order because He takes the lower place. He is the third Person, though, at the same time, we discern that He is equal with the Others. That is the original idea of the Trinity.
Rem. And He is necessary to us if we are to have part in the service of God at all.
J.T. Just so. He has graciously come down to do it. As a matter of fact, He is said to be sent by the Lord Jesus, too. But the Lord Jesus is never said to be sent down from heaven.
J.T-r. The Old Testament saints, in wilderness circumstances, were familiar with seeing the glory of the Lord. Isaiah also speaks of it, does he not? and John in his first chapter says, "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father". They seemed to be somewhat familiar with the glory of the Lord, did they not?
J.T. The glory of the Lord in John is quite right, but you do not get it in the Old Testament. There it is more in figure, or in type.
{388}
J.T-r. Well, admitted the figure, but did they not see the glory at the door of the tabernacle?
J.T. I know, but what did they see? They did not see what the disciples saw in @John 1; these saw the glory of the Lord Jesus.
Ques. Referring again to the quotation from @John 7, "the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified", does that not bring us back to the wonder of the work of redemption and Christ's present place on high?
J.T. It does, indeed; everything hinging on the incarnation.
{389}
THE SERVICE OF GOD AND THE LORD'S SUPPER (3)
@John 4: 7 - 30
J.T. What is in mind to say centres in the passage as to worship. The thought is not to attempt to unfold the general teaching of the passage, but the question of worship. From verse 7 this subject is led up to, and we may remember that according to verse 6 the Lord became wearied with His journey: "Jesus therefore, being wearied with the way he had come, sat just as he was at the fountain".
Ques. Why do you call attention to that particularly?
J.T. I suppose it indicates the Lord's lowliness in accepting the appearance of weariness, or the feeling of it, without any disguise as to the condition He was in. He was ready to speak to a soul, the woman having come out of Samaria afforded the opportunity. The Lord seized it, and it led to this subject of worship; she herself raised it. She says in answer to the Lord, in verse 19, "Sir, I see that thou art a prophet. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where one must worship". The subject is thus set before us, and it seemed as if it would be suitable for us to follow on what we have had in this hall yesterday, and consider the thought of worship.
J.P.H. Is it in your mind very prominently that the fountain indicates the Spirit, the Holy Spirit being the One who is in charge of the matter of worship? The Lord was sitting there.
J.T. Very good. Verse 7 reads, "A woman comes out of Samaria to draw water. Jesus says to her, Give me to drink (for his disciples had gone away into the city that they might buy provisions).
{390}
The Samaritan woman therefore says to him, How dost thou being a Jew, ask to drink of me who am a Samaritan woman? for Jews have no intercourse with Samaritans. Jesus answered and said to her, If thou knewest the gift of God and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". The subject of living water is, no doubt, an allusion to the Spirit, and the Lord orders it that it should come up in this way, and that the question of worship should enter into the matter. It is a question of the Father, and what the Father seeks.
Ques. Do you mean that there could be no worship secured for the Father apart from the reception of the living water?
J.T. Quite so. No doubt the Lord thought of it when He asked for a drink.
Ques. Does worship enter into the thought of springing up into eternal life?
J.T. Quite so. The springing up alludes undoubtedly to the power of the Spirit operating in our hearts, so that the Father is coming into view, so to speak. The Father *seeks* worshippers.
Rem. The woman herself seems to introduce the thought of worship.
J.T. Yes, she does, I was thinking of that. The Lord orders it to reach this point. The woman says, in verse 15, "Sir, give me this water, that I may not thirst nor come here to draw". And then the Lord answers, "Go, call thy husband", as much as to say, There must be right household conditions ere we touch the question of worship.
Ques. Do you think then that this worship to the Father runs on to worship in the assembly?
J.T. I would think so. As we come to the question of the husband, she says, "I have not a husband. Jesus says to her, Thou hast well said, I have not a husband; for thou hast had five
{391}
husbands, and he whom now thou hast is not thy husband: this thou hast spoken truly. The woman says to him, Sir, I see that thou art a prophet". And then she says, "Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where one must worship". And then the Lord calls her "Woman", as if that was at the bottom of the whole matter, the household affairs. She was a woman and she had had five husbands. Things were deranged in her state and circumstances, utterly deranged, and yet the Lord does not hesitate to answer her question about worshipping and that it should be in this mount. He does not hesitate.
J.F.G. You have often referred to the thought of "from glory to glory" starting in our household setting and going forward. Is that what you have in mind that these household conditions must be right before this is known?
J.T. I think that is good. The Lord has household conditions in mind, undoubtedly, before the question of worship, but still He did not hesitate to proceed with what she said, and evidently what came out put things right in her soul. Then, it says she left her water-pot; that is to say, she left what she came to do and she "went away into the city, and says to the men ..." showing that she was completely delivered from herself. To be completely delivered from our circumstances is a greater matter.
J.P.H. In @John 17 the Lord says to the Father, "Righteous Father". Is everything that is offered to Him in worship and praise to be on a righteous basis?
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. When it says, "worship the Father", is it that Person in the Godhead?
J.T. Yes. That is what I would say.
Ques. I mean it is not a question of relationship in the worshipper?
{392}
J.T. Well, of course, it would have that in mind undoubtedly, the relation of the Father, but then if we just look at it as it stands we shall see this. She says, "Sir, I see that thou art a prophet. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where one must worship. Jesus says to her, Woman". That is a thing I think we should not pass over. He calls her "Woman", a title which enters into the question of household relations. "Jesus says to her, Woman, believe me, the hour is coming when ye shall neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem worship the Father. Ye worship ye know not what; we worship what we know, for salvation is of the Jews. But the hour is coming and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth; for also the Father seeks such as his worshippers. God is a spirit; and they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth". It seems to me wonderful that, in spite of the fact of what was actually true of this woman, the Lord should condescend to speak to her on those lines; the light shone into her soul, so that she is able to evangelise immediately.
D.J.M. Would @Ephesians 5 come in, "Wives, submit yourselves to your own husbands", and "Husbands, love your own wives"? All is in view of the great subject of worship in that epistle.
J.T. Quite so. How can we have the service of God where there is a deranged condition in families, in persons, whether men or women? And yet the Lord does not hesitate to proceed with the subject brought up by the woman herself.
C.F.I. Would this worship of the Father here link with the declaration of the Father in the first chapter? "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". Would the worship be in the light of that?
J.T. Quite so.
{393}
F.J.F. Is worship produced by having a divine Person before the consciousness of the soul?
J.T. Well, quite so. The Lord is there before this woman, and does not hesitate to answer her question in relation to worship.
A.M. She does not seem to have any person before her. She says, "Our fathers worshipped", but she does not mention any object of worship at all. She would not be intelligent as to that.
J.T. Well, it is just a question of what the Lord said in answer to what she suggested. "Jesus says to her, Woman, believe me, the hour is coming when ye shall neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem worship the Father". So that clearly the Lord had the thought of the Father in His mind, and placed it before her mind.
J.T-r. Does this thought of worshipping in spirit and in truth, following a reference to the household matters, involve that the Lord would raise moral questions with each one of us?
J.T. That is quite right.
J.T-r. I was thinking of the expression, "in spirit and truth". Would you say a word as to those two references?
J.T. The word 'spirit' is not *the* Spirit here; it is just the attitude of the mind. In dealing with God, our minds must be regulated, and the Lord aimed at that in saying to her, "Ye worship ye know not what; we worship what we know". That is to say, there is something there and worship is implied; that is, God is there. The worship is implied, "We worship what we know". The Lord really meant that God was there, so to speak, "for salvation is of the Jews. But the hour is coming and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth", "In spirit", is, you might say, that I am concerned about the thing spiritually, or "in spirit".
{394}
W.S.S. Would the words "and truth" go so far as to embrace the whole revelation; being intelligent in regard to what has been revealed?
J.T. That is what is meant. The Lord says, "the hour is coming". He would mean christianity. That is what we are in now. We are in it, and therefore the thing is in truth, "in spirit and truth". We were not concerned this morning about any ecclesiastical forms; we were there in spirit and in truth. We were there to worship God really, but beginning with the Lord's supper, because the Lord's supper is the beginning of the service of God.
Rem. I suppose in christendom the worship has very largely got on to Samaritan ground, in a general way; what is imitative.
J.T. Just so. There are probably a hundred kinds of services or worship in this country.
E.C.M. Does the verse in Philippians have any bearing, "*we* are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh", @Philippians 3: 3?
J.T. Just so; involving christianity, as we said.
C.M.M. Do you distinguish between worshipping the Father and worshipping God?
J.T. The Lord's message through Mary said, "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God", @John 20: 17. Evidently that would be the basis on which worship would be. We begin with the Father and then God is the final great thought. It goes to the full divine thought, the worship of God, "My God and your God", He says.
D.J.M. Would the Father involve the thought of the family?
J.T. Well, just so, only that God is the great thought in the divine mind. "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father". That is to say, the first thing is the Father,
{395}
in the worship, and then God, that God is "all in all". We end with that.
J.P.H. Did you indicate elsewhere that you thought that "God" in @John 20: 17 embraced the Godhead?
J.T. "My Father and your Father" is the same Person, the Father, and God, only that He is first spoken of as Father. It is "my Father" and then "my God".
Ques. Is there some particular emphasis on the thought of grace in the whole setting of this matter, connected with the name of Father?
J.T. It says "the Father" here.
Rem. Yes, I wondered whether you had that in mind calling attention to the Lord's weariness, that the light was reaching this woman through such a One. Is it an amplification of what John had already said, "full of grace and truth"?
J.T. Just so.
Ques. And when Paul says, "to the praise of the glory of his grace", would the thought of grace, connected with the Father, prepare us for the greater things?
J.T. So that @John 1 leads up to @John 4, of course. The third chapter introduces the new birth, which is basic, and then we have the Father giving everything into the hand of the Son. Then, in this chapter, that the Father is seeking worship, and the conversation led to the woman being thoroughly clear inwardly, so that she "left her water-pot and went away into the city, and says to the men, Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done, is not he the Christ?" That is to say, she is completely cleared inwardly, and evidently the clearance was worked out in this conversation as to worship, and as to her previous illicit relations. That entered into the subject of the conversation between the Lord and this woman, and it completely cleared her; so that
{396}
she becomes evangelical, and she is not afraid even to go to the men. We might have thought she might be ashamed of herself, but she was not. If we are clear before God, we are not ashamed at all; we are courageous, and can go out for the truth.
D.J.M. And she is able, as thus cleansed, to call forth all that is within her to praise Him?
J.T. Just so.
Ques. When you speak of being cleared inwardly does it stand, in your mind, in relation to the Lord's remark, "shall become in him a fountain of water"? Is clearance inwardly by the Spirit?
J.T. Quite so. There is free course for the Spirit, springing up. It is not running down or out, but springing up. It is a living thing.
J.T-r. Is the thought of what is inward in reference to this woman, and the work that had gone on in her, in keeping with the reference in @Psalm 51, "thou wilt have truth in the inward parts"?
J.T. Very good.
Ques. Would @Psalm 45 have any bearing, "He is thy Lord, and worship thou him"?
J.T. Well, that is quite in order. Of course, she has not come to that, but what is implied is that she is entirely cleared inwardly. She had a living spring within her, springing up into everlasting life. That is a basis for worship, of course; everlasting life is the basic thing.
F.J.F. When we worship God, would that include His creatorial powers. His almightiness, and glories that are not limited to christianity?
J.T. Well, what the Lord says here would lead up to that. The Lord says, in verse 21, "Believe me, the hour is coming when ye shall neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem worship the Father. Ye worship ye know not what; we worship what we know, for salvation is of the Jews. But the hour is coming and now is, when the true worshippers shall
{397}
worship the Father in spirit and truth". Then it goes on, "for also the Father seeks such as his worshippers. God is a spirit". Well, now, whether it be that He is the Creator, or whether it is just that He is to be worshipped, is not of very prime importance; it is a question of what God *is*, and that He is a spirit. That is the first thing, that He is a spirit.
J.S.E. Is the key to this in the word 'true'?
J.T. Quite so, "True worshippers". We are dealing with God. God is a spirit, but then there is the reference to the Father, "the hour is coming when ye shall neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem worship the Father". That is to say, the Lord had in His mind that it would be in christianity really. It would be a question of the Father; God as Father; but then it is God as God too. If we use the title "God", we have in mind what He is; that He is a spirit. The Lord, of course, is God too, but He became Man. He became Man, and He is said to be "the true God and eternal life". So that these things are all basic really, I mean they involve the Deity. They involve God in the true sense, first as the Father, as we get in @John 20, and even here, and then as God Himself. But here it is simply that "God is a spirit". That is what He is essentially; He is a spirit.
C.M.M. Is this God the Father? It says here, "God is a spirit". It says in Colossians, "God the Father", @Colossians 3: 17. Is the expression "God is a spirit" a brief reference to Colossians?
J.T. I think it is God in the sense in which the Lord conveyed the thought here, that "God is a spirit". "The hour is coming and now is", the Lord says, "when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth; for also the Father seeks such as his worshippers. God is a spirit; and they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth". I would take it, in that sense, that it is God as the object of our worship. The Lord had in His
{398}
mind that God was to be thus known. He Himself was God, of course, too; but He had in his mind worship, and how God is to be addressed as in worship and how He is seeking things; He is seeking worshippers.
Ques. Is this over against the ritual side of things, suggested in "this mountain" and "Jerusalem"?
J.T. Just so. The Lord is saying, in answer to the woman, that God is a spirit and that He is seeking worshippers. I think therefore we ought to deal with the subject that the Lord had in mind, and see what He intended to convey to this woman's soul, and what effect it produced in her soul. When we come to actual christianity, we are in an economy, that is, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit; and Two, the Son and the Spirit, are active in the economy. So that we have to bear in mind that we approach the Father through the Son, and through the Spirit as well; it is an economy.
Ques. So that both the Son and the Spirit act in a mediatorial way?
J.T. Just so, I should have used that word 'mediatorial', because that is just the point. It is the economy into which we have been brought, and it is God Himself in that economy, and the Son and the Spirit are subservient in the economy in operating, bringing about the system of worship.
W.S.S. In the end of chapter 3 you have said that an administration is committed to the Son, the Father seeking worshippers and the Son moving in relation to that.
J.T. Quite so.
W.C. Would it be right to say that when God is before us in relation to worship, we are not thinking of the mediatorial side of things, but are in the gain of them?
J.T. Well, we know it. We are in the mediatorial system, and we approach God on that principle. We approach God through the Son and the Spirit. The
{399}
preliminary of the service of God is the Lord's supper, and the Son and the Spirit have part in that, but when we come to the final part, which we are now thinking of, the Father is the Object and He is approached mediatorially, through the Son and through the Spirit.
P.L. "For through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father", @Ephesians 2: 18.
J.T. Just so. There you have it all.
Ques. I suppose we never get beyond the mediatorial system, do we?
J.T. No, I do not think we do.
Rem. We have to remain within the limits of the economy in that sense.
J.T. That is just what I would say.
J.T-r. Would you say a word, please, as to "we worship what we know". The word 'what', instead of the personal pronoun, is brought in.
J.T. That is something to think of, and it is over against what they were doing. "Ye worship ye know not what; we worship what we know". "What we know" is, I would think, all that we have in the mediatorial system through which we approach God.
J.T-r. I wondered whether worship is not more a personal matter, keeping clearly in thought the mediatorial system.
J.T. And then your objective is God, and that means the economy into which we have come, and that we approach Him through the Son and through the Spirit. That goes on, as far as I can see, eternally.
Ques. Does it show how near it was to the Lord's own heart, that He should speak so freely of this matter to such a woman?
J.T. Quite so, and what she does is the sequence of it, meaning that she is liberated in her soul now. She leaves her water-pot. The disciples marvelled that Jesus talked with the woman, but He knew what He was doing, and she was delivered. She had
{400}
been a disreputable woman and now she is delivered from it all. She is not a bit afraid of the men.
Ques. Is it like the truth setting you free?
J.T. That is just what it is.
J.J.T. After the Lord speaks of worship and she is set in liberty, she evangelises. Does that follow on the spirit of worship?
J.T. Quite so, I would say that, because she leaves her water-pot of her own accord. Why does she do that? It means that she had now another Object, and that was her deliverance. So she went to the men and said, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?" That is, she is evangelising, but then you can see in her evangelising, that she is delivered inwardly. She is in possession of the living water springing up into everlasting life.
A.M. The Lord says in verse 22, "Ye worship ye know not what; we worship what we know, for salvation is of the Jews". Can we have this kind of knowledge apart from an appreciation of salvation, involving deliverance?
J.T. I think we ought to keep to the actual state of this woman, and the Lord's conversation with her; and how He bore in His conversation what she suggested; that is, the question of worship. Therefore the idea of worship enters into all that we are saying, salvation and all else.
Ques. What this woman came into was, in our language, more deliverance than salvation, was it not?
J.T. That is what I would say, exactly. Her course and circumstances were most disreputable, but then the Lord delivers her completely. She is set free. Why does she leave her water-pot? Why does she not fill it and bring it back, which is what she came to do? But she left it, meaning that she is wholly free from everything for the moment,
{401}
except to evangelise, to do the work of God. She goes to the men and says to them, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done, is not he the Christ?" That is, she would spread abroad the knowledge of the Lord Jesus, in that sense, among men.
Ques. Would that link with the beginning of @Romans 7, where we have the thought of being married to another? She says, "Come see a man".
J.T. I would say that. Just so. We might say she is married to Christ; but then that would mean that she belongs to the assembly, fully. If we are dealing with that on those lines, @Romans 7, it is a question of being of the assembly.
J.P.H. Should the fact that the Lord discloses all this to this woman of this disreputable character be a great encouragement to all of us to go in fully for understanding all that the Lord would disclose to us?
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. In this passage, God the Father is the Object of worship; there are scriptures which suggest the Trinity, the Godhead. Would that be outside our range?
J.T. Let us read the passage again. "Believe me, the hour is coming when ye shall neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem worship the Father". It is the Father that is in mind, "Ye worship ye know not what; we worship what we know, for salvation is of the Jews. But the hour is coming and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth; for also the Father seeks such as his worshippers". And then, "God is a spirit", "God" includes the three Persons. What was immediately in the Lord's mind here, however, was the deliverance of this woman.
A.T.S. Is it the proper part of man to worship God in a sense that God is a spirit?
{402}
J.T. Well, quite so; only that the worship of God will be in the millennium too, but it will not be the worship that we have. Ours is superior, and the Lord is dealing with that. He is not dealing with the millennium; He is dealing with what was coming in through Himself. It is what He calls "the hour is coming", and that is christianity.
D.J.M. And being an inward matter, does the Spirit lay hold of our affections and direct them in right channels?
J.T. Quite so, I think we will get help as we proceed on those lines. The effect of the conversation between the Lord and the woman is that she is completely delivered. That is what we all need, because the great thought with us is not the creation exactly, or our business, it is a question of God and our relations with Him; that is, our worshipful relations with God, especially on the first day of the week.
W.S.S. Would we not be very much affected by the wonderful thought that the Father *seeks* worshippers, and worshippers being persons of such a character as this, such as we all are.
J.T. What is in mind, is just that. The Lord is thinking of the Father Himself, and therefore we have to think of Him, and the second, or final part of our service, on the first day of the week, refers specially to the Father, and then to God.
W.S.S. I was thinking of the Father's desires. To think that He has desires towards us in relation to worship is very wonderful.
J.T. Quite so. It is wonderful, and some of us have had a touch of it this morning. But I think we might just as well keep to the idea of worshipping the Father, and of what He is seeking.
E.B.McC. Should a prophetic word be liberating in that way in view of worship? The woman says, "Sir, I see that thou art a prophet".
{403}
J.T. Well, things would be liberated in the assembly; it is in the assembly properly that the prophetic word is liberated, according to the first epistle to the Corinthians.
Ques. What is worship? It has been said that it is the outcome of what God is Himself, known in the soul.
J.T. "The Father himself loveth you". That is to say, "God is love", but then it is God as the Father that we are dealing with just now. Although God Himself is mentioned, what we are dealing with, in the main, is the Father. It enters into the service of God, on the first day of the week, as some of us had it this morning, and rejoiced in it. The point now is to come to that in what we are saying, how the Father is *seeking* worship. Where you have "the Father" mentioned in that sense, it is God in grace. That is, I believe, what is meant in John's gospel, God revealed in grace.
A.T.S. Does that not enhance the impression we have of the Father, if alongside of that we think that "God is a spirit"?
J.T. It does help us, because the Lord is pleased to give us that definition. It is a very remarkable thing, that He should say it to this woman, and He did say it, and it was one of the elements that entered into the deliverance.
Ques. Is it not a most remarkable thing, that that great God is a spirit and to be worshipped?
J.T. Another thing is that it is deliverance from idolatry. That is another great point in christianity; it is deliverance from idolatry, "Little children, keep yourselves from idols", John says.
W.S.S. Would verse 18 of chapter 1, "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father", link up with what you are speaking of this afternoon?
J.T. Very much, "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared
{404}
him". That is to say, in mediatorial grace, He has declared the Father. That He dwells in the Father's bosom is remarkable. John does not tell us anything about *our* sonship until we come to @Revelation 21, and there he speaks of sons, and our being sons; but throughout the gospel it is only the sonship of Christ that is in mind.
Rem. So that the divine thought is fully set out in Christ.
J.T. Exactly.
F.J.F. And will the thought of Father be extended to the whole universe in the day to come?
J.T. I think so. I think the basis of our considerations, however, ought to be @John 20 and kindred scriptures, rather than the millennial day, because we are dealing with christianity. That is the great point in the Scriptures, christianity. It is in the Father that we come to God in the most precious sense, but then the Lord says, "My God and your God". So that we come into the knowledge of Christ's God.
A.T.S. It is as a glorious Man that He says, "My God".
J.T. Yes.
A.C.S.P. Is what is within our range greatly enhanced by the consciousness that there is so much with God that is beyond our range altogether?
J.T. Well, quite so, if the word 'consciousness' is great enough for that, but the range is beyond us. It is inscrutable; inscrutable is the best word.
Ques. And does not the sense of that induce worship?
J.T. Well, it does.
J.T-r. Will worship go on eternally?
J.T. I think so. God is seeking it now and why should He not have it then?
J.T-r. It gives an impressive sense that what we are privileged to touch now will go on for ever.
{405}
J.T. Exactly. There are dispensations, and the one we are in is the greatest of all. It involves everything that is to be disclosed to men.
A.H-n. Would you give us your thought as to why you remarked, God is the final thought?
J.T. I think God is the final thought; God is to be "all in all". It is not all *and* in all, but "all in all". The Son Himself is to be subject, we are told.
Ques. May I refer back to a previous remark? The mediatorial system is not to be dissolved? It is to continue, is it not?
J.T. That is what I understand, I do not think God is to change at all in His outlook, so to speak. What He is seeking now, He will be seeking then, and He will be getting it.
P.L. "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages. Amen".
J.T. Very good. That is one of the finest phrases we can get on the subject. That is, the closing passage of @Ephesians 3.
Ques. And is not great stress laid on the thought of the Father at the beginning of that prayer, and that we should be strengthened by the Father's Spirit in the inner man, as leading up to the grand result that has just been quoted?
J.T. Yes, "Of whom every family in the heavens and on the earth is named". And we are the greatest family, the assembly is the greatest family. So it is "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages". The assembly is the greatest family of all, and the glory to God is there seen in Ephesians.
E.B.McC. Does God tabernacling with men go on eternally beyond the millennium?
J.T. I think it does. It is clearly in contrast to the Jews. It is just *men*. That is the idea; the divine idea eternally was that. The Jewish system was only brought in subordinately, and it is worked
{406}
out, of course, but the idea of God is to tabernacle with men, and Christ became a Man. Of course, He was a Jew, in a certain sense, but He became Man. The incarnation is manhood.
Rem. "And the life was the light of men", @John 1: 4.
J.T. Just so. It is not angels but men.
Rem. Men as such; not the Jew only, but all.
J.T. That is right.
F.J.F. "Good pleasure in men", @Luke 2: 14.
J.S.E. Is this word 'worship' comprehensive of two other words, 'giving thanks' and 'praising'?
J.T. Well, we have to go to the dictionary really to get the abstract meaning of the word, but what the Lord is saying conveys it to our minds. I would rather learn what He had in His mind as to worship, learn from the Lord rather than from the dictionary. Worship is really the outgoing to God of our intelligent affections in the power of the Spirit, and that is what God is after.
Rem. In 2 Corinthians the apostle says, "The God and Father of the Lord Jesus knows-he who is blessed for ever", @2 Corinthians 11: 31.
J.T. A beautiful phrase! He knows; but I think what we are dealing with now is the question of worship; and it is the outgoings of our intelligent affections unreservedly to God. That is what He is looking for.
Rem. You have spoken of the capacity of the vessel in relation to the woman which was before Him. I was thinking of the advantage we have over that poor woman, as being in the Spirit's day and linked on with such glorious things.
J.T. Quite so. That is the solution of everything. There is no greater day than the day we are in. It is leading us on into eternity.
Rem. I think we were all struck when you remarked that in @Revelation 21, verses 1 - 8, the eternal
{407}
setting of things is given prior to the millennial setting, which shows it is primarily in God's mind. Does not that make this dispensation very wonderful?
J.T. Very good.
Rem. What is eternal has entered into it, and will really flow out of it.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. God all in all would be God known in Christ, would it?
J.T. It is God. God is God, and Christ is Christ. What the Lord is dealing with here is God, as the Father. The Father is seeking, because it is what comes out in the service of God that we are really dealing with, and the first day of the week is the day for it. It is, so to speak, a question of the enjoyment that there is for God, I use the word 'enjoyment' for it is what He is seeking from us, from our intelligent hearts. It is the intelligent service of God.
Ques. Would you not think we might humbly say what He is receiving too?
J.T. I think He is, I think the revival has brought it all about, so that the service we are going on with is according to God's mind, and it is wonderful that God brought it out in our day.
W.S.S. Is there great comfort in the words "now is", "the hour is coming and now is", linking up with what is eternal?
J.T. Quite so. The "now is" would cover the Lord's own attitude. Undoubtedly He had His own attitude toward His Father. He spent His nights on the mount of Olives. What was He doing? He was with the Father.
C.A.I. In the matter of God and men, is there the thought not only of the order of being, and God in grace in relation to him, but also of what God has brought in for His own pleasure in men?
{408}
J.T. Yes; only that we have to remember, when we say that, that it is in sonship, men in sonship, that His pleasure is secured. Sonship is the highest thought; the highest relation we can be in with God.
E.C.M. Is that the thought in @John 17, "the men whom thou gavest me out of the world"? Would that link on with the thought of men?
J.T. Quite so.
E.A.E. I would like to be clear on one thought. Would you eliminate worship to the Son and to the Holy Spirit from the end of the morning meeting?
J.T. I think the Father is the supreme Object after the Lord's supper is finished. The Father is the supreme Object. The Spirit is there to *augment* the service, and the Son too, but it is mediatorial. Both the Spirit and the Son are mediatorial in Their service. God is the Object of all.
E.A.E. So that you would not address the Son and the Holy Spirit at that point?
J.T. No, I should not. That is the line the brethren have been taking for about forty years, and God has helped us in it. He has helped us in the way that the service of God has been broken up, as it were, beginning with the Lord's supper, and then proceeding to the Father. It is all in the power of the Spirit, and the Lord Jesus as the Mediator.
Rem. So that the word in Ephesians is "through him"-that is, through Christ-"we have both access by one Spirit to the Father", @Ephesians 2: 18.
J.T. Well, that gives it exactly, just as I have spoken of it.
A.C.S.P. To whom does the last verse of @Ephesians 3 refer? Paul says, "To him be glory in the assembly".
J.T. Let us see how the passage runs, "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all
{409}
generations of the age of ages". "To him" there refers to God, and would include the three Persons, though in the matter of worship and assembly service, with which we are dealing, it is the Father who is primarily in mind.
Rem. It makes a very affectionate appeal to us all, that we are necessary to such a system of affection.
J.T. I think it is wonderful, the more we ponder it. And how carefully it is presented to us. We have the three Persons, and two of Them subordinate in lowliness, so that the Father should be ministered to as He seeks.
A.H-n. So that when we are moving forward on the line of worship, is it right to include in our minds the Name, God's name, according to @Matthew 28?
J.T. It is "name", just one name. We are baptised "to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". Is that what you have in mind?
A.H-n. Yes, I was wondering whether it was right to include Them in our minds, involving worship?
J.T. What we are referring to now is God. It is really inscrutable, but we can see enough to see that God is the supreme Object, and that He is dealing with everything on those lines. The Son and the Spirit have come into a subordinate place, and He is the supreme Object to Both; so that we are brought into line with that.
Ques. So that the sense we have of relationship greatly liberates the worship that may be there?
J.T. Just so.
J.F.G. In the chapter in Ephesians which has been called attention to, it speaks, just earlier, of being strengthened by His Spirit.
{410}
J.T. That is by the Father's Spirit, in the inner man.
J.F.G. Has that in view that the worship to the Father might be reached?
J.T. That is right. Ephesians, I believe, gives the supreme thought in the service of God.
{411}
THE PERSON OF CHRIST AND ETERNAL LIFE (1)
@1 John 1: 1 - 10; @1 John 2: 1 - 29
J.T. The gospel of John has been much before the brethren of late, and it has occurred to me that we should look at the first epistle of John at this time, with a view to apprehending the distinction that is to be made between the gospel of John and the three epistles. In the gospel of John the Spirit of God begins with the Person of Christ, as it is said, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". Whereas, in John's epistle, it is "That which was from the beginning". It is not 'He who', but "That which"; that is to say, it is a thing or system which the Lord has established, and set up here on earth at the present time with a view to testimony, with a view to the saints walking in the light as God is in the light. "That which was from the beginning" refers to the beginning of Christ's service and ministry here, and then it states "that which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life"; and then, "(and the life has been manifested, and we have seen, and bear witness, and report to you the eternal life, which was with the Father, and has been manifested to us): that which we have seen and heard we report to you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And these things write we to you that your joy may be full". So that the Spirit of God is here bringing before us what the Lord Jesus set up as having died and risen and having been glorified, and having sent down the Spirit. That is to say, it is a system of things unto which we are brought as believers,
{412}
and the great theme which is specially stressed in this system is eternal life.
Wm.H. Would what came out in Christ be carried through, and form part of the system in the power of the Spirit?
J.T. That is the idea; carried through, and it is carried through now. It has been carried through from the outset, from Pentecost, and still holds, the Spirit of God being here. He is here taking care of the divine interests, and of our interests too, and to bring us into the substance of eternal life and other such things. Although we are in the closing period of the dispensation, the Spirit of God is here. He has remained here since He came down at Pentecost, especially, in view of this epistle, to maintain the saints in the thought of life, as it is said, "the life has been manifested". "That which was from the beginning ... which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life"; that is to say, the theme is "the word of life".
Rem. We have had several crises in the testimony concerning the truth of eternal life. Do you think the errors came in through lack of understanding of the epistle we have before us?
J.T. I would say that; especially what occurred in 1889, or thereabouts, in the controversy on eternal life. There were those who would insist that the idea of eternal life was a person. That brought in an error, which they gave up some time after, but they brought in an error there, and the effect of it remains, I fear. It is for us now to become clear as to the substance of this epistle.
H.B. You spoke of divine interests and our interests. Could you help as to distinguishing the two?
J.T. Well, christianity is God's interest; He has brought it in. The gospel shows how it was brought
{413}
in by a Person; that is to say, the Lord designated as "the Word". The Lord Jesus was the expression of the mind of God; He conveyed the *mind* of God; and all that He conveyed was unfolded in that gospel, and now the question is whether we can see that it is God's interest, and that God's interest is bound up in that testimony. It is for us to see and hold that it is our testimony too; it is our interest too. That is, every believer, every one who has the Spirit, is bound up with it and has eternal life according to the gospel of John. The point in this epistle is not simply that we have it, but that we *know* that we have it. We shall see that later, that we *know* that we have it, and that we are bound up with it.
A.R. Would you say what the force of "the eternal life, which was with the Father" is? What would be conveyed in that?
J.T. I think it is the life that was with the Father consequent on Jesus having become Man.
A.R. Would it refer to the life that He moved in here, in communion with the Father?
J.T. That is what I understand. That is just what the truth is. The Lord having become Man, He was with the Father, and therefore the testimony is bound up between the Father and the Son, and the Spirit.
J.C-S. In the opening of the gospel, John traces back the Word into eternity to identify Him as God, but "with the Father" is what He is in manhood, is it not?
J.T. That is right. This epistle commences with "That which was from the beginning", whereas in the first chapter of John's gospel it is "In the beginning was the Word"-"was the Word". That is, He did not begin then; He *was* there. Whereas here "from the beginning" refers to Christ in humanity, and the idea of eternal life is bound up with it.
{414}
A.R. Would @John 1: 14 have a bearing on this? It says, "And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us".
J.T. Quite so. It became something that it had not been before. The Word became something and that was flesh; that is to say, manhood or humanity.
J.C-S. Is the title "Word" descriptive of what He was here in time?
J.T. Yes; conveying the mind of God. It is, in that sense, a title of the Lord, and it belongs to Him. He is the Word. He expresses all that has been made known of God and all that *can* be made known of God. That is the full force of it.
Rem. There are three expressions used here-"the word of life", "the life", and "eternal life".
J.T. "The Word" is the expression of life. It is the word of life. It is not simply the Word by itself; Christ is the Word; but "the word of life" is the expression of the life. Then "the life" is the enjoyment or the thing to be enjoyed. "In him was life, and the life was the light of men", we are told in John's gospel. Then "the eternal life" is, of course, simply stating that it is eternal life, that it *is* eternal. It is not a passing thought, it is an *eternal* thought.
Wm.H. So that what was seen in Christ here, and manifested, was God's purpose for men, lying outside the range of death altogether?
J.T. Just so. So that if we look at verse 4 of @John 1, we shall see it, "In him was life", referring to Christ, "and the life was the light of men". And then the note there means that is not the light of angels, or of any other beings, but it is the light of men only. It is for men only.
J.C-S. Is this life connected with the promise of God? It is men that are in mind.
J.T. Well, quite so; the promise of life. We get that referred to in the Scriptures, that it was in
{415}
God's purpose, and it has taken form. It has taken form in Christ as Man, and it is one of the greatest subjects in the gospel of John, but it is unfolded fully, unfolded as in the possession now of believers, and characterising believers. It was a promise.
Wm.H. It has now taken shape, has it? The promise has come into expression in the Person of Christ? And that has come within our range?
J.T. Quite so. And so the description here is to that end. "That which was from the beginning, that which we have heard"; that is to say, the Lord Jesus was heard here in His testimony, and then "which we have seen with our eyes". He was seen with the eyes of the apostles and others, and then it says, "which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life". It is not only the life, but the word of it; that is to say, the word being the expression of it. Christ was the expression of it. Anyone, when He was here, might have met Him and seen what He was doing, so that this epistle is to bring out the real thought of life manifested or expressed in the Lord Jesus Christ and now imparted to us.
Ques. What about this thought of handling?
J.T. Well, the Lord said in Luke, for instance, "Handle me and see". The apostles and others had the opportunity of handling Him, which is a precious thought.
Rem. It is not mystical.
J.T. Not mystical, exactly. It is a real Person here upon earth, One that could be seen and heard, you might say, at any time, while He was here.
J.S.E. Is that the force of the word *report*?
J.T. Just so. Report is a means of testimony: "We report to you".
Ques. Do we have the same thought in Philippians: "holding forth the word of life"?
{416}
J.T. I would think so, holding it forth. That means that it was to be seen in Paul and the twelve, and others who carried on the testimony. It began in Peter, of course, peculiarly, on the day of Pentecost. That was a particular report that was to be seen and heard, and there were three thousand persons converted through that report.
F.J.F. So would it include the Lord's life here before His death and after?
J.T. Quite so. The word says, "Speak ... all the words of this life", @Acts 5: 20. Words convey the details of the life, and how real it was. And it is still real, for the Spirit of God makes it real now in the saints, and that is what we get as we look into this epistle. The saints are brought into this life and are to have the characteristics of it, the Spirit of God making it all living in us. It is not a myth or a fancy, it is real life, first seen in the Lord Jesus and now seen down here in the saints in the power of the Spirit of God.
A.R. Would you say the apostles had a special place in this, "that which we have heard, which we have seen"?
J.T. I think they had, and they had a certain fellowship, as it says here, "that which we have seen and heard we report to you, that *ye* also may have fellowship with us; and our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ". That is to say, the twelve apostles had a special fellowship with the Father and the Son; they had a special *fellowship*. There is no such fellowship now, because it was the fellowship of the apostles. The fellowship that we have is "with us", as John says here, "that *ye* also may have fellowship with us; and our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And these things write we to you that your joy may be full".
{417}
And then it says, in verse 6, "If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not practise the truth. But if we walk in the light as *he* is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin". That is to say, *we* have fellowship with one another now, but the twelve had fellowship with the Father and the Son as well. That is a very important point that is noted in verse 3, "that *ye* also may have fellowship with us; and our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ". There was that fellowship then, but the fellowship which Paul speaks of and which exists now is with one another. That is, as we are told elsewhere, the "fellowship of the Spirit".
Ques. In the case of the apostles, was it the fellowship of inauguration?
J.T. Exactly, that is right.
J.C-S. What they had access to in regard of the thought of life in Christ enters into the report. Is that the basis of the fellowship really, which we come into with one another?
J.T. I will read it again, "That which was from the beginning", that is the great theme, "that which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life; (and the life has been manifested, and we have seen, and bear witness, and report") -- that is to say, the twelve bore witness and reported the thing to the disciples and to others.
J.C-S. So that the report really enters into our own souls and gives us the light of this position.
J.T. Quite so. We are brought into it; we are brought into the life that the Lord Jesus had in Himself here. We are brought into that. It was the
{418}
light of men, but now it can be said that we are brought into it; men are brought into it. It is the testimony of the gospel really.
Rem. And therefore the necessity for the blood, the blood of Jesus Christ?
J.T. That is the basis, to maintain us right in our consciences, "the blood of Jesus Christ ... cleanses us from all sin". We are thus maintained in practical righteousness on the basis of the blood of Jesus Christ, which effected redemption.
R.H. In connection with the handling, it is after He arose from the dead, in Luke. Then in Acts, Peter stresses it in saying that they had seen Him and eaten with Him after He arose from the dead. What would be the significance of that?
J.T. That is all very practical as a testimony. Peter renders that testimony in the book of Acts. It is a practical testimony, that the Lord ate and drank with them. He was with them for forty days after He rose from the dead, and He ate and drank with the disciples during those forty days. It is all an incontestable testimony for anyone who had ears to hear and eyes to see; and that testimony remains now. That kind of life is available to us, in that we may eat and drink and yet we have an inward life which is called eternal life.
Ques. Is the word 'eternal' essential to give character to the life, because of the present conditions where we are surrounded with what is passing?
J.T. Do you mean what is referred to in verse 8 of chapter 2? "Again, I write a new commandment to you, which thing is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing and the true light already shines".
Ques. Yes. That is the character of it, but I wanted to ask if this life continues in eternity?
J.T. I think the word 'eternal' would mean it does. Is that your thought?
{419}
Rem. Yes. It is enjoyed now, when the word, 'eternal' attached to life gives a peculiar character to it, but the same thing will go on.
J.T. Exactly.
Ques. Does it suggest that the reality of this, in the power of the Spirit, who abides with us, carries us right over into eternal life? "Another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever".
J.T. Well, it is suggested. The Spirit is abiding with us, which is a greater thought, really, than eternal life, while at the same time they synchronise; but the Spirit is in us and maintains us in life; "the Spirit is life because of righteousness" (@Romans 8: 10), but that life remains eternally; it is called eternal life here indeed. That is the point of it. The great point in this epistle is the life. In fact, in the last chapter John says, referring to Christ, that "He is the true God, and eternal life". It shows how the full thought is expressed in Him, and we are brought into it.
C.A.I. Is this involved in what Paul speaks of in @2 Corinthians 4, "that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body"?
J.T. Well, the idea is the same, although there are, of course, varieties. If we get two statements conveying the same idea, then we have to compare them and see whether there is any variety to be noticed, I think "the life also of Jesus" is to be noticed. It is not just the idea of eternal life; it is what He was down here.
Wm.H. You referred to the Lord being with the disciples during the forty days. Would that suggest a circle of things outside the range of nature and of death, a heavenly order of things?
J.T. Quite so. So you can see, for instance, how the Lord went in with the two with whom He had travelled to Emmaus. As they constrained Him He went in, and He tarried with them, but He vanished
{420}
as He broke the bread, showing how it was outside of mere nature.
S.G. The apostles fellowship was with the Father and the Son, and ours is with the apostles, I would like to ask whether it can be said that our fellowship is with the Holy Spirit.
J.T. I think so. We have the very word as to the Spirit, the "fellowship of the Spirit"; we are brought into that. The Spirit is a divine Person, as Christ is, and as the Father is.
F.J.F. So is the thought that the eternal life is a character of life that will never be displaced?
J.T. Just so. It goes on; the word 'eternal' means that.
J.C-S. Is the intention of this epistle to set us up in our affections in a circle that lies outside of death and where Christ gives character to the life of it?
J.T. Quite so. We are brought into it, so that we are enjoined to lay hold of it: "Lay hold of eternal life", @1 Timothy 6: 12. All this, of course, depends not only on Christ but on the Spirit as well. The Spirit is here to maintain us in it. He is the Spirit of life.
J.C-S. And said to be "springing up into eternal life"?
J.T. Just so. Very good. "Springing up into eternal life".
C.F.I. Why does John introduce these tests? "If we say that we have fellowship with him", and "if we say that we have no sin". Is it to stress the practical side of things, that it might not only be in theory but in reality?
J.T. That is right. If we say it, then there must be something corresponding with that. If you will read the passage you will see the full force of it, and we will all get the benefit of it.
{421}
C.F.I. Verse 6: "If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not practise the truth". Verse 8: "If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us". Verse 10: "If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us".
J.T. The contrast has to be noted in each case, "If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not practise the truth". That is the dark contrast, and then in verse 8, "If we say that we have no sin" (well, that is a lie) "we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us". That is not simply something that might be a lie, but it characterises the person who is speaking. "If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us". It is not simply that I have told a lie, but the truth is not in me, I am not a christian at all. That is what is meant, showing how severe the teaching of this epistle is. It is abstract in general, but the abstract is as strong as the concrete. It means a person that is outside of christianity altogether, he is not a christian at all.
Ques. Many have a difficulty in apprehending this term 'abstract'. Could you say a little more as to the bearing of it. It is an idea used especially by John, is it not?
J.T. It is particularly so in this epistle, I would say. If one had time one could run through it and show how frequently the abstract idea recurs. It tends to strengthen us as believers in the reality of things, and then to condemn us if we are not in it.
Ques. Is it an aspect that we need the Spirit for, in a peculiar way, to help our minds?
J.T. Just so. So that you might know a person all his life, and all your life, and then there may be some discrepancy attributed to him. Well, you say,
{422}
I have known that man so many years and I know he is a genuine christian. That means that, in the abstract of your mind, you know that man is a christian, even although he may be defective. Whereas if you have to say I never knew that man to act as a christian at all, I do not believe he is a christian, that is the negative side of it.
F.W-n. Does what is manifested come in along with what is abstract in John's epistle?
J.T. Well, it does. The abstract idea runs through it, and I have no doubt we shall be helped as we proceed. The wise thing is for us to go along now on the surface of the truth and gradually we come into the reality of it, the abstract idea of it. So that we have, we might say, come now to the end of the first chapter.
A.R. Before leaving the chapter, I wondered if you would say a word as to walking in the light. It says, "But if we walk in the light as *he* is in the light, we have fellowship with one another".
J.T. The word 'walk' would be in the sense of movement, by profession. If you are walking in the light, the thing is shining, and anyone and everyone who knows you can see that you are walking in the light. You are not walking in darkness.
D.J.M. It says, "He that practises the truth comes to the light, that his works may be manifested that they have been wrought in God", @John 3: 21.
J.T. Just so, "Wrought in God". That is a characteristic word of the gospel, but this epistle carries the thing further, as to walking in the light.
Wm.H. Would all these tests show the reality of the eternal life, that things are not taken for granted merely? Was not the difficulty in the past that eternal life was claimed apart from a moral state and practical walk?
J.T. Just so. That is what came into one's mind in proposing the epistle, so that the dear brethren
{423}
who are here, and the brethren generally, as the truth is spread abroad, may be real in the thing that we profess. We attend meetings and read Scripture, and read the books, and speak to one another, but the thing is to be real in all that we are doing. So that everyone can see we are real, and this epistle is to bring that about, and we shall see it as we proceed. I think we might go on now to chapter 2, where in verse 1 we have the expression, "My children". That is not a question of God's children, it is "my children"-that is to say, the apostle in writing has the moral right, being an apostle, to call the saints his children. That is another thing to be noted, the moral right that a man like John has to speak of the saints as his children.
J.S.E. Does that put the stamp upon him as a father in this letter?
J.T. We come to that presently. This question of moral right is important. We have not apostles, of course, now, but we have men that have certain moral rights because they have gone on with God and God is with them. We are thus characterised as of God in having a certain moral right in dealing with the Lord's people, as having an influence over them, and the like. There are those who have the place of eldership or fathers, and I think that is important because we must not despise them. Such men are to be honoured and maintained as much as possible, because of the testimony.
Wm.H. So Paul refers, in the close of the epistle to the Corinthians, to Stephanas, and he says, "that *ye* should also be subject to such, and to every one joined in the work and labouring". Would that bear on the thought of fatherhood?
J.T. Very good. So in stressing the thing Paul says, "For if ye should have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet not many fathers". Paul could say that. He was a father.
{424}
Rem. Would you say a word about the expression in verse 1 of chapter 2, "In order that ye may not sin". I was thinking of the thought of a preventive against sin. Often we have it in our minds that it is impossible to walk in that way, but do not the words, "that ye may not sin", contemplate a certain sinless walk?
J.T. I should think so.
Rem. The possibility of it, that is what I am raising.
J.T. The continuance of it too, as we shall see in the epistle. The person that is so regarded continues in the thing; "they shall never perish", to use the language of the gospel. Young people need to be sure of that, to get assurance as to these things; and walking in the light gives assurance.
F.J.F. Is that the same as "Be *ye* therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect", @Matthew 5: 48?
J.T. Quite so. That is to bring out the truth in Matthew, as to the idea of perfection, and that the Father is the pattern of perfection. If we want to know how to be perfect as christians, as Paul said, "That we may present every man perfect in Christ", if we want to lay hold of that and enter into it, then the Father is the pattern of that. It is a question of walking in the light as He is in the light, and then we have fellowship with one another.
R.McK. Is joy a consequence of walking in this way? He says, "These things write we to you that your joy may be full".
J.T. It shows that John had in mind that christianity was a real thing, that the Lord Himself was in it. The Lord spoke of the joy that He had, "my joy", He said, and we as believers are to have our joy full. Perhaps we would all have to admit that we know very little of joy; but here John says, "That your joy may be full". There is no discrepancy
{425}
in it, and no weakness about it. So the reality of christianity is the point in this epistle.
Wm.H. If sin does come in, it says, "we have a patron with the Father". Is the idea that we have means of dealing with it, so that we should not drop out?
J.T. Here it is not the Spirit as the Paraclete, but Christ as the Paraclete. That is to say, the Paraclete is with the Father, and so we can count on being supported. Perhaps the brethren have not followed the idea of the Paraclete; there are two mentioned. The Lord says, I will send another one. The first one is Christ Himself; He was the Paraclete, and He has gone to heaven, and He is there now, in heaven, for us, to look after our affairs there. The word 'patron' is used here, but the word is the same as Paraclete. On the other hand, we have the Spirit here on earth, and the same word is attributable to Him. He looks after our interests here on earth, our spiritual interests particularly.
J.C-S. How completely we are taken care of!
J.T. Quite so. That is just what one thinks, and what one had in one's mind, that the dear brethren might come to the reality of things. We have everything that is needed to carry us through to the glory of God, everything that is needed is provided for us. We have a Paraclete in heaven and a Paraclete on earth, and then, moreover, the saints too are helpers, because they have fellowship one with another. That is a great help to us.
A.R. What would you say is the service of the Patron on high? How does He serve us if we sin?
J.T. I think He would bring it to bear upon us in our consciences. It is an unseen service that He carries on. If something happens to us He touches our consciences, so that we may judge ourselves, in all such things as that. Our Paraclete looks after us, but it is in the heavenly side of it. The Spirit of
{426}
God does the same thing here on earth, as in the assembly. How wonderfully well off we are, therefore!
Wm.H. The Lord looked at Peter, did He not, and brought about repentance?
J.T. Exactly. The Lord looked at him at the right time.
T.T. Do you get an idea of it with Samuel, after the people had sinned in asking a king? "Far be it from me that I should sin against Jehovah in ceasing to pray for you", @1 Samuel 12: 23.
J.T. Just so. He was a paraclete for them, as it were, standing by them; and he prayed, too. God thundered on them, showing that God answered the intercession of Samuel so that they might judge themselves. What one is constantly occupied with now, in proposing this epistle, is that the dear brethren might be real; that we all might be real, not artificial, but go on and enjoy fellowship with one another.
H.K.R. Would you open up a little more what the thought of a paraclete is; what we are considering now, and then the Paraclete in @John 14. There is a note in chapter 2 of John's epistle, "Christ manages all our affairs for us above; the Holy Spirit below, I use 'patron' in the sense rather of the Roman patron, who maintained the interests of his clients in every way. So Christ on high; the Spirit here for saints". In @John 14: 16 the same word is used, and the footnote says, "One who carries on the cause of any one and helps him. This Christ did on earth; this (l @John 2: 1) He does now in heaven, and the Holy Spirit on earth 'manages our cause, our affairs, for us'. If 'solicitor' were not too common, it just answers the sense".
J.T. So that these passages being read, the brethren ought all to get help on these points. Then we go on to the second verse, "*He* is the propitiation for our sins; but not for ours alone, but also for the
{427}
whole world". That is another thing, that Christ is not simply the Paraclete, but the propitiation for our sins, and not only for ours, but for the whole world. It shows the breadth of the redemptive work of Christ.
H.W. Is that what John the baptist had in mind when he said, "Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world"?
J.T. Very good. It is just possible, when it says, "*he* is the propitiation for our sins", that the 'our' may refer to the Jews, but it is probably also christians simply, but then the whole world is included in the breadth of it. The whole world is within the range of it, and that is the basis really for the gospel.
F.J.F. Is that why the blood of the sin offering was carried into the sanctuary? I do not know that I could say very much, but draw attention to what is *before* God, which is great enough to cleanse the whole world, if they would only accept the Lord Jesus Christ.
J.T. Quite so, and that is to be compared with the blood on the door-posts of the Israelites. It is just to cover the man that is inside the door-posts, but the blood in the sanctuary is to cover the whole world, showing the breadth of it.
Wm.H. So it is the divine side, as meeting all the claims of God's throne?
J.T. Just so. Now verse 3 says, "And hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments. He that says, I know him, and does not keep his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; but whoever keeps his word, in him verily the love of God is perfected". So that we have contrasts here, but they are very real contrasts; so that it goes on to say, "Hereby we know that we are in him". That is to say, the epistle brings out the truth of how we may *know* things, so that we
{428}
may have the consciousness of things. We shall see more of it as we proceed. So it says further, "He that says he abides in him ought, even as *he* walked, himself also so to walk". So that abiding in Him is, I suppose, an astronomical thought, like a heavenly body abiding in the sun. A believer is like that, he is in Christ, but then there is a corresponding conduct, and that is that he ought to walk even as *He* walked, so that the test of everything is Christ.
J.C-S. So we must substantiate the idea in ourselves?
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. We are warranted in comparing what a person says with his conduct, to see whether it is according to this standard.
J.T. Now, we have another thought in verse 7, "Beloved, I write no new commandment to you, but an old commandment, which ye have had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word which ye heard". That would be the Lord's own testimony; that is the old commandment. "Again, I write a new commandment to you, which thing is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing and the true light already shines. He who says he is in the light, and hates his brother, is in the darkness until now. He that loves his brother abides in light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him. But he that hates his brother is in the darkness, and walks in the darkness, and knows not where he goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes". It shows that when darkness is brought in it is the abstract thought again, but then the point that might be alluded to first of all is, "Again, I write a new commandment to you, which thing is true in him and in you". That is to say, it was true in Christ when He was here, and now that the Spirit has come down, and the Spirit is in us, it is true in us too. What is true in Christ as here is true in us
{429}
too. The new commandment is true in us. The old commandment is true in Him; it is what He was here; but the new commandment is what we are, because of the Spirit come down, and redemption accomplished, so that the true light is there in the believer.
Wm.H. Why does he use the expression *commandment* in referring to what was here in Christ, and now in the saints by the Spirit?
J.T. I think it is the idea of what is imperative. It must be, and, of course, it was absolutely so in Christ, but now it must be in us too. The point in the epistle is that things *must* be, and that is where the abstract is to be understood.
C.F.I. Does that involve the work of God in the saints?
J.T. It does, indeed. There could be nothing without that, and that is what we should see, I believe, as we proceed. The saints are workers; we are brought into workmanship, so that we are doing things as well as Christ. That is the idea of this epistle, so that things are real, and every one is a worker, as it were, each one helping the other.
J.C-S. "True in him and in you", would cover the thought of eternal life, too.
J.T. Quite so. The new commandment implies that. What is true in Christ is true in us, showing how the truth, as in the saints now, corresponds with what Christ was here when He was on earth. It now corresponds in us; it is what He was when He was here. It makes the thing all real, because christianity is a real thing and goes on into eternity.
H.K.R. Would that link on with @John 8, where Jesus replied, "I am ... altogether that which I also say to you"?
J.T. Very good, exactly agreeing with it. If we say anything, we ought to agree with what we say.
{430}
H.B. I would like to ask as to the brother here. It says, "He that loves his brother". Could you help us as to that?
J.T. Well, the brother is the professing christian. He is viewed as a professing christian if he believes the truth of the gospel at all. If he is a professing christian he has the classification of a brother, but he might prove to be unreal, and that is the point here. If he does not love his brother, he is unreal; he is in darkness, showing that it is all abstract. It is not an individual item that is in mind, but rather what is characteristic.
J.C-S. There is no neutral course with John, is there?
J.T. Just so; no neutral course. He is real or he is not real.
D.J.M. It says, "the true light already shines". Would that include what is seen in the saints?
J.T. Quite so, "The true light already shines". Christians are really the true light, you might say, in that sense. It is a very remarkable thing to be noted.
Ques. Does this shining manifest itself in loving the brethren?
J.T. That is the idea; verses 10 and 11 say, "He that loves his brother abides in light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him. But he that hates his brother is in the darkness". It is not simply that he has done something wrong at some time, but he is in the dark; it is the abstract idea. "And walks in the darkness, and knows not where he goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes". These are most serious things and yet we are apt to fall into them.
The next great point, and it is a great point, is the question of the gradations we have here of the family of God. The first is general, "I write to you, children, because your sins are forgiven". That applies to all
{431}
of us. But then the next is, "I write to you, fathers". That does not apply to all of us, because it refers to persons that "have known him that is from the beginning". That is, a father knows Christ as from the beginning, not simply as what He is in heaven now, but as "from the beginning". Then, "I write to you, young men, because ye have overcome". That is, there is strength in the young men, and it says, "ye have overcome the wicked one". And then, "I write to you, little children, because ye have known the Father". They know the Father in the light of His being Father. The little children have the light of the Father. And then again, we have the past tense. Verses 12 and 13 refer to the present, but the past tense is used in verse 14. "I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. Love not the world". Notice it is all to young men, showing that the young men are in mind specially: "Love not the world, nor the things in the world. If any one love the world, the love of the Father is not in him; because all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world is passing" (that is a thing that we have already noticed), "and its lust, but he that does the will of God abides for eternity". Then the next thing is to the "little children" in verse 18. We have "children", which is a general thought, covering all christians, but verse 18 is to "little children". John says, "Little children, it is the last hour, and, according as ye have heard that antichrist comes, even now there have come many antichrists, whence we know that it is the last hour. They went out from among us, but they were not of us"; that is, they are not real christians, "for if they had been of us, they would have surely remained with us, but that they
{432}
might be made manifest that none are of us". So that we can see how we may be shut out altogether, in the abstract sense, in this verse. Then it goes on. "And ye have the unction from the holy one, and ye know all things": the little children have means of knowing all things; the word 'unction' means that. It is a reference to the Spirit, but it is a peculiar word that is only mentioned here.
R.H. Did I understand you to say, in relation to verse 13, that the knowledge involves more than what Christ is now in heaven? "Ye have known him that is from the beginning".
J.T. It includes what He is now, but it is "from the beginning". That is, the whole walk of Christ here, the gospels are the record of it from the beginning.
Rem. Do you mean, from the incarnation?
J.T. Yes. That is what is in mind.
J.C-S. Everything for christianity dates from that point, does it?
J.T. That is right. It dates from that point.
C.A.I. What is the special thought in the use of the word *unction* in regard to the Holy Spirit?
J.T. It is a peculiar word. It refers to knowledge that the christian has acquired; the little children have it. It is attributable to them, in an abstract sense. Let us look at it again, "*Ye* have the unction from the holy one, and ye know all things. I have not written to you because ye do not know the truth, but because ye know it". That is a remarkable thing; it can only be abstract, because they know it, the little children know it. "Because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth. Who is the liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? *He* is the antichrist who denies the Father and the Son". This is all to the little children, the young christians. "*He* is the antichrist who denies the Father and the
{433}
Son". Well, why should the word 'antichrist' be brought in here? Surely it is because young people, especially as going to school and the like, are exposed to that sort of thing, to great people, to people of great distinction in the world, who are not christians, persons who deny the Father and the Son, and the young people are exposed to that. Parents therefore are to be watchful, and look after their children and see the books they read, and forbid the bad books.
D.J.M. Have the "young men" overcome such? Would "the wicked one" be antichristian teaching?
J.T. That is right. They have overcome the wicked one, but the little children are in danger of the antichrist. It is another idea; the reference really is to young people, or school children; they are exposed to people who have distinction in this world. They are not to follow them, nor to pay any attention to them. Children are to have the unction; that is to say, the Spirit of God giving us light about everything; and parents are to see to that. They baptise their children to that very end, that they may be in the light and be saved from antichrist.
Ques. Is that why the word 'holy' is stressed from the beginning, "*ye* have the unction from the holy one"?
J.T. Very good. The Lord Jesus is called "the holy one" in @John 6. Peter says, "We have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God".
Ques. Does this word 'unction' suggest that the Spirit is something special to the young people in the way of help, in view of their stage of growth?
J.T. Well, I thought of that, and it is young people, and especially because the antichrists are brought in, who may refer to people that have distinction and may be written up in the papers and the like, or be the subject of novels and all that
{434}
sort of thing. Young people are exposed to that, and their parents ought to watch it, so as to save them from antichrist.
Ques. Would you encourage them to speak to the Spirit Himself, in view of this statement?
J.T. I certainly would, if they have the Spirit. If young people want to come into fellowship, we should always find out and make sure they have the Spirit. It is not simply that they are baptised, but that they have the Spirit.
Wm.H. Would the thought of unction lie largely in sensibilities, or would it go further in the way of an intelligent conception of the truth?
J.T. I think it is an intelligent thing in the mind of the young people. If we are christians, we have the mind of Christ, in the abstract, anyway. But then the thing is to follow that up, foster it, and to read what is good. As the word is, "be followers of that which is good", @1 Peter 3: 13. Parents should see to it that the good things are in the way of the children, even as Elisha walked through the house when that little boy died. Although under his father's influence, yet he could not save him, and Elisha looked around to see if everything was all right in the house. What were the children reading? That may be the cause of the moral death of the child; very often it is.
Ques. Is that why the last hour is stressed in relation to the little children?
J.T. I think it is. The Lord is looking after the little children, because He needs them to carry on the truth, and the little children are to be saved.
T.T. He refers to unction again in verse 27. In the first instance, verse 20, it is "from the holy one, and ye know all things"; and in verse 27 it is, that the unction "abides in you" and then "teaches you".
{435}
J.T. Notice the word "*yourselves*" there. It is stressed by being in italics, "*yourselves*". Let us see what the note says about that: 'Personal pronouns, used as the subject of a verb, are normally emphatic in Greek, ... there is some distinctive emphasis here', that is to say, this word *yourselves* is emphatic, and, I would say, it refers not simply to the little children, but to all the saints. In verse 26, we have "These things have I written to you concerning those who lead you astray: and *yourselves*, the unction which ye have received from him abides in you, and ye have not need that any one should teach you". Now, that is important, that the christian has in the unction the means of acquiring instruction by himself; "but as the same unction teaches you as to all things, and is true and is not a lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him". That is a great general truth for the saints, and it secures us; it protects us. We have it in ourselves to protect ourselves in the sense of intelligence, according to this unction.
S.G. You said that any books of an antichristian character should be forbidden. What if the school authorities command, in the schools, that such should be read?
J.T. Well, we cannot control the authorities. Although they may be ordained of God, yet they may not be christians, and, of course, that is where the influence of the parent comes in. He should see to it, that even if the teacher does not teach the truth to the young, he should do it at home. He should see that things are done at home.
{436}
THE PERSON OF CHRIST AND ETERNAL LIFE (2)
@1 John 3: 1 - 24; @1 John 4: 1 - 14
J.T. It should be observed that the family of God is in mind in this chapter; but the family of God as children, not as sons, children being an expression of derivation, viewing us particularly before God in His love for us. John never uses the word 'sons' as to us, except in one place and that is in @Revelation 21. So that the chapter before us now is the family of God in the sense of our being children, children of God. We have also in the chapter the idea of John being our father, or at least, we being the children of John, which is a matter we touched on at the last reading. It is important to keep in mind the way John treats of the saints. He has personal experience with God and is honoured in his service. Those who serve us are to be honoured and helped in every way in the service, and they have certain rights attaching to them. It will be noticed that the word 'begotten' has a very distinct place in the chapter. It is not the word 'born', I think the idea of being begotten calls attention to the father, as in Abraham. There is a certain progenitive authority connected with one who is a father. But the word for us immediately is the love. We are called upon to notice it: "See what love the Father has given to us". Notice the title "Father" here; it is not our Father, but it is a title of God, a peculiar title of God in John. It is God in grace, and in relation to the family.
J.C-S. "To us there is one God, the Father", is that the idea?
J.T. Yes, just so. And what is to be noted too is the stress laid on the 'seeing', seeing the Lord, "Beloved, now are we children of God, and what we shall be has not yet been manifested; we know that
{437}
if it is manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And every one that has this hope in him", that is to say, in Christ, "purifies himself, even as *he* is pure". So that the idea of what we are to be like, in eternity, has to be left. Yet things are made very real to us, in that when we shall see Him there is immediately the thought that we shall be like Him.
C.F.I. Does that involve something beyond the thought of children?
J.T. I think it means sons, although John, as I said, does not mention sons, except in @Revelation 21. "We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is". We shall be in His likeness; we shall be sons in character.
Wm.H. Paul refers, in @Romans 8, to the manifestation of the sons of God. That would correspond with it?
J.T. Quite so.
D.J.M. Would the expression, "his body of glory", in @Philippians 3 correspond?
J.T. It would, and another thing is the word in @Romans 8 as to the one thing that we still await, in order to our being glorified. It refers to sonship; we await adoption, or sonship.
A.R. Is there emphasis on the word 'now': "Beloved, now are we children of God", in contrast to what we shall be?
J.T. Yes.
T.T-s. Has John in mind in speaking of "the Father" and "this hope" to stress the idea of origin and destiny in order to produce present results in us morally?
J.T. Well, our destiny, of course, would be sonship. What is in mind is the present, and there is emphasis on the word *now*. "Now are we children of God". We shall not remain children eternally, I apprehend.
{438}
C.A.I. Would you say a little to help us in regard to the connection of eternal life with the children of God? John says in chapter 1: "The eternal life, which was with the Father". Are family relationships involved in this? It would be seen in the Lord Jesus as He was here. Then that life, the eternal life, is now for us to enter into. Is it connected with the Father in regard to us too?
J.T. I do not think it is. Our position as children down here refers to derivation; of course, from God, but it is not the thought of eternal purpose. It is not the thought of sonship. It says: "Now are we children of God", but what we shall be has to be awaited till we see the Lord as He is. It is as if that great thought is reserved, showing how much there is reserved, and then the present is enough, as it were, and more than enough, to cause us joy. "See what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the children of God". It is the present time, but it is enough to cause joy, and that is in keeping with the epistle.
J.C-S. Is John's family confined to the earth for the moment?
J.T. I think so. Therefore we are the objects of the care of God. That is one of the features of the epistle, and it is to encourage us into satisfaction with what we are brought into, according to this epistle.
Ques. Would this hope have some definite effect on us, in the thought of purifying?
J.T. It is hope in Christ. It ought to have an effect upon us like other things, for the idea is to effect a present result. Even the possession of eternal life is a present result. "See what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the children of God", but then in @John 3 we have the idea of eternal life as the evidence of the love. The love that God has for us is evidenced in the epistle
{439}
in that we should be children, but in the gospel in that we should have eternal life.
Wm.H. In @John 1 he refers to those who were born of God: "who have been born, not of blood, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God". They had the right to take the place of the children of God.
J.T. That is a present result, "Who have been born, not of blood, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God" is a present result. It is not sonship.
Wm.H. So that John would develop the features that belong to the children of God; they are marked by love.
J.T. That is the great point, that we are the children of God. We may come in for suffering, because we are of God, we are derived of God and God loves us, and the devil, of course, would attack us; hence the constant use of the word 'devil' or 'Satan' in John's writings. The immediate efforts of the devil against the saints are in mind.
Wm.H. The generation of God-His children, are in opposition, are they not, to the children of the wicked one?
J.T. Just so. So that we have, in verse 7, "Let no man lead you astray; he that practises righteousness is righteous, even as *he* is righteous. He that practises sin is of the devil; for from the beginning the devil sins. To this end the Son of God has been manifested, that he might undo the works of the devil. Whoever has been begotten of God does not practise sin, because his seed abides in him, and he cannot sin". Wonderful statement: "he cannot sin". This must be, as we have said, an abstract thought, "He cannot sin, because he has been begotten of God. In this are manifest the children of God and the children of the devil". So the two families, so to
{440}
speak, are in evidence. The children of God and the children of the devil.
J.C-S. Would the features of the divine nature in the family really be the Father's features?
J.T. I would think so.
Rem. Teaching in this abstract manner seems to be much more challenging than historical allusions in which things are mixed up. Here what is of God is absolutely separate from what is of the devil.
J.T. Do you not think that God is entitled to use the abstract idea to bring out what is in His mind, and what He is effecting in us. It is in order that we shall be sure of things, and be able to fall back on certainty. The abstract idea is the most positive certainty.
H.B. What is the point in his stressing righteousness?
J.T. Because it is of God. To be righteous is a feature which belongs to the family of God; it is "as *he* is righteous". "*He*" would be Christ, of course, showing how the divine Persons may be interchanged in thought.
F.J.F. It says of the Lord that He loved righteousness.
J.T. Just so. And "hated lawlessness". What a thought that is for our times! Trade unions and all that sort of thing are so rampant, and the idea of righteousness is cast to the winds by many people. The idea of Magna Carta is cast to the winds too, and notwithstanding the boasted rights of Britons, a man is not allowed to earn his living, even though able to do so. Unrighteousness is rampant in all these associations. Therefore the saints have to suffer; it is a time of suffering, as it is now in Australia in a special way.
Rem. You might call these associations the works of the devil.
{441}
J.T. I do not think we should hesitate to say that. God is acting against the thing. It is so rampant, and so open, that God is acting against it. The question now is whether the brethren are going to take sides with God in acting against it, because the great apostasy which is coming in is to be marked by it.
Ques. Do you not think that the time we are in calls for a review of all kinds of associations, directorships of companies with worldly men, and partnerships, and professional associations?
J.T. I would go to the worst features first, and see if we cannot arouse our consciences as to it. When murder takes place, you have to deal with the worst features: a murderer is of the devil, you know, directly of the devil, and these associations I am alluding to have murder behind them.
J.C-S. So the devil really expresses himself in that way in such associations. Murder is really the expression of his character.
J.T. Just so, and men go as far as to murder, taking away a man's living, for the sake of forcing him to join what he abhors; but God is taking a hand against that. I would say He is showing His hand against it in the different parts of the earth, but especially in America and in Australia.
A.R. What would you say about associations which might not be murderous?
J.T. Keep them last. Keep them under the last heading, for if it is a question of murder, I think we should base, as it were, all that we have to say on that, because it is directly of the devil.
Ques. Is it in principle "Hades gates"?
J.T. Quite so. It is comforting that those gates shall not prevail against the assembly, showing the power there is in the assembly. There is no family in earth or in heaven greater than the assembly.
{442}
A.R. What I was thinking was that while associations may not be murderous, the principle of association with unbelievers would be the same.
J.T. Well, if it is so. Let us deal with the thing that we know is of the devil directly, and that is trade unionism. In New York we have had to withdraw from eighteen persons because they elected to remain with the trade unions. They elected to do that instead of being true to the fellowship of God's Son. That is what the thing comes to, but God has come in and rescued nearly half of them, although there are about eight remaining. This trade unionism is so patently of the devil that we had better deal with that.
R.H. The idea of violence and murder come out in Cain.
J.T. Quite so. That is where the thing begins.
F.J.F. Does all this bring out the great dignity that God connects with His people? I was thinking of that word in John, that those to whom the word of God came, were called gods (@John 10: 34); they were so distinguished.
J.T. Quite so, and the Lord says of that word, that the scripture cannot be broken. So the question of righteousness is what enters into all this. The Lord said, "It becometh us to fulfil all righteousness"; not one part of it, but all of it.
Ques. Is the only way we can fulfil righteousness to allow the Spirit to have His place with us and lead us where He will?
J.T. Just so. There are three things mentioned in @John 16, that the Spirit would do and righteousness comes in there. "But I say the truth to you, It is profitable for you that I go away; for if I do not go away, the Comforter will not come to you; but if I go I will send him to you. And having, come, he will bring demonstration to the world, of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment: of sin, because they
{443}
do not believe on me; of righteousness, because I go away to my Father, and ye behold me no longer; of judgment, because the ruler of this world is judged" (verses  7 - 11). Therefore the Spirit is the power for all this; He is the power to bring demonstration, which is a public thing. The Lord would bring demonstration in among the brethren as to all these matters, and we certainly should begin at murder. If a thing is murderous, we should stress it. The Spirit would convict us, and convict all men of this terrible thing called unionism.
Wm.H. He says in the end of verse 8, chapter 3, "The Son of God has been manifested, that he might undo the works of the devil". Would that be a subjective thing in the saints?
J.T. Quite so. These works are in trade unionism above all things, because it is depriving men of the means of living and robbing them of the enjoyment of christian fellowship. But God has taken in hand to meet them, and it is a great comfort that He has. The point with us now is getting things into our souls, the young people especially, and then taking a stand against what is of the devil. The devil is openly spoken of, and it is a question of our taking a stand against that, wherever it appears.
T.T-s. So it speaks a good deal in the chapter of what we do, as well as what Satan does, or Cain.
J.T. We have come down to verse 10-"In this are manifest the children of God and the children of the devil. Whoever does not practise righteousness is not of God, and he who does not love his brother. For this is the message which ye have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another: not as Cain was of the wicked one, and slew his brother; and on account of what slew he him? because his works were wicked, and those of his brother righteous. Do not wonder, brethren, if the world hate
{444}
you. *We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren". That is to say the brethren are brought into peculiar view here. "He who does not love his brother abides in death. Every one that hates his brother is a murderer". We are thus not left in darkness at all as to this matter of a murderer, and where it lies; it is of the devil. The Lord says of the devil in John's gospel, that he was a murderer from the beginning.
A.R. Would you say something as to the word "practise"? It comes in quite frequently. What would be the bearing of that word, do you think?
J.T. I think it is a continuous thing. It is not an isolated thing, which might happen to any of us, but a continuous thing, I suppose that is what is meant.
Ques. Would it link up with the word in @Revelation 19: "It was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure; for the fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints"?
J.T. Very good. "Righteousnesses" is the plural word, and the assembly is clothed with that which is made up of acts of righteousness, and it is called fine linen.
S.B. In the previous chapter provision is made for those who sin, but in this chapter we are told those who practise sin are of the devil.
J.T. We have to go by the context. Scripture has to be read contextually, and we must examine words, and see if there is any correspondence. They can be examined and compared and a difference made between them.
Wm.H. Here it is a question of practising sin; is that what is characteristic of the person?
J.T. Quite so.
R.McK. Does the statement in chapter 5; "He is the true God and eternal life", set out the thought for us objectively, in that idolatry and lawlessness
{445}
disappear before the Lord? Is that the setting out of the truth objectively?
J.T. The fifth chapter is really the most important, in a sense, in all the epistles. It is a remarkable statement, that "He is the true God and eternal life". Then we are told to keep ourselves from idols, for they are as bad as anything else. The Lord Himself is said here to be the true God, but in @John 17 the Father is said to be the true God, so that we have to compare those two things.
Wm.H. It says in verse 14, "*We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren", and then in the next verse, "ye know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him". It would seem as if eternal life is connected with the loving of the brethren.
J.T. Yes, clearly, and that a murderer is outside of it. He is hopeless; he belongs to the lake of fire: "no murderer has eternal life abiding in him". It is a remarkable thing that that should be said. You might think it need not be said, but it is said, and it is to bring out what abides in us, and how the devil may be working.
J.C-S. It speaks in the end of the tenth verse of him "who does not love his brother". Such a person is not of God, if he does not love his brother. The person who hates is seen to be a murderer, but even the absence of love is regarded as conclusive that the person is not of God.
J.T. Quite so. It is remarkable what you do get in this epistle in the way of contrast, and what the Lord really means in all that we had this afternoon, and have now this evening, is to get the young people to face all these things. There is so much abroad to defile the young, and to teach very terrible things, that the Lord would impress upon us that we must judge things according to what they really are.
{446}
The assembly introduces us into the blessedness of God and the service of God, and it is important that the youth should be in it. Many of them coming into it at a very early age, some as young as eight or nine years of age, and it is an immense thing that parents should have in mind to bring their children up with a judgment of all these terrible things that are mentioned in this epistle.
T.T-s. A new realm is opened up in verse 14, to which we would have access, in contrast to what we find in the world, "passed from death to life". Would it suggest that there is another sphere opened to us?
J.T. Among the brethren, so that eternal life really is among the brethren. The assembly is the sphere of eternal life at the present time, and we are to lay hold of it.
A.A-n. Is it significant that the word for 'know' in verse 14 is the word for 'conscious knowledge'? Before this we have had the word for 'objective knowledge', but now, as coming into the sphere of the brethren, it is conscious knowledge. Is that right?
J.T. And it bears on the great truth that the Lord is bringing before us, namely the Spirit, the presence of the Spirit here in the assembly. Although we say sometimes on earth, yet it is not strictly on earth, it is in the assembly. That is where the Spirit is, and therefore we get eternal life in the assembly.
R.H. Would verse 14 help us to be assured that we have the Spirit. "*We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren". If there is love for the brethren, is that evidence that we have the Spirit?
J.T. Quite so. We often say if there is a young person who wants to break bread, and to be with us in the service of God, the challenge must be, has he
{447}
or she got the Spirit? As Paul said, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" That is the great question if there be any thought of a person coming into the fellowship; the Spirit must be with them, and in them.
A.R. It says that the fruit of the Spirit includes "love", so you would say that if a person has love for the brethren it would be the result of the Spirit in them.
J.T. Quite so. It is a very good test, I would say, as to persons seeking fellowship. Have they received the Holy Spirit? Let the challenge be brought home to them, and let the parents know it too, and let them answer for it.
R.H. Would you make that test a historical matter or a question of the evidence of it in the person more?
J.T. In the person, I would say. John would say that here, it is a question of what you have abiding in you. So we may well say we call on all that is within us to praise God. That is a right statement, for it is what is within us. Therefore when we come together to the breaking of bread, the question is what is within us. What are we? We have to think of the saints first when we sit down together, and what their character is, and what their history may be. The Lord is looking at them from that point of view.
C.F.I. Would you say that the enjoyment of life involves the brethren, and love for the brethren?
J.T. Certainly. Life is love, and we might say it is an interchangeable expression. Love is life and life is love. That is what I would say.
C.F.I. @Psalm 133 confirms that. "There hath Jehovah commanded the blessing, life for evermore", where the brethren are dwelling together in unity.
J.T. Just so. So that we have what is seen in this chapter, verse 18, "Children, let us not love
{448}
with word, nor with tongue, but in deed and in truth. And hereby we shall know that we are of the truth, and shall persuade our hearts before him-that if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart and knows all things. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, we have boldness towards God, and whatsoever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments, and practise the things which are pleasing in his sight". So there is victory within sight of any one of us. There may be something to challenge your heart, and to condemn it, but God is greater than that. The thing is to measure up your heart with God, for He knows all things, so that we can get rest in our hearts in that sense in the presence of God. "Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, we have boldness towards God, and whatsoever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments, and practise the things which are pleasing in his sight. And this is his commandment, that we believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and that we love one another, even as he has given us commandment. And he that keeps his commandments abides in him, and he in him. And hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given to us". The Spirit therefore is brought into great evidence in these passages in a subjective sense.
J.C-S. All that is presented in that way is not valid without the Spirit.
J.T. That is what I would say. The desire to break bread cannot be accepted except there is clear evidence that the Spirit has been received.
F.J.F. And I suppose one of the marks that they love the brethren would be that they attend the meetings.
J.T. Very good, and the fathers and mothers should see that they attend the meetings. They see
{449}
that they attend the school, of course, because, you might say, their livelihood may be dependent on the schooling they get, but what about God? What about the meetings? What about divine claims?
Rem. Does that not require that we who are in fellowship should avail ourselves of every coming together, sisters and brothers alike?
J.T. Very good; sisters and brothers alike. The necessity of sisters being present at all our meetings has come before us already within the past ten days, but not, of course, at the care meeting. The question is whether the care meeting is a designation that attached to the early christians, or whether they did not rest rather on eldership. Eldership therefore must come more into view than it is at present. The first reference to eldership, in the plural sense, is in @Acts 14, it is not one elder, but elders in every assembly.
Ques. Are you suggesting that we put too much weight on the care meetings?
J.T. I think we do, and it has gradually moved into the place of the assembly. It has done so very much in certain places.
J.C-S. In stressing eldership, are you thinking of experience and moral authority?
J.T. Quite so. That is why we have twenty-four of them in @Revelation 4. It is referring back to David's regime. We have twenty-four elders and four living creatures. That is to, say, the idea of experience with God first, twenty-four times; and then life, the living creatures, four times. Eldership thus has the greater place in that sense.
Wm.H. Would you get a sample care meeting in @Acts 15, when it says, "the apostles and the elders were gathered together to see about this matter"?
J.T. Very good. They were *seeing* about it, but the assembly comes into it at the end. It comes into it at the beginning too, for they were received by the
{450}
assembly, and then at the end the whole matter was ratified by the assembly and the Holy Spirit had to do with it too. Would you confirm all that, please, from the scripture.
Wm.H. In @Acts 15, verse 3, it says, "And they caused great joy to all the brethren. And being arrived at Jerusalem, they were received by the assembly".
J.T. That is what I meant. "They were received", which is a very touching occurrence. It is a nice thing to see the assembly receiving, and now here in Glasgow I suppose nearly all the brethren are receiving someone into their houses, where they are showing hospitality, and that is a great matter. It is very nice and glorious to see the number of brethren who are being entertained by the brethren. It is a great opportunity for love to be actually working amongst us.
Wm.H. It says in verse 6, "the apostles and the elders were gathered together to see about this matter", then when they arrived at the judgment it says in verse 22, "Then it seemed good to the apostles and to the elders, with the whole assembly, to send chosen men from among them with Paul and Barnabas to Antioch".
J.T. So that whilst you have the apostles and elders and James and Peter, you have also the whole assembly involved.
Wm.H. Then you have further reference in verse 28, "For it has seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us". The Holy Spirit is brought in too.
J.T. Quite so.
S.G. In relation to eldership, should matters be in the hands of elders even before they come into the care meeting?
J.T. Very likely, because God is showing His interest in and approval of elders. So in @Nehemiah 8, the first reference is to a large group of saints coming
{451}
together to listen to Ezra, and this is followed by the second day, when the elders, those of experience and knowledge, had the first place. There are no sisters mentioned at all on the second day, so that what we are saying now is just to stress the necessity for eldership, that is to say, experience with God in the matter of administration in the assembly.
G.D. Does not John write his second and third epistles as an elder?
J.T. He does. He addresses an elect lady too, showing the respect he had for the sisters.
D.J.M. Paul in writing to Philippi says, "To all the saints in Christ Jesus ... with the overseers and ministers".
J.T. All that is important, showing how matters stood at the beginning according to Scripture. The Scriptures themselves must be the test of everything as it comes up.
F.J.F. It says in @Revelation 7: 13, "And one of the elders answered, saying to me, These who are clothed with white robes, who are they, and whence came they? And I said to him, My lord, *thou* knowest. And he said to me ..." and so on. Would that show that the elder is looked upon as having knowledge?
J.T. Quite so. He is asked questions, and the elders run right through to chapter 19 of Revelation, showing how important they are in the mind of God. There are twenty-four of them, not twelve, but twenty-four.
Ques. Might there be cases of sin which the elders might feel it is not necessary to make public?
J.T. Yes, I have had to do with that myself, and felt it to be of God, dealing with cases of that kind and adjusting them according to @Galatians 6, which reads, "If even a man be taken in some fault, ye who are spiritual restore such a one in a spirit of meekness, considering thyself lest *thou* also be
{452}
tempted". That is not an assembly matter, it is a matter for elders, for those who are spiritual. 'Spiritual' there is, you might say, a synonym for eldership. Would you say that?
Rem. Yes, I would say it fully, but I do not think this is much understood.
J.T. Well, I think you are right; I am glad you brought it up. According to the verse which has just been read in @Galatians 6, the fault has not overtaken the man, but he is taken *in* the fault. He is taken in the fault, and therefore it may be very serious.
A.R. Would you differentiate between sins, feeling that one might be more serious than another?
J.T. There is no differentiation there. The sin is there, and the man has to be restored. It does not say, *If* ye can restore him; it implies that spiritual people *will* restore him; they will do it, "Ye who are spiritual restore such a one in a spirit of meekness, considering thyself lest *thou* also be tempted". And so we have a similar passage in @James 5: "Is any sick among you? let him call to him the elders of the assembly". Notice, *the elders* of the assembly, "and let them pray over him", and then it says, "if he be one who has committed sins, it shall be forgiven him".
A.R. I think what you have said is most important, but I have a very strong feeling that many cases have been brought to the assembly which could have been dealt with according to @Galatians 6.
J.T. Quite so. The very worst things can be forgiven: Peter's were forgiven, anyway, although he denied the Lord Jesus.
E.B.McC. Must it be plural? "Ye who are spiritual".
J.T. Well, apparently; that is what it says. They are spiritual, and eldership implies that.
{453}
J.C-S. And would the restoration of the person involve self-judgment on his part?
J.T. Surely. Because another thing comes in there, and that is what we have had in the second chapter of John's epistle. That is to say, the Patron is with the Father, not with God but with the Father. Things can thus be adjusted, because the Patron, that is to say, the Paraclete, is with the Father. And then, in addition, we have the Holy Spirit here. With Christ in heaven and the Holy Spirit here, surely we can have everything settled.
J.C-S. So that, if the person judges himself, he is dissociated from the sin, is he not?
J.T. Quite so; if he judges himself. It says, "if any one sin, we have a patron with the Father". Surely if the Advocate is acting in heaven there would be self-judgment. The first thing He would do, would be to bring about self-judgment.
J.S.E. Would the case of David with Nathan in @2 Samuel 12 be typical of this?
J.T. I would think so, because Nathan says, "Jehovah has also put away thy sin". David had confessed it, but Nathan said, 'The Lord has put it away'; the Lord did that. It was a terrible sin; it was murder and other things, but the word is, "Jehovah has also put away thy sin". Nevertheless, the government of God pursued the thing, although the forgiveness was there.
Wm.H. Sometimes when a person is restored we hold reserves against such even after he is supposed to be restored and forgiven.
J.T. That is not right. The Lord says. Forgive him "seventy times seven". The Lord knows better than we do. There is a great deal of that, holding things back. Sometimes I have heard of it, in certain parts of the world, where things are held back for years, and a certain committee appointed to look after it until it is settled, and perhaps it never is
{454}
settled. The thing ought to be settled at once, because heaven has plenty of means, and earth has plenty of means, and the assembly, too, enters into it.
J.C-S. Does it not really amount to such persons being put on probation, instead of being forgiven?
J.T. Quite so. Look at the means that heaven has in the sense of a Patron with the Father, and look at the means that earth has in the Holy Spirit down here, and then the assembly added to that! The assembly operates in the power of the Holy Spirit, so that all these things should be settled. Why should they not be?
H.W. What would you say in regard of a case where one would go and identify himself in the breaking of bread with those who are not going on with the truth? Is not the fellowship involved, and does not the assembly necessarily come into the forgiveness of such a case as that?
J.T. That would be right.
H.W. I mean elders would hardly overlook or forgive a sin like that without it coming before the saints.
J.T. When a thing becomes public the assembly has to be called into it, because there is so much importance attached to the assembly by heaven. The Lord said, "Whatsoever thou mayest bind upon the earth shall be bound in the heavens, and whatsoever thou mayest loose on the earth shall be loosed in the heavens", @Matthew 16: 19. And also, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained", @John 20: 23. The assembly therefore has a great place in heaven, and nothing should be allowed to pass it.
H.W. Such a thing would be rather different from moral defection.
{455}
J.T. Well, where there are secret matters as in @Galatians 6 and in @James 5, we have the authority of Scripture that these things should be dealt with, privately, as you might say.
A.R. You are suggesting how a matter might be dealt with and not made public.
J.G.H. The word 'fault' is used in Galatians. What would be the measure or extent of the sin?
J.T. What does the scripture say? Whatever it is, it is definite. That is what I would say. However bad it is, it is dealt with, because if the man deals with it himself, in self-judgment, heaven deals with him in grace.
J.G.H. What would be conveyed in the word 'fault'?
J.T. Evidently it is something very bad. It is not that he is just overtaken by the fault, but taken *in* it. So that he is the man that is taken in the fault, and spiritual persons ought to know it.
J.C-S. The woman in @John 8 was taken in a fault, was she not?
J.T. She certainly was, and the Lord says, "Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more". It was not plenary, she had to see to it that she was not to sin again. But then the Lord says, "Neither do I condemn thee", as if He was not there for that.
Rem. What you are saying strikes at many long-established rules and customs in the minds of brethren, not everywhere, but in certain places.
C.A.I. Does it mean that the investigations which may be carried out in regard to cases of sin should be with a view to restoration rather than ultimate public exposure or judgment in the assembly?
J.T. With a view to restoration, quite so. That is the end you have in mind, not condemnation, but restoration.
{456}
R.H. What is the bearing of the word 'restore' on a brother's service if he has been one who has served publicly?
J.T. The word is really 'mended' as in @Matthew 4: 21. The man is mended, he is set up as he used to be. Whatever he used to be, he is just equal to it. That is what is meant, I think.
R.A. There has been a good bit of exercise about it as to whether a brother is to be immediately restored to his place in the service. Some have thought that he should be treated with some reservation for some time after.
J.T. That is wrong, I am sure. The idea is to mend the man, so to speak, and that would mean that the man is made whole as he used to be; so that he is able to do the same thing as he always did. He is set up again. The passage in @1 Corinthians 1: 10 and the passage in @Matthew 4: 21 would show that. It is the idea of mending.
Rem. Had Paul that in mind when he said, "Take Mark, and bring him with thyself, for he is serviceable to me for ministry". Is he not one who had been mended?
J.T. Quite so. He is mended, back in his old place.
S.G. Would the reference to Peter being restored illustrate that? Six weeks later, after he had sinned, he was serving as the first brother.
J.T. It illustrates what can be done. It is just a question of what can be done, on account of the wonderful system we are in. How abundant grace is from the divine side, and why not from our side?
Ques. Does the instruction in @Leviticus 14 help in that matter, in connection with the cleansing of the leper and the anointing with the remainder of the oil?
J.T. The instruction is very plain there, and very extensive, and it is very wonderful that it is there.
{457}
One thing to be noted before we proceed is that there is always a priest there, and the priest will always forgive if he can. The idea is to be a priest, and I believe those who are spiritual in @Galatians 6 are priests characteristically.
{458}
THE PERSON OF CHRIST AND ETERNAL LIFE (3)
@1 John 5: 1 - 21
J.T. As we continue to dwell on this epistle, we are struck with the place that knowledge has, and especially the knowledge that we have eternal life. The gospel is largely to show how it is to be obtained: "God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may ... have life eternal", but the epistle is to show how we *know* that we have it. That is, we are to have the consciousness that we have it, and hence the chapter closes with the fact that not only is the Lord Jesus the true God but "he is the true God and eternal life". In the gospel it says, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". Here in the epistle the point is that He is the Son of God, but He is the true God, and not only that, but He is eternal life. In @John 17, as we had it yesterday, the Father is the true God; but here the Son is the true God, and it might be equally said that the Spirit is the true God. There are not three Gods, but One. The Father is the true God, and the Son is God and the Spirit is God. Hence the frequency of the use of the word "God" in these two chapters, 4 and 5. If we look at it, we will be struck with the number of occurrences of the name "God". Here, in the first verse, "Every one that believes that Jesus is the Christ is begotten of God; and every one that loves him that has begotten loves also him that is begotten of him. Hereby know we that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep his commandments". That is the peculiarity of the epistle, how the divine Persons are spoken of, and how the believer is brought into the life which Christ is said to be, eternal life.
{459}
F.J.F. Does that make eternal life an objective thought?
J.T. That is just what it is. If you would enlarge on the word 'objective' a little bit, it will help us.
F.J.F. That is, we apprehend it and see it, fully, in the Lord Jesus.
J.T. So that the knowledge of the Lord Jesus implies that we have it. He is it. We spoke yesterday of certain, who, in years gone by, asserted that eternal life was a Person, but the more accurate thought is that a Person is it, and that Person is the Son. The point now is to know this. It is not simply to be light to us, but we are to *know* it, to know that we have eternal life.
J.C-S. Would the consciousness of having eternal life be within the range of every person who has the Spirit?
J.T. That is just what I would say. It all depends on the Spirit, as well as on redemption. It shows the importance that is to be attached to the present stressing of the Spirit in our readings and in our ministry of the truth.
R.H. Would you be free to say a word about knowing the Spirit, in verse 2 of chapter 4, "Hereby ye know the Spirit of God" and then in verse 13, "Hereby we know that we abide in him and he in us, that he has given to us of his Spirit".
J.T. I think it is to stress that the saints should become acquainted with the Spirit, as well as with the Father and with the Son. The Spirit is One of the divine Persons, equal with the Father and the Son, and is to be known in a personal sense. He is not simply an influence, but a real Person, to be apprehended. He has not become Man, of course, neither has the Father, but the Son has become Man and died, because death had to come in; hence the
{460}
idea of the water and the blood, in this chapter. Water is moral cleansing, but blood is judicial cleansing; that is to say, the judgment has been passed upon us, so that we have died.
J.C-S. "This is he that came by water and blood". What is the thought of His coming in this way?
J.T. Just that He came into the sphere of testimony. It is not only that He came to earth. He *has* come to earth, but He has come into the sphere of testimony, so as to be within our range.
C.A.I. He has come to where He now is, in that sense.
J.T. I would not just say that. The allusion is to His coming into the sphere of testimony. He is, of course, in heaven; He has gone into heaven, angels and principalities being made subject to Him, but the point is the sphere of testimony. He has come into the sphere of testimony, and hence the Lord can be said to come *to* us, as well as for us, which He does, on the first day of the week, and at all times when we are in assembly.
Wm.H. Is the thought that it is characteristic of His coming, that He came by water and blood?
J.T. Just so. He came by the means by which we can be brought into the divine thoughts.
J.C-S. It is an added thought to chapter 4, where it speaks of "every spirit which confesses Jesus Christ come in flesh is of God", "Jesus Christ come in flesh" is His incarnation really, but His coming by water and blood is introduced to meet a state, in us, is it not?
J.T. Quite so. The blood is judicial cleansing and the water is moral cleansing. That is, the judgment had to be passed and executed, but the water is for moral cleansing, and applies to us even now while we are still here.
{461}
C.F.I. So that, apart from His coming in this way, we could never have been brought into eternal life, could we?
J.T. Just so. So that the water has a peculiar place in the testimony here.
Ques. Would you say a word about the reference in @Hebrews 10: "Our bodies washed with pure water"?
J.T. Well, that is to stress the character of the water. It is pure; there is no admixture.
A.M. Would the "washing of water by the word" bear on this? Does it link with the word of God?
J.T. Yes, quite so. It is the application of the water of the word to the believer, as well as the blood. It is not by blood there, but by the word. That is to say, it is the moral side of the matter. It applies to us even now, so that we might have part in the service of God, and then have part in eternal life too, as a present matter.
J.C-S. It would not be possible for us to get through without the water in our present condition, would it?
J.T. I think that is right. When we are raised, we shall have a perfect condition, so that we shall not need any more washing. But washing applies now, as we see in John's gospel, to our feet: "He that is washed all over needs not to wash save his feet". But then the washing applies both to the whole person as well as to the feet, before he is converted; but now that he is converted and has the Spirit, the only need of washing is the feet, "He ... needs not to wash save his feet", in view of part with Christ in the fulness of it even now, before we are raised actually. So that in Colossians the believer is said to be raised through *faith* of the working of God, that is, the application of the water by the word.
{462}
Ques. Does the matter of faith, and overcoming the world, run along with the practical side of the washing, the washing of the water?
J.T. Quite so, the practical side, and what should be added to that is, that it is in view of our entering into the purpose of God, because God must have His part in all these things. It is not simply that we should be clear ourselves, but that God should have His part.
Wm.H. The Spirit seems to be brought in in connection with the water and the blood. It says, "They that bear witness are three: the Spirit, and the water, and the blood". Is that to give the consciousness of eternal life?
J.T. I think so. The Spirit must finish everything; He must have to do with everything, in that sense. The Spirit is said to be the truth.
D.J.M. Would you say a word as to that, "the Spirit is the truth".
J.T. It is the application of the truth; He is it. It is not simply that He applies it, but He *is* it. Of course, the Lord is the truth too, as He said, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life". It shows how the divine Persons may be regarded interchangeably. There is only one God, so that the three Persons are One.
A.R. It says the Spirit bears witness. Could you help as to that?
J.T. I think it comes out in ministry; the Spirit works on that principle. Whether it be the ministry of the gospel or the ministry of the truth of the assembly, it is a question of the Spirit.
J.C-S. The footnote is interesting: ''Are to one point or purpose'-to one thing in their testimony'.
J.T. Yes. Doubtless we are all made to feel how much we have to learn as to these things, and to learning what abstract means. Here we have the thought of a person sinning and not sinning to
{463}
death; therefore a distinction is made in certain sins. The idea of sin, of course, comes in constantly, because it has to be dealt with. If we run down the chapter, "Every one that believes that Jesus is the Christ is begotten of God; and every one that loves him that has begotten loves also him that is begotten of him. Hereby know we that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep his commandments". It shows that love is the great positive feature that is stressed in this chapter. "For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments; and his commandments are not grievous. For all that has been begotten of God gets the victory over the world; and this is the victory which has gotten the victory over the world, our faith". So that faith is brought into it here too, "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" It is a question of testimony here, and different features of it.
A.R. What is implied in believing, according to John? Much is made of it in this chapter.
J.T. I would say that we should go to Romans for these distinctive elementary features, to see how things come to a believer. The epistle to the Romans is the great epistle to study in that respect; that is Paul's gospel.
A.R. I wondered whether believing, according to John, involves a certain apprehension of the Person that is believed on?
J.T. I am sure that is true. You must get the facts of Romans, in order to be basic, and to see the full bearing of the gospel.
F.J.F. Does it mean that our faith gives us the light of God's world, a new world, before we can give up this one?
J.T. Very good, and "faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God".
{464}
T.T. In verse 1, it is believing that "Jesus is the Christ", and in verse 5, it is believing that "Jesus is the Son of God". What is the distinction?
J.T. Christ is the One by whom things are done, the One whom God employs to do things; but the Son of God implies power, the power of the Person; the power of Christ is implied in His sonship; that is to say, He is no less than God Himself, in the sense of power. As to things being done, it is the Christ, I think. Of course, we cannot limit the terms, because they are all applicable to the divine Persons.
T.T. "He hath done all things well". Is that Jesus the Christ?
J.T. Just so.
F.W-n. Would you say a further word as to how the thought of victory is identified with our faith?
J.T. It shows that even now we can come into the thing. Of course, when we are in the glory, we are in it; but then the point is, to come into it now, because we are in a dispensation of faith. When we are translated to heaven, everything is finished for us, although the millennium has to come, but there is no idea of unfinished conditions at all after we are translated to heaven. But now there is great need of dealing with unfinished conditions, and so these terms that we have before us indicate how this comes about; that is, it is through faith, so that we have each to learn to understand what faith means and how it comes about, and hence we are told how it comes about in the epistle to the Romans, "Faith cometh by hearing" showing the importance of hearing, but then, not only what we hear, but that hearing is by the word of God.
A.A-n. Is that why verse 5 is put in the form of a question, in order to raise a challenge with us?
J.T. Yes! "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son
{465}
of God?" He will get it. There must be the believing in the Son of God, and it is a question of faith, for we are in the faith period. When we are translated to heaven, faith is no longer needed. We are living in the *faith* period, and all these matters as to faith have in mind that it is a faith period in which we are; we have to learn how to exercise faith, so that we can be said to be believers, but then this epistle is intended to make us more definite as to all these things, and especially as to faith as to eternal life.
A.S. Is it important that it is in the present tense? "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" It is a continuous thing.
J.T. Just so. It is a present thing; that is the force of it. It is not he that *has* believed, although that also has its place. So that in verse 13 we have "These things have I written to you that ye may know that ye have eternal life who believe on the name of the Son of God".
J.C-S. It is not a passive thing, is it? It is an active thing in the soul.
J.T. It is a present active thing; that is the idea. So that we may come into the thing at once. It is all available to us, and therefore we can come into it at once. There is nothing to wait for.
A.A-n. Is there an illustration of it in @John 9: 35? "Jesus heard that they had cast him out, and having found him, he said to him, Thou, dost thou believe on the Son of God? He answered and said, And who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him? And Jesus said to him, Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he".
J.T. The Lord graciously answers his question fully. The Lord intends him to have the full effect of his faith, and He answers his question fully, not partially. All this shows the need of being sure
{466}
about things, and Scripture supplies us with all that we need to know.
Wm.H. The man seemed to become attached to the Son of God outside of everything accredited here, did he not? I was thinking of the way he was cast out, but he found the Son of God outside, and the faith of the Son of God involves an order of things in resurrection outside of all that is religious and accredited.
J.T. Just so; showing that such a one must be cast out. They cast him out, for he did not belong to their system. We do not want to belong to a system out of which we are to be cast.
H.K.R. Does the closing section of @Romans 8 set before us one who was in the full light of the victory over the world? Verse 31 says, "What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who against us?" and so on.
J.T. The chapter is wonderfully reasoned out by the apostle Paul, so that the conscience and heart should be set free from all that is against it. So verse 6 here says, "This is he that came by water and blood"; (we have already touched on that) "Jesus the Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is the Spirit that bears witness, for the Spirit is the truth". A very remarkable word, "the Spirit is the truth", "For they that bear witness are three, the Spirit, and the water, and the blood; and the three agree in one. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater. For this is the witness of God which he has witnessed concerning his Son. He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself". That is a thing to be noticed, "the witness in himself", that is, he has the Spirit. "He that does not believe God has made him a liar, because he has not believed in the witness which God has witnessed concerning his Son. And this is the witness, that God has given to
{467}
us eternal life; and this life is in his Son". So that we are instructed here as to where the life is; it is in the Son.
S.G. When the Lord Jesus was here, the truth as to what God is was set out in Him, also the truth as to what man should be according to God. In what sense would we apprehend the Spirit as the truth?
J.T. It is as having been sent down from heaven, for the Spirit has been *sent* down. The Lord Jesus is not said to be sent down from heaven, but the Spirit *is* said to be sent down. He is here as sent down, and He is here to set out things and elucidate them, to make them applicable so that there is an answer to all that is in the mind of God for men. He is the truth in that sense.
Wm.H. We were referring yesterday to the sphere of eternal life. Would the Spirit be our link with that sphere?
J.T. Just so. The sphere of eternal life is in the assembly; that is where it is. It is not on the earth, as we often say; it is in the assembly.
W.R. Why is eternal life connected with the *name* of the Son of God? It says in verse 13: "that ye may know that ye have eternal life who believe on the name of the Son of God".
J.T. The name there means simply that He is known by that designation, and all that enters into it. It is a question of the renown of the Son, and the believer coming into the effect of it. It is renown.
T.T. Does the Son of God imply that He takes things up for God?
J.T. Quite so; but the idea of the name, the name of the Son of God, is renown in the universe. That name has renown, and as it comes to the believer, he becomes victorious. That is to say, "These things have I written to you that ye may know that ye have eternal life who believe on the name of the Son of God". That is, the believer
{468}
comes into it, into the renown, the universe is full of it, as it were.
J.C-S. There is no name to put alongside of it. It is the fame that he has acquired in that name.
J.T. Quite so.
C.F.I. Does the expression, "has the witness in himself", involve the inward consciousness and joy of life?
J.T. Just so. It is the witness in the sense of the Spirit. It is what the believer has positively; not simply as light, but positively, and it is in the Spirit as given to the believer. Hence the word is, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" "We did not even hear if the Holy Spirit was come", they said, and so the apostle instructs them and then he baptises them to that name, to the name of the Lord Jesus, and then he lays his hands on them so as to bring them into touch with what there was, and the Holy Spirit came upon them.
Ques. Is that the truth in @Romans 8, when it says, "The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit"?
J.T. Very good, showing that it is the highest part of the believer. There is the spirit, and the soul, and the body, and the spirit is the highest part of us. It is the part in which we are connected with God, and therefore it is morally the greatest thing to be stressing, while we are in the body.
F.W-n. Does it all show that there is an end corresponding with what is in the gospel, reached in this chapter? I was thinking of the word, "that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name", @John 20: 31.
J.T. Well, just so, the Christ, the Son of God. Paul himself preached the Son of God, Jesus Christ, at Corinth. The Man is Jesus, of course; He acquired that name in becoming Man.
{469}
F.W-n. You stress what was set out in the gospel, in Christ personally. Is the thought that the end is reached with the saints corresponding to that?
J.T. Quite so. We might now proceed, and verse 11 says. "And this is the witness, that God has given to us eternal life; and this life is in his Son". That is, God has given us the Spirit, as the witness. "He that has the Son has life, he that has not the Son of God has not life". So that the positive and the negative are there. "These things have I written to you that ye may know"; that is the next thing, the emphatic idea of conscious knowledge, "that ye have eternal life who believe on the name of the Son of God". That is, it is not simply on the Son, but on *the name*. It implies the fame or renown that attaches to Him, the renown that fills the universe, as we may say, the renown of Christ, that name. We need not be ashamed of it, therefore. It says in Philippians, "to you has been given, as regards Christ, not only the believing on him but the suffering for him also". Suffering is attached to it, but we need not be ashamed of that. It is all calculated to strengthen us in our testimony. And so it goes on, here in verse 14, "this is the boldness which we have towards him, that if we ask him anything according to his will he hears us. And if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we have asked of him". Now the word *know* has a great place in the whole of the chapter we are now on. We are to know, and be certain of things.
F.J.F. Did not the Lord wonder that men did not see what was in Himself when He said, "Ye know how to judge of the appearance of the earth and of the heaven; how is it then that ye do not discern this time?" @Luke 12: 56.
J.T. Yes. The expression "this time" in that verse is the point. The whole universe is filled with
{470}
the renown of Christ, and they did not know about it. And so it is today people do not know about things, but the renown is there, "How is it then that ye do not discern this time?" This is the most wonderful time of all.
C.A.I. Do you connect this thought of the renown with the sphere of testimony to which you have referred? And could you help us a little more as to the Lord and the sphere of testimony.
J.T. It is what literally He has come down into. He was born in the world; that is to say, He was born as an ordinary child. He came into the world that way. But then He came into the sphere of testimony in due time, and was anointed. When the time of the anointing came, He was anointed, and it was in the power of the anointing that His testimony was rendered. He came into the sphere of testimony, and remains in it still; even although He has gone into heaven, the sphere of testimony is within our range. He was born as a babe, of course, which is a wonderful thing, and it is most touching. Luke would affect our hearts, so as to make us touched by the gospel, and so Luke gives us the full account of the Lord's birth. He is there in the world, and in due time He is anointed, the Spirit of God coming upon Him.
C.A.I. Is it right to connect the thought of eternal life with the sphere of testimony, and the saints as in that too?
J.T. Certainly. It belongs to it. Not only that, for there is much more than eternal life, the whole matter of the assembly is in the sphere of testimony. Therefore ministry is always in mind, and we constantly have these meetings. You might say, we cannot get on without them.
J.C-S. "The Spirit is the truth" would cover all that.
{471}
J.T. Just so. The Spirit is *the* truth. The article shows that it is the whole matter, and, of course, the same thing is applicable to Christ because He also is the truth and the life.
W.R. Is eternal life connected with the true God and true Man in that way?
J.T. Just so. It is the two things we need to know, to know God and to know Jesus, whom the Father sent. We need to know what man is in Christ, and then to know what we are in the counsels of God to be made through Him. What we shall be eternally, that will cover it, but what God is to us, and what we are to God, are all set out in Christ.
J.C-S. Does the consciousness of eternal life involve that we have really come to a conclusion in our souls in regard of the judicial ending of the man that sinned?
J.T. Very good, and then the moral side too, the moral ending of things. But the judicial side really implies that, and both are applicable to the Spirit and to Christ. The Spirit is the truth and Christ is the truth.
Ques. Is the prayer, referred to in verse 15, an evidence of eternal life in the believer?
J.T. Well, very good, "If we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we have asked of him". "If we know that he hears us"; hence we should be conscious, when we are praying, that we are heard in heaven; I am saying in heaven, but we are heard anyway. The "He" would refer to Christ and also to God the Father, it would refer to both; in fact, we might say, to all the divine Persons. The hearing is available to us, it implies that our voices are heard up there.
W.S. Does verse 14 indicate that we are heard if we ask according to His will?
{472}
J.T. Just so. We ought to be taught to pray. Therefore a brother says to the Lord, "Teach us to pray", and the Lord did teach them how to pray, and perhaps we might ask ourselves, have we learnt how to pray? I think we should ask that question. The Lord says, "When ye pray, say, Father", not 'Our Father which art in heaven', but just "Father, thy name be hallowed", and so forth.
A.R. Would you include the three divine Persons in the last clause of verse 15, "We know that we have the petitions which we have asked of him"?
J.T. I do not say it would be the Holy Spirit, although it might be; but certainly I would say it may be either the Lord Jesus or the Father.
Ques. If we prayed like Jabez would we be sure of being heard? It is said, "And Jabez called on the God of Israel saying, Oh that thou wouldest richly bless me, and enlarge my border, and that thy hand might be with me, and that thou wouldest keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me!" @1 Chronicles 4: 10. Would that be the kind of prayer that would be sure of an answer?
J.T. Very good, I would say that fully.
J.C-S. "We know that we have the petitions which we have asked of him". Would there be a conscious sense in the soul, an impression that God really hears us and we will get the thing?
J.T. I think so, and therefore I would bring it into the days of the week. If we select Monday as the day of prayer, the evening of prayer, God will acknowledge that. He acknowledges what we fix in that way, and then we ought to look for the answers on Tuesday. That is the way I would look at it. Tuesday is the day of answers, and we ought to have good times on Tuesdays. It is a good time for ministry meetings; Tuesday is very often selected for them.
{473}
Ques. Is that illustrated in the assembly making unceasing prayer for Peter when he was in the prison?
J.T. Very good. Although they did not believe it fully, for they really persecuted Rhoda, showing how easily we may persecute each other when we should be thanking God for each other.
Rem. I was wondering if verse 15 was an evidence of eternal life, because it follows the statement in verse 13, "that ye have eternal life who believe on the name of the Son of God"; life seems to give us the boldness, the liberty, of approach.
J.T. Yes. That is right, "And this is the boldness which we have towards him, that if we ask him anything according to his will he hears us", I remarked that if we fix a day for prayer, and we usually fix Monday, whether we may not in our minds sanctify Tuesday as the time of answering of prayer. It is not that the whole week should not be devoted to the answers, as doubtless it will, but I do think that we should learn to fix the days of the week, especially because the first day is so honoured in that we have the Lord's supper. It was the day on which the Lord Jesus was raised from among the dead. In the old economy it was more months, whereas, in our economy, it is weeks and days and hours; so we have the term "last hour" here in this epistle. Our time is thus so fixed and utilised, and we should make the most possible use of it too, so that the whole economy should be operative, from our side, not only from the divine side but from our side. This epistle is to bring us into it, so that we also are operative, every one of us; that is the divine thought for us. Our prayers will thus begin to move too, and hence our prayer meetings.
Wm.H. He refers in verse 16 to the circle of the brethren, does he not? "If any one see his brother
{474}
sinning a sin not unto death, he shall ask". Would that be to preserve the circle of the brethren intact?
J.T. Yes, and we must distinguish sin from sin; some are worse than others. We were speaking last evening as to unionism and the terribleness of it and how death, in principle if not actually, is often applied to anyone that offends unionism. How terrible that is!
J.V. What would you understand by a sin unto death?
J.T. It would be a sin that God would not pass over, as it were. It is not easy to be sure what sin it might be, but that there is such a sin is what the apostle says here. There is such a sin. "There is a sin to death", and then he says, "I do not say of that that he should make a request".
D.J.M. That kind of thing as in Ananias and Sapphira?
J.T. Well, it might be that. It has often been alluded to as an illustration, I think they were christians, all the same; they were believers.
Ques. This verse would test the spirituality of those we referred to yesterday, spoken of in @Galatians 6, would it not?
J.T. Just so. That was the prime thought last night, when we finished. Perhaps we did not finish it fully.
Rem. There was a great deal of interest amongst the brethren, as you would detect, when you spoke of that matter, because what was said was so liberating, having in mind the great system of grace, of which we know so little although we are in it so fully.
J.T. Especially not to have things prolonged. Some say, Let us take time and see how it works out, whereas we have already forgiven a brother, and yet we say we will wait a while. Why should we wait?
J.C-S. I think that is particularly so in regard of those who serve. Sometimes there is a long waiting
{475}
to see how they will shape. There is no indication that Peter, after the break for which Paul rebuked him, had to give up his service for a period.
J.T. Not the least. You marvel at the quickness whereby Peter is brought into the service, and yet he had to go out and weep bitterly when he had denied the Lord. I think we ought perhaps to learn that we may not be fully believing in our own prayers and the result of them.
F.J.F. So that when a brother is restored, he is fully restored?
J.T. Quite so. He is 'mended'; that is the word, as we had it last night. He is mended so that he is what he was before, fully.
F.J.F. It is the same word as that used for mending their nets in @Matthew 4. They were ready for use?
J.T. Just so, to make them ready for use. They were what they were before; even if they were broken they became what they were before, when they were mended. If a brother is mended, he becomes what he used to be.
A.A-n. Do you distinguish then between recovery and restoration?
J.T. Not much. Recovery would be restoration, of course, but why do you say that?
A.A-n. Does recovery mean more the person's own part in the matter, and restoration the part of the saints in the matter?
J.T. I do not know about that. It is a question of who is offended by the sin. It may apply to God, or it may apply to the whole testimony of the saints, or it may only apply to one person. Therefore we have to examine, and see what is what and how the thing should work out. We must see what the real value of the thing is, or importance of the thing, or evil of the thing, I mean to say, we have to compare
{476}
values, as it were, on the line of comparing spiritual with spiritual.
A.S. It says here, "he shall give him life". Would you say something about that? Does it involve something in the person's soul?
J.T. "If any one see his brother sinning a sin not unto death", (it is a question of someone seeing him) "he shall ask, and he shall give him life, for those that do not sin unto death". So that if it is a sin that is not unto death there is evidently a clearance of him. But then it goes on and "There is a sin to death: I do not say of that that he should make a request". Therefore there is a certain bar on making a request if it is a sin unto death. We have to decide what a sin unto death is, and I believe, according to what was said just now, that Ananias and Sapphira sinned that sin. But I do not believe they were unforgiven, I believe they were saved.
Ques. Do you mind saying a word as to the pronouns in verse 16; it might clarify the matter slightly, "He shall ask" and "he shall give him life". To whom do these two pronouns refer?
J.T. "If any one see his brother sinning a sin not unto death, he shall ask"; that is, the person who sees him asks. Then, "and he shall give him life, for those that do not sin unto death". So there is evidently latitude in the person who sees the thing happening, showing how important a person of that kind is. And then again, it says, "there is a sin unto death". So that the apostle is making it all plain for us, and then he says, "I do not say of that that he should make a request". So that we have to stop. Then the next thing is, "Every unrighteousness is sin"; that is a generality, and finishes the whole matter. Verse 16 is of prime importance as to what is a sin unto death and what is not a sin unto death.
{477}
Wm.H. So that the thought of the brother is one who would cover a multitude of sins, would he not?
J.T. Just so. Love does that. The more love I have, the more likely I will be forgiving towards the brethren. But the want of love is apt to make me unforgiving.
R.H. This is singular as compared with Galatians being plural. Does it allow for such a matter to be dealt with by an individual without further consultation with another? It is just one: "if any one see his brother". In Galatians it is "ye", which is plural. You were saying yesterday, in connection with elders, that it might be dealt with by two, but I wondered if this would allow for one, the matter being settled without others being brought into it. James, too, speaks of *one*, does he not? "If any one among you err from the truth, and one bring him back".
J.T. Apparently it can be dealt with by one person here, as far as I see. Let us read it again, "If any one see his brother sinning a sin not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life, for those that do not sin unto death. There is a sin to death: I do not say of that that he should make a request". Well now, that is all that we can say, we cannot bring in the plural here.
A.S. Does this refer to private prayer?
J.T. I do not know, I take it just as it is, and then let it have its full force. It is a question of what is not unto death and what *is* unto death, and then the apostle does not commit himself; that is, he is going to leave it with you, and yet it is you he is dealing with.
Rem. It seems to put a special responsibility on the one who sees, that he should take up the service of an intercessor.
J.T. That is right. It is to bring in the importance of this man, whoever he may be, and apparently
{478}
the idea would be that he is spiritual. The apostle can take him up in this abstract way, so that it is left open, as to whether he should pray for it or not. I think it brings out the importance and the value of the saints, in all these cases.
W.H.W. There is a rather beautiful example in the Lord praying for Peter, "I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not".
A.M. Is all this to encourage the confession of sins so that we not only confess them to God, but we confess them to one another?
J.T. Well, the Lord says there, "*I* have besought for thee that thy faith fail not". The point is that Peter's faith might not fail, because the Lord had taken him up as an apostle. It would be a terrible thing in an apostle if his faith failed, it would weaken the whole system. It is a question of faith; and that his faith should not fail, even though he had sinned. It was not a question of the importance of the sin, but that his faith should not fail because of it.
F.J.F. The "you" there is plural, is it not, in the first instance (verse 31)? "And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has demanded to have you, to sift you as wheat". The 'yous' are plural, but then the singular is used, "I have besought for thee".
J.T. Yes. The Lord had prayed for him, that his faith should not fail, whatever might happen. It is not so much there the importance of the wickedness involved but that his faith should not fail, that Peter as an apostle should not fail. Even although the sin might be great, yet the Lord prayed that he should not fail in faith, because faith is a characteristic of the dispensation. The whole dispensation is a dispensation of faith.
J.C-S. He was an important person in the inauguration of that, was he not?
J.T. Just so.
{479}
C.F.I. Would the answer to that prayer be that Peter judged himself?
J.T. Undoubtedly he did. He went out and wept bitterly.
C.F.I. I notice there is no reference to repentance in verse 16 of the chapter we are considering. It is simply, that if one see his brother sinning a sin not unto death, he shall ask. It is taken up apart from the state of the person, is it?
J.T. Well, it is always better to go by the actual words of the scripture, "There is a sin to death. I do not say of that that he should make a request". That is what John says here. And then, in verse 17, "Every unrighteousness is sin". That makes it very large. How much we have to forgive!
T.T. "He shall ask". Would that suggest that the Lord puts it upon us as an obligation, that we ought to ask? We are not allowing it to drift, nor leaving it to someone else, but we feel that it is incumbent upon us, if we see one sin, that we should ask, and should seek his liberation.
J.T. That is, it suggests he gets life for the asking by his brother. But then, the matter is left open, according to what John says here. He says, "There is a sin to death: I do not say of that that he should make a request". That is all it says there. What the brother is going to do about it is left, for John says, "I do not say of that that he should make a request". So it is left to him.
Ques. Is speaking against the Holy Spirit a sin unto death?
J.T. I would say that, but there is no forgiveness of that either in this age or in that to come.
{480}
VICTORY (1)
@1 Corinthians 15: 51 - 58; @Romans 8, 11
J.T. The thought for this afternoon's reading is to present the truth of the victory from God's side, so that we may see it from God's side and see what He affords to us in a sense of victory at this time. Then it is thought to take up other scriptures for the evening occasion, so that we may see how the victory is worked out in the believer's soul. We shall, in the later meeting, read from certain scriptures such as @Revelation 15, and see how certain persons acquire the victory over the beast. Other scriptures will be added, but now, as we have said, the thought is to present the truth from God's side, from these two scriptures, and immediately to show that the truth in mind in @Romans 8: 11 is that the Spirit quickens our mortal bodies. It is not the Lord who does it, but the Spirit. It does not say that the Spirit raises us, nor that He takes us up to heaven, but He quickens us. I think it worth while to mention this so that we may all have it before us. The quickening of our mortal bodies is by the Spirit, not by the Lord, nor by God the Father, but by the Spirit. I think it well that we should have before us as much as possible what is said of the Holy Spirit at this time, because of its importance. The Spirit is speaking about Himself, and He would have us to understand that whilst the imminence of the Lord's coming is to be before us, yet the actual quickening of our bodies (because it is a question of our mortal bodies, not of our dead bodies, but our mortal bodies) is by the Spirit. God will raise the dead. "The dead in Christ", we are told, "shall rise first"; but the imminent divine action is the change of our mortal bodies. We may be free now to look at the passage in @1 Corinthians 15 as to the work of God in the sense of victory for us. The apostle begins by
{481}
saying, "Behold, I tell you a mystery". I *tell* you, "We shall not all fall asleep, but we shall all be changed, in an instant, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet; for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and *we* shall be changed. For this corruptible must needs put on incorruptibility, and this mortal put on immortality. But when this corruptible shall have put on incorruptibility, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall come to pass the word written: Death has been swallowed up in victory". That is the act of God: "Death has been swallowed up in victory. Where, O death, is thy sting? where, O death, thy victory?" I hope the dear brethren will be free to join in with this subject. The coming of the Lord has been much in our minds, and specially, indeed, from the time of the revival, and it is now imminent. It is a question of our being ready for it, and the Lord is looking for this.
Rem. What you have said about the Spirit's part in this matter seems to fit in with the way the verse in @1 Corinthians 15 is framed, "This corruptible must needs put on incorruptibility". Does that contemplate the believer having an intelligent part with the Spirit in what is done?
J.T. Well, whether we should be conscious when it is done is just a question, because it is done in an instant. But I suppose, in so much as we are mortal and have our faculties, we will be conscious to some extent.
G.M.S. When the apostle says, "I tell you a mystery", does that involve the working of the Holy Spirit? Does not the word 'mystery' in Paul's teaching always have in mind the operations of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. I am not so sure that I would say it has, because the mystery itself in Romans is the assembly. Of course, what is involved in the assembly is
{482}
mystery, but then it is the mystery of God, I am not sure of the force of your remark.
G.M.S. I thought it linked on with all that Paul had in mind in regard of the peculiar place the assembly has in her relations with Christ. I have in mind that mystery, as Paul presents it to us, always involves the presence and workings of the Holy Spirit.
J.T. I would say so, but I am not so sure that I would connect it specially with the word 'mystery', because there is the mystery of God. The word 'mystery' is used by itself as embracing Paul's ministry, and that includes the assembly.
G.M.S. This is "a mystery", not "the mystery".
J.T. That is true. "Behold, I tell you a mystery".
F.J.F. Is a mystery that which is only known to the initiated, those whom God lets into the secret?
J.T. That is right. It is only known to the initiated. Therefore it strictly comes in with Paul; it belongs to his ministry. Although the word 'mystery' is used elsewhere, it is properly attached to Paul's ministry. There is the mystery of the gospel, for instance.
H.W. Are the saints being prepared for this matter of change every Lord's day in connection with the Spirit's work and the glory of the Lord coming before us?
J.T. I think so. I think we had it in Glasgow last Lord's day, the power of change that enters into the service of God. John, for instance, said, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day". It is a change in his state and condition. The Lord Himself is seen as changing in the book of Revelation. He is seen in peculiar garb, in judicial garb, in chapter 1, but then as He speaks to John later in the chapter He says, "I became dead". He shows, in that sense, that it was not mystical, it was a real matter. He says, "I became dead, and behold, I am living to
{483}
the ages of ages, and have the keys of death and of hades". All that is real as to Christ; it is not mystical or a similitude, but an actual matter.
A.R. Would this scripture fit in with @1 Thessalonians 4? It says, "we do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them that are fallen asleep". He then goes on to describe the rapture.
J.T. What precedes the rapture is the change of our mortal bodies, and then we are caught up. The rapture is really by the Lord Himself, but the change of our mortal bodies is by the Spirit, according to the verse in @Romans 8.
J.S.E. So that when you speak of victory, what you have in mind is that it is wrought out here on the earth and we are now, in the power of the Spirit, to be brought into the gain of that.
J.T. Quite so. Change is possible because of the Spirit indwelling us. In the service of God, on the first day of the week, there is possible change immediately, especially when we come to the time when we speak to the Father.
J.C-S. Is the change in view of going up? In this passage, in @1 Corinthians 15, it does not go beyond the change, does it? The change takes place, the mortal body is changed, but we are not taken off the earth. 1 Thessalonians goes further, and speaks of our being taken up.
J.T. That is right, but I think the passage in @1 Corinthians 15 implies the rapture, our being caught up, although it does not state it.
J.C-S. The point is what you stated at the outset, the victory over death.
J.T. Quite so. That is the point. The victory is not the rapture, but the power over death; and of course the change in our mortal bodies as well; the quickening of our mortal bodies. That is what prepares us for the rapture, particularly in the passage in Thessalonians, where the apostle speaks of those
{484}
whom God brings with Him. He is speaking about those whom God brings with Him, but of course he has the rapture immediately in mind. When God comes in, the dead saints shall be raised, and God will bring them with Jesus. That was what was said to the Thessalonians, for they did not know what had become of those who had died. They were concerned about them, but the apostle says that God will bring them with Jesus.
Ques. You were speaking of the truth as from God's side; why does he add the last verse here, saying to the brethren, "Be firm, immovable, abounding always in the work of the Lord, knowing that your toil is not in vain in the Lord"?
J.T. I think it is that the profession of christianity is a sure thing. The Lord is to come, and the dead are to be raised. That is what is in mind, and the victory implies that the dead are to be raised. There is nothing, therefore, to cause any fear or consternation at all to us; the dead *are* to be raised. The Corinthians were denying it; they were denying the resurrection.
J.C-S. And practically denying Christ's resurrection thereby.
J.T. That is what it says, "How say some among you that there is not a resurrection of those that are dead?" That is what they were saying. It was infidelity out and out, and, of course, we want to get clear as to the antidote to all that, and that is that we believe; we are sure, and our labour is not in vain in the Lord. If the resurrection does not happen everything is in vain.
G.M.S. May we connect the last trumpet with the teaching of @Numbers 10? I have in mind the blowing of the trumpets in order to call the saints together. This is said to be "the last trumpet".
J.T. I think the allusion is to a military movement. It is the last one, when everything is gathered
{485}
up. That is what God is going to do when He comes in; everything will be gathered up and finished. The last trumpet would be the evidence that God has come in and everything is finished from His point of view.
F.J.F. The Roman army moved away at the last trumpet.
J.T. That is the idea. Whatever was there they gathered it all up, packed up everything and went away. That is the idea in the last trumpet. So that we do not need to be anxiously concerned about our businesses, and all that attaches to man in the flesh, because the last trumpet means that all that is over; we shall come into what is spiritual, the power and victory of God.
F.W. Does this expression "must needs" connect with the believer having been indwelt with the Holy Spirit?
J.T. It certainly does.
F.W. And must his body be brought into conformity by this change because he has been indwelt with the Spirit; and now all that is connected with mortality is to be removed so that he may be entirely according to the Spirit?
J.T. That is right, and then what we call the rapture is dependent on that. The Spirit's action precedes what we call the rapture.
J.S.E. Is this part of the scripture intended to develop in us the corporate side of the truth? He says here, "if there is a natural body, there is also a spiritual one", as over against the passage in Thessalonians which deals with the matter personally for our comfort. Is that right?
J.T. Very good. So that the stress is on spirituality, incorruptibility, "This corruptible must needs put on incorruptibility, and this mortal put on immortality". But then the corporate side is what is, I believe, in mind when the apostle says in verse 58,
{486}
"So then, my beloved brethren, be firm, immovable, abounding always in the work of the Lord, knowing that your toil is not in vain in the Lord". It is a question of those who are ministering, those who have ability to serve the saints, that the labour should not discontinue, but that they should be in it, and at it all the time. "Your labour is not in vain in the Lord". And, of course, that labour would reach the assembly, the corporate thought of the assembly. We must be set together in assembly, "There is one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". All that must go on because all these facilities are available to us. Let us therefore be working, let everyone be working, for our labour is not in vain in the Lord. If the work is really going on it is acceptable to God. It is not in vain; that is to say, the assembly is being formed.
Ques. In verse 26 it reads, "The last enemy that is annulled is death". What we now have before us is the victory side rather than annulment, is it?
J.T. That is my theme, that the dear brethren, all of us together, should have the sense of victory, because we are surrounded by so much antagonism, and particularly now the work of the devil. God is working, so that however much opposition there is, we need not be discouraged. God is working, and He is giving *us* the victory, as it says, "But thanks to God, who gives us the victory". God gives it to us.
D.J.M. Paul speaks of those who were saying that the resurrection had taken place already, and who were overthrowing the faith of some (@2 Timothy 2: 18).
J.T. Whereas at Corinth some were saying that there was no resurrection, and so the apostle refers to certain facts to show that it was ridiculous to say
{487}
that. It was a downright lie to say that, it could not be anything else. We want to be set against untruth or lying.
J.S.E. "How say some among you that there is not a resurrection of those that are dead?" That is his challenge, is it not?
J.T. Quite so. This sort of thing was among the Corinthians, and it may be here in Edinburgh.
D.J.M. It says, "their word will spread as a gangrene".
J.T. Quite so.
J.C-S. Is the intention of the victory now that our souls should come into the truth and reality of resurrection?
J.T. Quite so. It is what God is doing for us. God is acting for us. He gives us the victory. He gives it to us. This evening we shall see how it is worked out in our souls experimentally, but what we are dealing with now is what God is doing, and what God is giving to us. He gives us the victory. It says in verse 54, "But when this corruptible shall have put on incorruptibility, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall come to pass the word written, Death has been swallowed up in victory. Where, O death, is thy sting? where, O death, thy victory?". That is what God is doing for us.
F.J.F. Is the thought that the outward man, the body, must be brought into accord with what God has already given us within, in our souls?
J.T. That is to say, He is going to give us the victory over death, which would mean that we shall be raised. "The dead in Christ shall rise first", it says. We therefore want to be in accord with all that God has wrought in us inwardly. The one thing we are waiting for is the resurrection, the redemption of the *body*, and according to @Romans 8, it involves sonship. We are awaiting adoption or sonship; that is, the redemption of our body. Our spirits
{488}
are right with God and our souls too, but our bodies are not. Our bodies are still mortal, and have to be changed to immortality, into incorruptibility. That is just the one thing that we are lacking.
H.K.R. "Then shall come to pass the word written: Death has been swallowed up in victory".
J.T. It is an allusion to @Isaiah 25. It is a question of the power of God.
A.M. Would there be a distinction between incorruptibility and immortality?
J.T. Well, there is a distinction, but I would say they synchronise.
C.F.I. Is the thought in verse 57 that we have the victory now?
J.T. That is the idea. God gives us the victory, not He will give it, but He *is* giving it. He gives it now, that is what we are coming into in the power of the Spirit. But the word *gives* implies what goes on; it runs on to the literality of it; the literality of the idea of incorruptibility and immortality.
J.C-S. Would it mean that the pressure of death is lifted off our spirits now by the victory?
J.T. I would say so. We are not therefore to be afraid of death. The Lord says, "Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul", and then He says further, "but rather fear him"; that is, God. So there is no danger at all for us to fear. John's writings, and Paul's too, would show there is no danger; everything is fixed.
A.M. I was wondering if corruption has a moral bearing, and mortal has a physical. Paul refers to those that love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption, as if it is to have a continuing moral effect.
J.T. Quite so, but as to the point before us, that is the victory, there is no difference really between immortality and incorruptibility.
J.S.E. Do the two expressions identify the two states? Would corruptibility refer to the state of the
{489}
dead, and mortality to the state of living? Both are to undergo a change, and put on the opposite.
J.T. But we are corruptible now. I mean the flesh is corruptible, and we are as in the flesh. "This corruptible" is the present state we are in, not morally, of course, but that is the present state.
C.F.I. Are we to have in view what is to take place on the earth? We are to be here in bodies of incorruptibility on the earth where death has prevailed.
J.T. It is a state of security. You cannot just say that we are incorruptible, although there may be something, as our brother mentions. But as regards our actual state it is corruptible; it is capable of corruption.
J.C-S. "For this corruptible". It is present, is it not?
J.T. Just so.
C.F.I. I had in mind the change, "This corruptible must needs put on incorruptibility"; it will happen on the earth.
J.T. Yes, it is God that does it for us. We cannot change ourselves in that sense, "This corruptible must needs put on incorruptibility". God does that.
J.G.H. "Flesh and blood cannot inherit God's kingdom, nor does corruption inherit incorruptibility".
J.T. That is quite true.
F.W. The verse that you read in @Romans 8, verse 11, refers to quickening your mortal bodies also "on account of his Spirit which dwells in you". Is this whole matter connected with the presence of the Holy Spirit in us?
J.T. That is the point in mind in the reading of the verse in @Romans 8. In fact the whole chapter is stressing the Spirit, you might say. The Spirit is mentioned nearly twenty times in that chapter.
F.W. Is that why, in @1 Corinthians 15, it uses
{490}
the expression "must needs put on". As the Spirit indwells the body, it must needs be according to the mind of God that this incorruptible and immortal condition shall be reached.
J.T. It must needs be. God alone can do it.
H.K.R. Would it be diverting to ask if Caleb and Joshua in @Numbers 14 and @Deuteronomy 1, were two who were really in the gain of victory, and not only in the light of it?
J.T. That is good. They did not fall in the wilderness. The bones of the ungodly, the disobedient, fell in the wilderness, but they did not fall in the wilderness.
H.K.R. Will you say a word in regard of "abounding always in the work of the Lord"? Joshua and Caleb went through the wilderness with the light of the land in their hearts and they encouraged those they were among.
J.T. Quite so, and that word may be added to our passage. It certainly *is* added in @1 Thessalonians 4: "Encourage one another with these words".
G.M.S. Would it be helpful to refer to the actual resurrection of the Lord Jesus and how it came to pass? It is said of Him, is it not, that He was quickened, and it says of us that we are quickened together with Him. Then again in @Romans 6 it says, "Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father".
J.T. "Quickened together with him". What is your point in that, about the Lord Jesus, that He was quickened, and that we are?
G.M.S. I was thinking of the difference between the raising of the Lord and our being raised or changed. It says, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in hades, nor wilt thou give thy gracious one to see corruption", @Acts 2: 27.
J.T. It would mean that He was raised. Of course you might say He was quickened too, but
{491}
we must guard a divine Person, when speaking thus, because He says, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up". He could do it Himself. We can hardly say the Spirit did it for Him, but He does it for us.
T.R. I would like to ask if Stephen was in the gain of this quickening? It says, "being full of the Holy Spirit, having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God". Was he in the gain of the victory?
J.T. Not yet, he was still in the flesh when he said that. He says, "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit". He was still in the flesh.
C.A.I. In @1 Peter 3, it is said in regard to the Lord Jesus, "being put to death in flesh, but made alive in the Spirit". Would that indicate that the Spirit had the quickening part with the Lord?
J.T. I do not think so, I would not like to say the Spirit did that. It was the Lord Himself really; "made alive"; it was the act of God.
A.McG. In @John 6 it says, "It is the Spirit which quickens". Have you in mind that the Spirit is the quickening power wherever it may be? The Father raises the dead and quickens and the Son also quickens (@John 5), but @John 6 says, "It is the Spirit which quickens".
J.T. Well, quite. "The Spirit which quickens".
J.R. Would there be a difference between what is moral and what is physical in regard to what you are saying?
J.T. We have already alluded to the idea of quickening as the Spirit's action, and then we have alluded to the idea of incorruption, or incorruptibility. There is a moral thought in that, as it says, "Grace with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption". There is a moral side in
{492}
that, but that is all I would say about it. In general, what we are speaking of refers to the action of God, not anything in ourselves, but God's action.
Rem. In Colossians it speaks of the quickening having taken place, "And you, being dead in offences and in the uncircumcision of your flesh, he has quickened together with him".
J.T. That would be the moral side of the truth, of course. But it is God that does it, so it should be applied to us now, as bearing on our walk and service. It is God that does it.
A.T.G. Would you say a little as to the difference, if there is any, between the change in @1 Corinthians 15 and the change carried out by the Lord in @Philippians 3, "who shall transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory"?
J.T. It is very much akin. Philippians goes the whole way, whereas Corinthians does not go the whole way; it does not really take us off the earth. Philippians does; it says, "our conversation is in heaven". So we are taken off the earth, as also in Ephesians, we are taken off the earth, according to the word, "has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ".
W.H.K. Will you please give a word bearing on the scripture in @2 Corinthians 5, "our house which is from heaven"?
J.T. The apostle has in mind that they should be clothed, that is to say that they should not be unclothed; they should not be naked. The clothing would be the full thought of God for us, with our house which is from heaven. The word *house* is used there, which is a very general idea; we are clothed with that.
A.M. And in that passage he says, "Who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit".
{493}
J.T. . That is to bring us into present accord with it. He is already saying that he has a desire to have put on our house which is from heaven.
Ques. Does not the apostle gather up the bearing of all this teaching in verse 58, when he says, "So then, my beloved brethren, be firm, immovable", and so on. Is the intent of this light to stimulate us to toil in the Lord?
J.T. Exactly. That is the point. It is a question of our being in the thing, in the work, knowing that your toil (the word 'toil' is used) is not in vain in the Lord. So that we are to keep at it all the time. There is nothing to deter us because if we die we are going to be raised by God Himself; and if we live our mortal bodies will be quickened by the Spirit. Everything is safe and sure for us, and this has a stimulating effect on our present service.
H.W. Is that illustrated in @Acts 4 where the disciples being let go came to their own company, and were praying and then the house was shaken?
J.T. Quite so. That was the way God assured them.
Rem. How Paul himself seems to be stimulated here in the phrase, "my beloved brethren"! Does that not indicate that his affections are profoundly moved by bringing forward this truth?
J.T. Very good. I never knew a time when there was more enjoyment of fellowship and more stimulation to go on. The work of God is going on, and we want to be in it thoroughly. That is the point in the passage, and all this precious truth that we are dealing with is to bear on that. Verse 58 is the great end in mind practically.
D.J.M. Is Paul in the power of it in the second epistle, when he says, "We ourselves had the sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not have our trust in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead; who has delivered us from so great a death,
{494}
and does deliver; in whom we confide that he will also yet deliver", @2 Corinthians 1: 9, 10. And then he goes on to labouring, "ye also labouring together".
J.T. Very good. So it is all a question of stimulation, because there is a danger of flagging. Although we have had a good time for the last fortnight, yet perhaps we give up, and return to ordinary affairs and ordinary conditions. But if we give up the work of God is thereby hindered, and not stimulated.
H.K.R. Is it your mind when he says, "My beloved brethren", that that would be a word addressed to the saints in their local setting to continue in this work, as well as to those the Lord has given to serve in a general way?
J.T. Quite so. Everybody must take it on, and especially now the sisters, because the Lord seems to have given us a touch as to them, that they should be with the brethren in all these holy convocations. They should have part in it, and be in it thoroughly.
J.C-S. "The work of the Lord" is a very comprehensive term, is it not?
J.T. Just so, showing that the Lord is over all the services. That is another thing to keep in mind, that the Lord is over all the service and at times the Spirit of God takes part in it, showing the interchanging of the divine Persons. In @Acts 13 the Spirit takes on the work, and He says to the saints at Antioch, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". That shows what the Spirit Himself can do, as well as the Lord.
Rem. I should like you to open up a little now the thought in @Romans 8. We need some help on that point in connection with the Spirit.
J.T. I do not know whether the brethren all take it on, as I was saying, but it is a question of the
{495}
action of the Spirit in verse 11 of @Romans 8. It says, "But if the Spirit of him that has raised up Jesus from among the dead dwell in you, he that has raised up Christ from among the dead shall quicken your mortal bodies also on account of his Spirit which dwells in you". That is a thing which I think we have overlooked, as far as I can see. We have not dwelt on the fact that before you can have the rapture, you must have the quickening by the Spirit of our bodies, our mortal bodies.
Ques. Is that something additional?
J.T. I think it is.
Ques. Would that be the last action of the Spirit?
J.T. I think so; we might be prone to think that the Spirit, being with us all the time, would quicken us and take us up to heaven, but He does not; the Lord Himself does that. He descends from heaven with a shout, with archangel's voice and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ arise first. It does not say that the living ones shall be quickened, in that passage in Thessalonians, because it is the Spirit that quickens them. He quickens our mortal bodies.
J.C-S. Then does the Spirit bring our bodies into accord with what He has wrought in them before we go up?
J.T. That is the idea. We are quickened here on earth, as far as I see, and then caught up together. So shall we ever be with the Lord.
Wm.H. Would this be the last touch of deliverance where it says in the end of @Romans 7, "who shall deliver me out of this body of death"? It is by the Spirit quickening our mortal bodies?
J.T. Very good. And then we are brought into @Romans 8. I would say that fully, because the Spirit is made so much of in @Romans 8, as anyone
{496}
can see if he looks into it. As I said, nearly twenty times the Spirit is mentioned in @Romans 8. There is contrast with chapter 7 where the state is one of bondage.
Rem. We have a good deal in regard to the present service of the Spirit in @Romans 8. I mean, "by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body", and then, "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God", and then later the first-fruits of the Spirit are spoken of, "even *we* ourselves, who have the first-fruits of the Spirit".
J.T. I have often thought that if anyone wishes to open up a positive line of truth, how much there is as to the Spirit as presented in @Romans 8. Amongst these things is that He quickens our mortal bodies, which is the last great action that He performs upon us.
J.C-S. I think it is a most touching thought, that the Spirit begins first in us, in new birth, and He goes on to complete His work so that we are perfectly ready to go up.
J.T. The Spirit according to @John 3 really ought to be linked on with it as to the beginning of things.
{497}
VICTORY (2)
@Revelation 15: 2 - 4; @1 John 5: 4, 5; @Romans 8: 35 - 39
J.T. The first scripture read is of peculiar importance at the present time in view of the principle of trade unionism which is so rampant in different parts of the world, especially in Australia. The passage in 1 John is of particular importance because stress is laid on faith for the victory. Then in @Romans 8 the further thought is to call attention to love, as exercising our hearts, and the persuasion that believers have, which enters into our knowledge of God and Christ, the love of God and the love of Christ. Believers have persuasion, as knowing the love of God and the love of Christ, that we are inseparable from the divine Persons. But it says in @Revelation 15 the victory is over the beast, "those that had gained the victory over the beast, and over its image, and over the number of its name". They are seen standing upon a glass sea, and have a song, or songs. We may perhaps incidentally touch on the idea of singing, as entering into our sufferings at this time in relation to this evil called trade unionism, and what the saints are suffering from it, like the apostle Paul and Barnabas in the Philippian jail; in praying they were praising God with singing. The idea of singing is of peculiar importance, and the Lord has helped the brethren in the use of the hymnbook, and one was impressed as we were singing here today, what triumph there is in it. It is not merely a question of our voices, although we cannot but value the service of the human voice for song. In @Revelation 15, we have the song of Moses and the Lamb, and the bearing of it is against the beast and the false prophet. The word is, "having harps of God", which belong to heaven; they are properly
{498}
heavenly instruments. "And they sing the song of Moses bondman of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying", (showing that the very words of our singing are important) "Great and wonderful are thy works, Lord God Almighty; righteous and true are thy ways, O King of nations. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy; for all nations shall come and do homage before thee; for thy righteousnesses have been made manifest". This matter of the beast, which has such a great place in the book of Revelation, seems to me to be worthy of our earnest consideration, because so much is made of it in the book, as over against the harlot. Both are to be destroyed in the judgments of God, and the question really is now whether we are able to discern which is worse or if one of them is worse than the other. They are equal in evil importance, as it appears, so that the saints are to be set, by the truth of God, against those two evils. You might say those two elements are the arch evils in the history of the world, the beast and the false prophet supported by the dragon, that is, the devil himself; and then the harlot, Jezebel. It is in chapter 17 we get her. "I will shew thee the sentence of the great harlot who sits upon the many waters; with whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication; and they that dwell on the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication. And he carried me away in spirit to a desert; and I saw a woman sitting upon a scarlet beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns". Then as to the beast, we have the record in chapter 13. It is only necessary now, for our present purpose, to look at the closing part of the chapter, to see the character of the thing, and how it bears on the brethren, those who work with their hands. It says in verse 15 of chapter 13, "And it was given to it"; that is, to
{499}
the second beast, "to give breath to the image of the beast, that the image of the beast should also speak, and should cause that as many as should not do homage to the image of the beast should be killed. And it causes all, the small and the great, and the rich and the poor, and the free and the bondmen, that they should give them a mark upon their right hand or upon their forehead; and that no one should be able to buy or sell save he that had the mark, the name of the beast, or the number of its name. Here is wisdom. He that has understanding let him count the number of the beast: for it is a man's number; and its number is six hundred and sixty-six". I ventured to read these passages in the book of Revelation so that the whole matter should be before us.
Ques. Would there be two features marking us, one, prayer in relation to the position, counting upon God at the moment, and then as those deliverances are wrought that there should be a song raised as the result of deliverance?
J.T. So that there is really victory, and in order that there should be singing there must be victory, and the victory implies sufferings. It is a question of whether we are suffering, ready to suffer if necessary, and then we have our songs, for there are two.
Rem. You referred to Paul; it is one thing to sing *in* the circumstances and suffering; it is another matter singing *out* of them.
J.T. Just so. Paul and Silas sang *in* the sufferings. So that it would seem as if the Lord is reminding us (we often speak of having come near the end, and that the coming of the Lord draws nigh) that the question of suffering should be accepted, the principle of it, anyway. The word is, "Because to you has been given, as regards Christ, not only the believing on him but the suffering for him also", @Philippians 1: 29. It is given to us.
{500}
H.W. Would the song of the Lamb suggest an appreciation of the work of redemption in their hearts?
J.T. I should think so, and it touches you. The Lamb is a remarkable title for the Lord in the book of Revelation; it says, "a Lamb standing, as slain", @Revelation 5: 6. It draws out our affections and sympathies with Him as a sufferer, for the word "Lamb" implies that He is a sufferer.
Ques. It is good for us to understand what we have to meet. It is this great system already taking form and shape that is pressing on the brethren. It is not simply a matter of whether we can be in a trade union or not, but are we not to understand that what lies behind all that is this great power of the beast?
J.T. Quite so. It is a concentrated or accumulated power, because it comes down from the four monarchies, as they are seen in the history according to the prophet Daniel. This thought of the beast comes down; it is accumulated. It comes down from the four monarchies culminating in Rome, and the Romish system, which implies really the West of Europe. Russia will be seen later, and also as the millennium finishes, but Western Europe, it appears, will be in mind as to the concentration of the terrible history of the beast.
Ques. Do you think the power of Russia will be finally broken at the close of the millennium?
J.T. I think so. It is the uttermost North, and it will control undoubtedly the Asiatic powers at the end, and the Lord will deal with it Himself. But I think Western Europe is what is in mind in the beast, because the false prophet is a sort of secondary power, but having the character of the beast. The beast is really seen in the second epistle to the Thessalonians, and, although we might say it is anti-Christ, it is really more anti-God. He is against
{501}
all that is of God in its varied features, and that, of course, raises the whole question as to what attitude we are in, in serving God, understanding the service of God and carrying it on, the Spirit of God being here to support us. We are told in that epistle that He that now hinders will hinder until He be taken out of the way. Undoubtedly the blessed Spirit is in mind, and I believe what has been brought out lately as to the Spirit only emphasises that it is the Holy Spirit, and that He is standing in the way of all this. It is thus for us to sow to the Spirit so as from the Spirit to reap everlasting life.
Ques. Did you not say that no trade unionist could have a harp?
J.T. That is what I would say. I remember saying that in Belfast, many years ago, because the harp belongs to heaven. It is an instrument of music that belongs to heaven.
F.J.F. "For thy righteousnesses have been made manifest". Would that be that they came to light in the saints of that day?
J.T. Quite so, because the Lamb's wife in chapter 19 is seen also with righteousnesses, *righteousnesses*, and they are wrought out in fine linen: "the fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints". The two things correspond.
R.H. Would this kind of praise as in verses 3 and 4, have any place in the service of God now?
J.T. I think it looks on to the coming dispensation. The militant part of the book of Revelation, I think, would come into the millennial dispensation. We are in the dispensation of the Spirit, and we have no such thoughts in the songs that the Spirit would sing, or that He would indite or that we should sing in His power. It is a question now of grace, grace reigning through righteousness.
A.R. Would there be any suggestion of using the harp at the present time?
{502}
J.T. It would be only in a spiritual sense, because the book of Revelation is a book of symbols, and we have to interpret what they mean. The militant side is largely actual war, because the dragon, Satan, is fought against by Michael, and that is actual war. Satan is cast out of heaven, as is seen in @Revelation 12, but our dispensation precedes all this. We are in the dispensation of grace.
A.R. You were speaking of the harp as being heavenly music, and I wondered whether as being in separation from what is around, and particularly what you mention, there might be the using of the harp now?
J.T. In a spiritual sense, quite so. We can use the spirit of the book of Revelation, because every scripture is divinely inspired, or breathed, and profitable. Therefore the Revelation is profitable, but profitable by the proper use of it. So the Old Testament too is profitable. It is only a question of the way we use them.
J.S.E. Are you seeking to emphasise that the more we are set in relation to victory over these hostile elements, the more free we shall be to enter into the response connected with the usage of the harps of God?
J.T. Well, because we are heavenly; we belong to heaven. We are raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies, so that we would use the harp in that sense. It is a question of our spiritual understanding. We use, in our book, the word *Hallelujah*, which is quite right, because we are using it rightly. It really belongs to the Old Testament, but we use it rightly, which we should be able to do, as having the Spirit. The wonderful fact that we have the Spirit enables us to do all these things, and I believe it is a great thing to keep in mind, that He that now hinders will hinder until He be taken out of the way. The Thessalonians are told
{503}
by the apostle, that they knew what was hindering, "that which". That would be the powers that be, I would say, or governments, but it does not say of that, until *it* shall be taken out of the way. On the other hand, "until he be gone" is an allusion to the Holy Spirit. That, I believe, is the meaning of the whole passage. The Holy Spirit will be taken away as the assembly goes away.
Wm.H. In spite of the combination of powers against the saints, is not God to be known in this wonderful character, as Lord God Almighty?
J.T. Quite so. So that we go back to Abraham. The idea of the Lord God Almighty belongs really to the Abrahamic period, but it belongs to us too because God is God and He remains God. But then He is known to us as Father, not as Almighty, but as Father; but we do get it in the second epistle to the Corinthians, "I will be to you for a Father, and ye shall be to me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty", @2 Corinthians 6: 18. The thought is brought into our dispensation, too, showing how we are to be trained in our minds in the use of Scripture, whether it be the Old Testament or the New, including the book of Revelation.
A.R. The verse in the end of @2 Corinthians 6 is connected with coming out from among them and being separate, and the promise is that He will be a Father to us. Would not that be an encouragement for us?
J.T. Just so, showing that the word "Father" would be carried back to Abraham. Although the idea of the Almighty belongs to the period of Abraham, yet the whole Scripture is one. We have to regard the authority of Scripture, whether it is the Old or the New Testament.
Rem. @Psalm 105 gives a remarkable outline of this celebration. It says in verse 1, "Give ye thanks unto Jehovah, call upon his name; make known his
{504}
acts among the peoples. Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him; meditate upon all his wondrous works. Glory ye in his holy name, let the heart of them rejoice that seek Jehovah". It goes over the whole history and says in verse 7, "He, Jehovah, is our God; his judgments are in all the earth. He is ever mindful of his covenant-the word which he commanded to a thousand generations-which he made with Abraham, and of his oath unto Isaac".
J.T. Quite so; so the Psalms come into our times as showing how God acts for the godly, so the Lord alluded to the Psalms in @Luke 24.
G.M.S. Might we have to distinguish between the beast and its image, and the number of its name? Is not the suggestion at the end of chapter 13 that the number of its name might be a most subtle thing, as it says, "He that has understanding let him count the number of the beast".
J.T. Just so; and then we get a clue to this six hundred and sixty-six. It points to the super-man, like the one with six fingers and six toes in @2 Samuel 21: 20. It is the great super-man; that is the sort of thing that is developed in our times. Six hundred and sixty-six is a clue; it is just a question of the use of numbers.
G.M.S. It says, "it is a man's number".
J.T. It is not 777; it is 666. When we get the expression, "the seven Spirits of God", it is the Spirit of God emphasised, but 666 is the man. It would be the super-man, much being made of man. It is just what he is, whether he be a scientific man or whatever it be, he is a super-man. We must all think of that, because that sort of thing enters into the lessons of the schools, and children are exposed to it.
J.M.R. I was wondering if Mordecai and Esther would illustrate for us those who gain the victory through suffering.
{505}
J.T. Yes, and you notice they do not pray. What they do is to fast. That is a thing to notice, for perhaps we do not do much of that. They do not pray in Esther; they fast. Esther calls upon the maidens to fast with her, and they did, and God came in for her.
J.M.R. Would fasting be the disallowance of all that is natural to us? It has been suggested we should sow to the Spirit.
J.T. I do not think it is just that. It is not simply what is natural to us; it is what is right in itself. We deny ourselves of that to get more spiritual power, although the thing might be right in itself.
J.M.R. Will you tell us the difference between what is right in itself and what is of nature.
J.T. A lot may be right; for example, the marriage state and housekeeping and all that, is right in itself, but we may deny ourselves of it for a time for the sake of gaining spiritual power. "This kind", the Lord says, "goeth not out but by prayer and fasting". In Esther there is no prayer, it is just fasting, self-denial.
F.J.F. Is that seen in John the baptist? He was in the deserts?
J.T. Quite so. He would not be carried away by looking into the shop windows, and the like, looking at the fine things that nature would seek. He dwelt in the deserts; not in one desert, but in the deserts.
F.W. Is it the principle of the Nazarite?
J.T. Just so.
Rem. You mentioned elsewhere, that at a time of crisis you had engaged in actual fasting. That could not be done all the time, or our bodies would die, but a crisis might call for that.
J.T. Quite so, I believe that fully, I experienced it myself, and I know it is true, although, as you say, we cannot do it continuously, because we
{506}
have to go to work and all that. God tells us things that we should do. The Lord tells us, "This kind", that is to say, this kind of evil power, "goeth not out but by prayer and fasting". It is a special thing.
R.H. Would Uriah, the Hittite, be an example of one who fasted in a time of crisis in the testimony?
J.T. I would say that fully, although David did his best to tempt him into the opposite, showing how one of the leaders amongst us might be capable of that sort of thing, because David *was* a leader.
J.C-S. Do you think, if we felt the gravity of the present position to which you have been referring, that it would lead us to desire to fast so that we might get an increase of power in relation to the matter?
J.T. Yes. It might be a special thing that is needed. You feel it is needed, and you deny yourself of things that are in themselves right. If they are wrong, of course, then they should be given up anyway, but it is things that are in themselves right that are denied.
A.M. Paul speaks about buffeting his body (@1 Corinthians 9: 27). Was that a continual exercise with him or would it cover special matters?
J.T. He says, "I keep under my body"; that is to say, he did not give it any rein; it did not govern him. That passage is remarkable. Paul said he had a right to certain things, but he denied himself of the right. He says, he had a right to lead about a sister as wife, but he denied himself of that; whereas Peter did not. Peter had a wife.
J.A.C. Cornelius says, in speaking to Peter, "I had been fasting unto this hour, and the ninth I was praying in my house", @Acts 10: 30. We have both together there.
J.T. Yes, showing that Cornelius was building up a memorial for himself in heaven even before he got
{507}
the Spirit, which is a most remarkable thing. That is what the angel tells him. He was building up a memorial for himself, by his fasting and almsgiving and prayer. I think we should not forget the almsgiving.
Rem. We have to come on to John for the faith position.
J.T. That is right. The point in the verses in @1 John 5 is faith. It is a question of faith, for the victory is to those who have faith. "For all that has been begotten of God gets the victory over the world; and this is the victory which has gotten the victory over the world, our faith". We have already had fasting and now the question is faith, and whether we are doing things in faith. It is a dispensation of faith, according to the word in 1 Timothy: "God's dispensation, which is in faith", @1 Timothy 1: 4.
Wm.H. Would the thought of "our faith" have in view the whole system that is now real to faith and in which we have our part?
J.T. I think so, because it is the dispensation of faith, "God's dispensation, which is in faith", it says. This is the time of it; we are in the time of it. In the millennium we shall not be in the time of it; it will be a time of sight, but now it is the time of faith.
F.J.F. Does that enter into all the service, on the Lord's day morning, for instance?
J.T. I think so. It is the time of faith, and the Spirit comes in to add His help to us, so that the thing becomes in power.
G.M.S. Is there a double victory suggested in verse 4? "This is the victory which has gotten the victory over the world"?
J.T. Showing it was stressing the idea of faith, "This is the victory which has gotten the victory over the world, our faith". The stress is on *our* faith. That is to say, it is the christians faith, not
{508}
simply faith as in @Hebrews 11, but *our* faith, the christians faith. It is the faith that we as christians have, or ought to have, that gets the victory over the world.
Ques. Does that bring in the subjective side of the truth with us? You were referring to that this afternoon.
J.T. Quite so. It is the subjective side, because the Spirit is here. The great feature of subjective truth, is the presence of the Holy Spirit here, and He is here to stay until the coming of the Lord. Then He will quicken our mortal bodies, which is apparently His last great service to us.
J.S.E. Are there two parts to this matter of the victory in this section? "This is the victory which has gotten the victory over the world, our faith". Then the question, "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" Is there the past sense of victory and then the present sense of it?
J.T. Well, I suppose you might say it is double in that sense. The passage is entitled to it.
H.K.R. What distinction do you make between faith that is mentioned here in 1 John and the faith in @Hebrews 11? "Now faith is the substantiating of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen".
J.T. "Our faith" is the point here. @Hebrews 11 speaks of faith by itself, beginning with Abel and running down through Abraham to the end. It is not our faith there, but what we have here is our faith.
J.C-S. Are you thinking of what is proper to christianity?
J.T. That is right.
Wm.H. You referred in Glasgow to the abstract thought in John. Would that be seen in the expression, "for all that has been begotten of God ..."
{509}
and then the personal in verse 5, "Who is he that gets the victory?"
J.T. You mean "all" and "Who is he?"; quite so. Whoever it be, therefore it is abstract. The brethren would do well to study the thought of abstract, because this epistle is peculiarly the epistle that helps us, as to the idea of the word 'abstract'.
Ques. Does the thought that Jesus is the Son of God bring another world into view?
J.T. Quite so. And what is for the Father in it.
Wm.H. And His peculiar glory is that He has the power of resurrection.
J.T. Quite so, I think we noted in Glasgow, that the idea of sonship is not used by John at all, until we come to @Revelation 21. It is more the children of God, but the Son of God, the sonship of Christ, of course, comes in here. Sonship as to us does not come in until we come to @Revelation 21; that is the only place where you get sonship applied to us. It is applied to the Lord Jesus in the gospel of John, and here.
J.C-S. Is the victory leading on to the realisation of eternal life?
J.T. Well, I think so, because the chapter ends with that, "He is the true God and eternal life". The great end of the epistle is that Christ is the true God. But there is what is additional to that, and that is eternal life, showing the greatness of eternal life and how immense it is as a blessing for us, so that we should go in for it and lay hold of it. It is not an additional *title* of the Lord Jesus, but it is simply that He *is* it, "He is the true God and eternal life", "The true God" is a title, but "eternal life" is not a title; it is just a thing, a blessing. Certain ones, many years ago, said that eternal life was a Person, but it is not a Person at all. It is just a blessing, or a thing, that marks the Lord Jesus, that He is it. He is it to our souls as we know Him. It
{510}
is presented in a Person, of course, it is in Christ, but that is not the idea of a Person. There is no such thought in Scripture as the personality of eternal life.
H.W. Is the thought that the saints are thus brought into a circle of things or a sphere of things, where death cannot enter and the enemy cannot touch? Is that the thought of the victory here connected with @1 John 5?
J.T. Just so. That is what I would say. We are brought into a circle where evil cannot come.
H.W. And this is to be enjoyed as the saints are together?
J.T. I think so, in the abstract. As we have been saying, the Spirit of God being in us is the means of it. It is quite possible because the Spirit of God is in us. He is in us and with us. He is in us personally, but He is with us as in the assembly, and that is what we may enjoy on the first day of the week, because the Spirit is here with us in a collective sense.
H.W. Is it dependent upon conditions amongst the saints, brethren dwelling together in unity?
J.T. It is. Quite so. So that purity and righteousness enter into it peculiarly.
F.J.F. Is resurrection the glory of God? Does that bring the new world before us? I was thinking of what the Lord said to Martha, "Did I not say to thee, that if thou shouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?" @John 11: 40.
J.T. I think if you say the glory of God is the resurrection, you will have to go further and think of our going into heaven. Martha refers to the resurrection in the last day. She believed what we might call orthodox truth, but the Lord was going further than that. He was telling her about other things, so that He says, "Every one who lives and believes on me shall never die". That is to say, the
{511}
living persons, those who are alive and remain, they shall never see death. But then the assembly comes down from heaven having the glory of God, in @Revelation 21, "having the glory of God". That is a further thought; the assembly has that.
F.J.F. That is very helpful.
J.T. We may proceed now to the passage in @Romans 8, so that we may see how we should be persuaded of things. We began to read in verse 35, "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? tribulation or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword? According as it is written, For thy sake we are put to death all the day long; we have been reckoned as sheep for slaughter. But in all these things we more than conquer through him that has loved us". And then the persuasion, "For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord", I think it is wonderful to be able to dwell on that! The persuasion that the apostle touches on here.
Ques. Does the use of the word "persuaded" mean that it is something he has arrived at through experience with God?
J.T. The word 'persuasion' is wonderful, I think. It is what a spiritual man arrives at in his own mind, because of facts that he is acquainted with or surrounded with. That is the one thought that is in mind in proposing this passage.
F.J.F. So he is in perfect victory, would you say?
J.T. It is really a challenge; "Who shall separate us?" It is a challenge to the whole universe; that is the way the apostle would speak of it, I would say. Who shall do so? It is a challenge that a
{512}
spiritual man ought to be able to make, because of his persuasion of the facts that he knows, through the gospel and through the ministry of the Spirit, and what he finds in the assembly really.
J.C-S. Do you think it is the lack of this persuasion in the soul that often accounts for much indefiniteness in regard of the truth?
J.T. Just so. Perhaps you will illustrate indefiniteness.
J.C-S. Sometimes you see young people coming into the meeting, they, break bread and they go on, and attend the meetings, but there is really no definiteness in their course, and indeed in that of some older ones too. Does that not indicate a lack of this persuasion in the soul? Is it not as a great lever, affecting us so that we are given over to divine things in result?
J.T. Yes. So that it is not simply that you can record the doctrines, or count up the doctrines of the truth that we hold, but that we are persuaded of the facts that they present, and that nothing can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. That is where it is.
J.C-S. And has that not a great influence upon the mind, the affections and the ways?
J.T. Quite so, "The love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord". It is a dual idea, the love of God and the love of Christ. But it is the love of God "which is in Christ Jesus" here. That is where the love is.
C.F.I. Does the suggestion that we *more than* conquer emphasise the victory?
J.T. Just so, "We more than conquer through him that has loved us". It is a question of love, in Christ or in God, and, I might add, in the assembly too, because the love is there. We have the love of the Spirit also, in Romans.
{513}
Ques. Had Paul arrived at this persuasion through suffering too? "For thy sake we are put to death all the day long". He had entered into that, had he not?
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. I was thinking of the real suffering that some of the brethren have had to meet in facing trade unionism. All that would give them great liberty and joy in the love of God.
J.T. Yes, "To you has been given, as regards Christ, not only the believing on him but the suffering for him also", @Philippians 1: 29.
W.H-l. Would "more than conquer" be suggested in "passing through the valley of Baca, they make it a well-spring", @Psalm 84: 6?
J.T. I would say that, fully. "They make it a well-spring". We are reminded of @John 4, "springing up into eternal life".
J.F. Is this thought of victory seen in the Lord personally? In @John 16 it says, "In the world ye have tribulation; but be of good courage: I have overcome the world".
J.T. Quite so, showing that He is our Leader in conflict. He is our Leader in suffering, and in conflict; and that really enters into all that is said about Him in Revelation as a Lamb. He is a sufferer in Revelation; "a Lamb standing, as slain".
C.A.I. You spoke earlier of our inseparableness from divine Persons and their love. Would this involve the true knowledge of God?
J.T. Quite so, the knowledge of God and of Christ too. So that it becomes a question of our laying ourselves out to know God and to know Christ. I believe @Ephesians 3 is the leading chapter to point out to us the love of Christ and the love of God.
G.M.S. Would you say a little more on that point?
{514}
J.T. If you read in @Ephesians 3, it is well worth reading, beginning with what Paul says when he speaks of bowing his knees to the Father.
G.M.S. @Ephesians 3: 14. "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named, in order that he may give you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man; that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love, in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God".
J.T. That is what I would say is the unique chapter, for it treats of the love of God and the love of Christ. It is presented to us in one who appeals to the Ephesians that they might know his knowledge of the mystery. He says, "My intelligence in the mystery of the Christ". That implies that he had full knowledge of the mystery. He was a sufferer; he speaks of being a sufferer in those chapters.
A.M. Is not the acceptance of suffering one of the primary elements of the kingdom? I was thinking of the teaching of the Lord in @Matthew 5. He says, "Blessed they who are persecuted on account of righteousness"; and then "Blessed are ye when they may reproach and persecute you". May we be liable to forget these principles in accepting the mercy and grace that is bestowed on us through the gospel?
J.T. Yes, quite so. There are many occasions of blessing, but really it comes down to "Blessed are ye"; that is, those to whom He was speaking, and, of course, the word comes to us tonight. He is
{515}
speaking to us, every one of us here tonight. He is speaking to us on the point of victory. Whatever the consequences may be that we have to endure, there is victory for us.
D.J.M. Is Paul in the gain of it, before Agrippa, when he says, "Such as *I* also am"?
J.T. Just so, "Such as *I* also am". So that we have here sufferings in dealing with the antichrist, and sufferings which are involved in the idea of having faith, in John's epistle, and now here in the epistle to the Romans, the persuasion of Paul as to the love of God and the love of Christ, that nothing could separate us from them. It is a challenge to the whole universe, that nothing can separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
G.M.S. Paul challenges seven things in connection with Christ's love, and ten in connection with God's love. May there be an indirect link between that and the Revelation, where it says of the beast he had seven heads and ten horns?
J.T. There is peculiar interest, it seems to me, attached to what we have said about Revelation, because we are face to face with this matter of the beast. Our young people do well to take notice of it, and as to the way out. The way out is by suffering, and the Lord's presence with us to comfort, and support us in it; and then that nothing can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Divine love is active toward us, and nothing can separate us from it.
W.H.K. Would the love of Christ be enjoyed in a peculiar way in sufferings in relation to the testimony? I notice it says, "tribulation or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword", which would relate to circumstances here, whereas the love of God relates to matters outside
{516}
of circumstances here, principalities, powers, life, death, and so on.
J.T. So that we are covered in that way, as they say in insurance circles, we are covered. We are covered against all these eventualities by the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
J.S.E. In pursuance of this, that the Lord is with us, would you be free to say a word about the four men loose in the fire and the form of the fourth like a son of God, according to @Daniel 3?
J.T. That would show that in the sufferings that we have to go through, the Lord is with us. He takes His place with us in them. So the appearance of the fourth, it is said, was as a son of God; we can see ourselves that it is meant that it is the Son of God.
Ques. You were speaking of the challenge. Would you see that in the answer that Hezekiah received from Isaiah, saying to the Assyrian, "The virgin-daughter of Zion despiseth thee, laugheth thee to scorn"? It is not a simple negative overcoming?
J.T. Quite so, and then the angel going out and destroying the one hundred and eighty-five thousand of the Assyrians, showing how God is in our favour. We have therefore nothing to fear. The Lord says, "Fear not them which kill the body", but then He adds, "but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell"; that is the one to fear. We need not fear the combinations of trade unionism and all that enters into the beast, because God is with us in it. There are those in the chapter we read who are overcomers of the beast and the number of his name; they are overcomers.
Ques. Do we get the acceptance of the position in verse 36: "According as it is written, For thy sake we are put to death all the day long; we have been reckoned as sheep for slaughter"? That is the position
{517}
which they have accepted, and then you were referring to the place we have in the love of God, and the love of Christ, and that we are covered by that.
J.T. Quite so, "In all these things we more than conquer through him that has loved us. For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature",-there is a challenge throughout the whole universe as to all this-"shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord".
