{1}
Pages 1 to 423, 'God's Government and Service' and Other Ministry, 1931 - 1942 (Volume 212).
GOD'S GOVERNMENT AND SERVICE
@1 Peter 1: 1 - 9; @1 Peter 2: 4 - 12
J.T. We may be helped in enquiry into this epistle in the light of God's government and service at the present time, for there has been much pressure. The apostle has in mind that the persons addressed were in like circumstances, contrary circumstances to what they might have wished or expected. The government of God lies in that, that circumstances are different from what we may expect. This epistle teaches us that the circumstances according to the will of God are perfect, and to be accepted. In the acceptance of them God does His best for us, that is from His point of view, which we would all recognise to be the best. The persons addressed are regarded as of the dispersion. Some other will than their own had acted; they were dispersed. But whatever the will was that was immediately acting, the point is to bow to the will of God. God being behind the circumstances has something in view. His best, what His love designs for us. In Jeremiah's time some were similarly dispersed, and Jeremiah wrote to them to stay where they were, and to multiply, and not to be diminished (@Jeremiah 29: 6, 7). It requires faith to stay in these circumstances, but as a result we see how God does His best for us. They are in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia. James speaks of the twelve tribes of the dispersion, but there the condition is more general. When conditions are more general they are easier to accept, even if they are adverse. But here it is more acute; but they are "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, by sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ".
{2}
That is the divine standard of those facing these apparently adverse circumstances.
Rem. For those to whom Jeremiah wrote safety lay in accepting their circumstances.
J.T. The refusal to bow to divine ordering means that we shall come under divine judgment. The judgment of God is a wide subject and dates back to the deluge. Certain racial conduct, for us gentiles, and certain conduct in the history of the church have occasioned divine action, for which we are externally suffering.
Rem. Is the confusion of tongues an example?
J.T. All who travel know something of that. We may not notice the things, but if we travel with God we shall know them and feel them. We are in circumstances religiously that we would never have desired. Our position is abnormal; we are outside, and not only in the world but in the profession. The subject is wide, and it is really essential that we should understand the circumstances and the government of God. But He does not alter; what He was, He is. And so these of the dispersion come in for better things than those lost through unfaithfulness. In these circumstances we belong to the elect of God. The elect come into the best. Jesus, God's elect, was in like circumstances, and on Him the Father opens the heavens and expresses His delight. Here we are "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, by sanctification of the Spirit". We are reminded of the positive side, and as of the dispersion this is the act of the Spirit, bringing us into accord with Christ: as it says, "unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ".
Ques. Would the end of @Matthew 11 bear on this?
J.T. That sets it out. The Lord was suffering rejection, but He rejoiced in the Father, the sovereign Ruler of heaven and earth. God would do something better for Him than if His ministry had been accepted
{3}
by Israel. The first eleven chapters have Israel in view; but God has better things in view, things to be revealed to babes, but leading up to the assembly. It is a question of our sanctification. The standard is not lowered by the change of circumstances. Moreover the sprinkling of blood is a basis for a new order things to God's glory.
Ques. Is it an allusion to the whole tabernacle being sprinkled?
J.T. The thought is well known in the Old Testament, and Hebrews brings out the basis on which the system is set, in contrast to the types. The thought goes back to @Exodus 12, and then in @Exodus 24 is the establishment of the covenant, and the sprinkling of the altar, the book and the people. In @Leviticus 16 and other places is seen the import of the sprinkling. Here it is the "sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ". It is set over against the blood previously sprinkled.
Ques. How does the sprinkling relate to what follows?
J.T. It is the solemn footing we are on before God. The government of God cannot be fruitful save as we are on a righteous basis before Him. The believer is not shaken. Peter traces government from the angels that fell, right on to the new heavens and the new earth. He links up the saints with it by the Spirit, links them up with what is past and what is future.
Ques. Is the obedience spoken of here like that of the Lord Jesus?
J.T. Yes. He brought in this kind of obedience; it is *how* He obeyed. The circumstances put all this to the test. They were really like the Lord's circumstances. The government of God in Peter and Jude covers all God's dealings known. They begin with angels; the disobedient angels are cast down. He takes up the world that was, the present world, and
{4}
the world to come. Circumstances arise contrary to what we might wish. In their acceptance we prove what God can be to us. When the Lord came there was the greatest adversity; the people were scattered and under Roman rule. Messiah was refused, but He was perfect in all that, and He faced the whole matter. He died under the Romans, but He went beyond all that and faced the whole matter to God's glory. He met the whole question that had brought in God's judicial ways, and He left God free to work out His own thoughts; our safety lies in submission to Jesus. All this is worked out in those who accept the circumstances. The standard has been brought in by Christ. There is a lever in the light that comes into our souls as being elect, elect "by sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ". It is "unto". The sanctification of the Spirit has in view this obedience.
Rem. Obedience with the Lord Jesus was an attitude of heart, "He wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed".
J.T. That is good. The law was *in* His heart.
Ques. Shall we suffer outwardly?
Rem. But bowing to that the Lord opens the door of privilege.
J.T. Indeed. They come into something better. They had been dispersed; they had not moved to make money. Some of the Jews may have moved for that reason, but they had moved otherwise. The disciples were to be men of portent; they were to be like Him. God has brought in, in Him, the standard of obedience; so He has brought in what is new. Here they are "sojourners of the dispersion", "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, by sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ".
{5}
Rem. Only that kind of obedience will do; there is no other thought.
J.T. The highest order of obedience would be seen in John's gospel, "As the Father gave me commandment".
Ques. Would Aquila and Priscilla illustrate this?
J.T. They were in a dual position. They were christians, treated as Jews. They accepted it, and they are found at Corinth, and without pretending anything, or claiming anything, either as Jews or christians, they are working; they are artisans, tentmakers. Paul would have no aspirations, either as tent-maker or at any work, but he is there with them. What did Paul mind as to the thought of the authorities about him? He had the light of God in his soul, and it is on those lines that he is working. So he would be subject to every authority for the Lord's sake (see @1 Peter 2: 13).
Ques. What are the better things you referred to?
J.T. "Blessed be the God and Father ... receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls" (verses 3 - 9). There you have a lot of precious things put together, reminding you in their fulness of Paul's condensation of what is so blessed in Ephesians. How much these people had already! But only in acceptance of their then present circumstances, the second chapter we have, "To whom coming, a living stone, cast away indeed as worthless by men, but with God chosen, precious, yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ". That is far beyond anything that Solomon had.
Rem. And the Lord would use all the pressure to give us experience with Himself.
J.T. There is a remarkable condition now in the world, dating back to 1914. The people of God have come under these conditions. What is there in them
{6}
for us? God is working out the end, perfecting His work in us. They are the occasion of our coming into these most blessed things. God is using all these things for the good of His people now. We might aspire to getting on in this world. God gives us the opportunity to have better things. The value of a man is more precious than gold. The Lord Jesus is God's standard.
Ques. Should not exultation mark us?
J.T. It would arise from the knowledge that Peter's epistle gives to us. Believers are linked up with the whole history of God's ways. The Spirit of Christ was in the prophets. The Old Testament prophets who suffered had to accept that the things they spoke of were not for them, but these great things are for us. It says that the angels desire to look into them. Think of that! They would not desire to know what statesmen were doing; but these things are so great that they desire to look into *them*. We find that the Lord Jesus Himself has suffered, "being put to death in flesh, but made alive in the Spirit, in which also going he preached to the spirits which are in prison, heretofore disobedient, when the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was preparing". He went back beyond the flood and He preached Himself. We are linked up with all that. The gospel has been preached to those that are dead. How faithful God has been; His love has been active all the time by the Spirit of Christ, "To whom coming" involves committal, and then there is the actual structure going on. There is a basis for the new system. Then there is the living condition of things, actual living stones; and then the holy priesthood. We are brought into the best, but God has His part in it, His own part.
Rem. This would be offering "an oblation in righteousness", @Malachi 3: 3.
{7}
J.T. Yes, it would; and all the preciousness of Christ is our portion. We were looking last night at @Matthew 9. What a thought of Christ! The Bridegroom; a bridegroom is a man at his best. So it is all His preciousness. You would turn from all else; Peter is already there, so he says, "To whom coming". Pressure is in view of enlargement, and all these meetings show that God is turning things to account. What are we coming to? The "living stone" is the positive thing before God. "To whom coming". That is the positive side; the blood is to deal with what is negative, so to speak, but here is the positive thing.
"But *ye* are a chosen race, a kingly priesthood, a holy nation, a people for a possession, that ye might set forth the excellencies of him who has called you out of darkness to his wonderful light; who once were not a people, but now God's people; who were not enjoying mercy, but now have found mercy". All this is very stimulating. It is what we are; not what Christ is only, but what we are. Whatever the world thinks, that is what the saints are. We begin to feel we are of value; the saints are a possession. Stephen corresponded with the Lord. All was allowed. Today many are suffering seriously, but the government of God makes a way for the testimony. At Shinar God scattered men over the face of the earth, but then the Spirit of God records *again* the posterity of Shem. It is given again. The tower would block the line of the testimony. The more concentration there is in the world the harder it is for the testimony, but God makes a way through. So in @Jeremiah 29, they are to stay and build houses. It is the ordering of God, and then in seventy years He will act. They have to accept the captivity.
Rem. We have received good at the hands of the Lord, and shall we not accept the evil?
J.T. "For thus saith Jehovah: When seventy years shall be accomplished for Babylon I will visit
{8}
you, and perform my good word toward you, in bringing you back to this place. For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith Jehovah, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you in your latter end a hope. And ye shall call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you; and ye shall seek me and find me, for ye shall search for me, with all your heart, and I will be found of you, saith Jehovah. And I will turn your captivity, and I will gather you from all the nations, and from all the places whither I have driven you, saith Jehovah; and I will bring you again into the place whence I have caused you to be carried away captive", @Jeremiah 29: 10 - 14.
{9}
SONS OF THE KINGDOM AND SONS OF LIGHT
@John 12: 36; @Romans 8: 14
What has pressed itself upon me, dear brethren, is the thought of sonship, not so much in the sense in which we usually speak of it, as in the last verse read where we are alluded to as sons of God, but rather to dwell on sonship of certain institutions or principles or qualities of God, in which the word or idea is somewhat figurative, the idea of sonship. But nevertheless the idea is there, and it is to make the things alluded to practical, and in so far as may be, experimental. Hence you have in the gospels, among other references, sons of the kingdom, sons of peace, and here in John, sons of light. Doubtless most of us have taken notice of these expressions and profited by them, but I am sure that they will bear further attention or enquiry on our part, because we are all prone to be theoretic, and terms which are intended by the Spirit of God to be always pungent, both in our minds and in our words, are apt to become crystallised and meaningless.
So these references which I have made convey what is most practical. First, sons of the kingdom, in @Matthew 13, as you will remember, are spoken of by the Lord as sown. You will recall that in that chapter there are something like seven parables, the first referring to the sower of seed, but the seed is called the word of the kingdom, the *word* of it. That is what is presented in ministry; the idea or thought of the kingdom conveyed intelligently in spiritual power by ministry alludes to the testimony of the Lord as Son of Man, and that of His apostles -- the word. Then we have another parable, usually called the parable of the tares or darnel, in which the seed is persons, not simply words -- an important distinction.
{10}
The word of the kingdom is sown and there are different growths, some permanent and many others of no value; but the parable of the tares implies that persons are sown. In other words, to be simple, an evangelist goes into a town and preaches the gospel and gets a convert. That is one operation of God, and that convert is sown in the place, otherwise there will be no representation of the kingdom. The word of the kingdom enters his heart and enlightens him, and he becomes a believer, as in Matthew, in the testimony of the heavens, the kingdom of the heavens. Now he is sown himself in the place, not as the word of the kingdom but as a son of it; that is the word used. The good seed are the sons of the kingdom.
Now I refer to that initially, because that is so important if we are to have representatives of the truth, valuable representatives of the truth in localities. We must not only have the word presented, but the sons of the kingdom set up there; they are sown, so to say. Now that would mean that they take root in the soil, in the divinely-prepared soil, and they bear fruit. As sons of the kingdom they would be persons who have some knowledge of heaven; the light of heaven has shone into those that are delivered from the earth. They cease to be politicians; they cease to be material for this world; they are secured for God's world, but for the moment they are set in the place as sons of the kingdom. They are set down in the power of it, so that as they walk in the street, as they do their business, as they keep their house, and so forth, they set out the thing in the place. Another thing that comes out in him or her is that he or she is a son of the Highest, according to Luke. According to Matthew he or she is a son of his Father, not simply of his Father, but of his Father who is in the heavens. That is to say, there is a heavenly touch with him. Luke says, "the highest", which is great moral elevation. That man
{11}
is no longer a socialist, nor does he belong to any of those unions or the like that go to build up this world; he is out of society. He is a son of the Highest, that is, of elevated matters. It is not simply that I belong to heaven; the point is, I am a son of what is high, the Highest, what is of God of course, but the Highest. There is no dignity in the world, therefore, that can eclipse me once I get hold of that. I am delivered from all human greatness, and greater than all, I am a son of the Highest. That is not a mere abstract thought. According to Luke we get a list of things that mark persons who are sons of the Highest: they love their enemies. That is the idea of the Highest, rising above the sin, the opposition that may be. They bless them that persecute them and that curse them, and they pray for them that despitefully use them. That is an entirely new thing; that belongs to the Highest; that comes from the Highest; I am a son of the Highest.
Well, there is another thing, and that is a son of peace. Luke makes much of the sons of peace. He uses it in the singular. It has to do with the formation of local companies, of an assembly in a town like this or in other towns. The missionaries went out two by two according to chapter 10; thirty-five pairs were sent out by the Lord, and they were to go into every city and place where He was to go, meaning that there would be those in these places as He came there who would receive Him; and as entering in they would enquire if a son of peace were there. You can understand that a son of peace in Luke would include all these things that I have been speaking of, a son of the kingdom and a son of the Highest and one that lives at peace with others, that knows something of the peace of God. How can I be a son of peace if I do not know the peace of God? "Being justified by faith, we have peace with God". That is one thing; but in deliverance, which
{12}
goes further, the peace of God garrisons the heart, "In everything, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God; and the peace of God, which surpasses every understanding, shall guard your hearts and your thoughts by Christ Jesus". That is a son of peace. He has acquired that by prayer. He is not quarrelsome. You cannot have an assembly according to God with quarrelsome persons. These missionaries of Christ came to a town and a quarrelsome person is there, whether it be a professor, or a confessor, or nominal believer in Christ, he would not be a son of peace; they would leave, for their peace would not rest there. Their peace rests where there is a son of peace. The peace of the two missionaries of Christ would be the peace of God. He would have a resting-place. Think of that, that in a town there is a resting-place for the peace of God, for the son of peace. You have, therefore, in these features material for local assemblies, that is to say, companies of people in which the thoughts of God are vested, in which they lodge, in which they are cherished, and in which the all-varied wisdom of God is worked out. You can see the magnitude of it, and that is the importance of these features, sonship of certain institutions or qualities or principles of God that have come in in Christ. They are intensely practical.
Well now, in John we follow on the subject, because he presents his side of it. He speaks about sons of light, and I wish to speak about sons of light particularly. John's ministry, as has often been said, but not too often, has reference to our own time, but it also had reference to the time it was written. It had always a place but it has a peculiar place now, having in view the great increase of darkness. We are living in darkened times, a time in which the works of the devil take that form, "The universal lords of this darkness", as Paul said. How feelingly we can speak
{13}
of it if we have been walking in any way with God for many years, especially in this last century. How feelingly we can speak of *this* darkness, not *that* darkness; and it all issues forth from the universal lords of *this* darkness. One may be an instrument of it in a large way or in a small way, but it is all to one end, to darken the mind of the saints.
Now John has that in mind and he makes a great thing of believing what is presented. Everyone who reads his gospel knows that it is peculiar, very different in character, not in substance, but in character, from the other three. He stresses the thought of divine Persons. It is a question of the revelation of God, or as I should say, the declaration; that is the word used in verse 18, the declaration. The declaration is to be understood as different from the revelation. The word 'revelation' is the apocalypse, that is, the unveiling, the unrolling of the veil, so that you look in and see what is there. That is the idea. The features revealed would be Persons. The declaration is that God is brought out. God is brought out to us; that is the force of the word, not that a veil is removed that we may look in, because the creature cannot look in, the creature is not capable of looking in for himself, "No one has seen God at any time". John said in verse 18 of his first chapter, and that was written long after the resurrection and ascension of Christ, long after the advent of Christ here, "No one has seen God at any time". In his epistle he repeats it. No creature is capable of seeing Him in His essential Being. So that it is not a veil removed, but He is brought out to us. In @John 1: 18 He is brought out by the Son, the only-begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father. Mark, it is not 'was' in the bosom, but "is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him". The declaration is past but the position is present. It is eternal. He is brought out in His Person so that He should be seen by us,
{14}
brought within our range so that the creature should understand. That is what is in view. What John calls for is believers in truth, not mere nominal belief, but genuine heart belief; hence you find in some cases there were believers, but Jesus did not trust them. That is another feature of John's gospel: there are those whom the Lord has no confidence in. He did not commit Himself because He knew all men; He knew what was in man.
So that the first sign is that He manifested His glory. What is the effect? The effect is that the disciples, already believing, believed on Him. That is another thing John has in view, true believers in Christ. So in the verse I read, "While ye have the light, believe in the light". Believe in the light. Now the light, whatever it may be, whatever comes from God is to be believed, and let no one turn a blind eye. I was going to say a deaf ear, but it is a question of the light to the eye. It is a serious matter to turn a blind eye to divine light so that you do not see. A person says, 'I do not see it'; that is, you are blind or you are wilful. The first thing you get in this gospel in regard of the Spirit is that John saw Him, "I saw the Spirit", he says, "descending and ... it abode". That is the point. Indeed, He that sent him to baptise told him, "Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit". Hence the importance, dear brethren, I do urge with feeling, to keep your eye open, your spiritual eye, and keep it single. Matthew says that the lamp of the body is the eye, and if thine eye be single, or simple, thy whole body is full of light, full. A very remarkable figure that! You know there is not one bit of darkness when the eye is single, but if thine eye be evil thy whole body is darkness, thy whole body. You may profess to be a believer on Christ and in fellowship, even pretending to be defending the truth and
{15}
yet every movement of yours be darkness if your eye is not single. It is not only what people say, but what they do, where they go, all is darkness, the Lord says according to Matthew's record. Then, "If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great the darkness!". So it is, alas, with our brethren in bodies around who have left the path of light. How great is the darkness! Better if they had never been out. That is a solemn warning to us to keep a single eye, for if the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is it! I become an imitation. That is the worst kind of opposition to the truth; the worst kind of darkness is imitation.
Well now, John, as I said, is stressing the idea of believing whatever is presented as light from God, while they have it; it may pass away. Immediately after the Lord said these things He hid Himself from them. How solemn that the Lord should hide Himself! He hid Himself, and then the Holy Spirit begins to speak about the announcement from Isaiah that they could not believe. A most terrible thing! If the light is refused, judicial darkness sets in. Isaiah says, "Who hath believed our report?". The evangelist goes on to it, "Lord, who hath believed our report?". What a word that is for our hearts! A report! In @Isaiah 53 the Person of Jesus is set before us in such a beautiful way, and the Spirit of God says, "Who hath believed our report?". Then it says that they could not believe because He had blinded their eyes. Isaiah said it again. The second word is a solemn word. So that we cannot trifle with God and the truth. Judicial blindness sets in. Isaiah says again that they could not believe, for He had blinded their eyes that they should not believe. That is a solemn thing. I am only speaking of what is stated and to emphasise what John says, "While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light". In the Authorised Version
{16}
the word 'children' is used. In fact, in all references to this the proper word is 'sons', and anyone can see that the word 'son' used in its full bearing is more than a child. Although we may call a male child a son, the scriptural use of the word 'son' indicates more than a child. It means that there is development. It means that there is something characteristic in him of that of which he is son in a developed form. So that the thought here is that we should be developed as believers in the light, developed in the light and living in it, which would mean that if one enquires as to where I am and why I am there, I can give an account of myself. Hence I am enlightened and my walk and ways correspond.
Well now, to make the thing simpler, I may illustrate from John's gospel sons of the light. The first one I would bring forward is the well known woman of Samaria. She is a son of the light in regard of her body. She left her water-pot as has been often remarked. She brought it to the well to fill it up and carry it back, but she did not do that. After Jesus had talked with her, her soul became illuminated. She had met the Son of God and she left her water-pot. He had been talking to her about living water and what it shall be in a person that believes; one who had drunk of it shall never thirst again, and it shall be in him a well of water. That was light to her soul in regard of her body, and she left her water-pot and went away to the city, and there were results. She spoke to the men and they were affected. She was a son of light in the place. Now that is a very simple thought. It is, as I may say, the initial idea of being a son of light, that one understands the importance of one's body. The epistle to the Romans points out to us how the gospel affects one so that his body is presented a living sacrifice to God, and that means purified inwardly to make room for the living water. That is the inward thing involving all
{17}
the automatic organs in the body, so that the body, the organs themselves, begin to act. I am not merely intelligent, I have affections, feelings and compassions with that. All become active and controlled by the Spirit, so that we live. As Romans teaches us, the body is dead physically, but the Spirit is life. The body is dead on account of sin. All that it was connected with has ceased to operate. Instead of that, the working of sin, the Spirit is life within, and in chapter 12 the body is presented as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable, and that is called intelligent service. I am a son of the light in regard of my body. I have that to present. That leads on to the worship of God as indeed the instructions to the woman involved. God is a Spirit. The first thing is that you present your body. She went to the city and left her water-pot as if she understood that her body was henceforward to be a vessel. I only touch on it.
The next son of the light can be said to be the nobleman of Capernaum, because God is no respecter of persons. The light comes to a poor outcast, and she becomes intelligent as to her body, purified to be used of God. Then we have the household, the nobleman as he is called; he becomes a believer in regard of his house. That is the next thing. The light is radiating in his house. He believes in his own house. His son is healed by the Lord Jesus. It is an important matter first to be son of the light in regard of my body, and then a son of the light in regard of my house, and then in chapter 6 you will remember what Peter says to the Lord when others, great numbers, were drifting away from Him. That is always happening, people turning away from Christ, walking no more with Him; what He says is too spiritual for them. The words that He spoke were spirit and life and many walked no more with Him. They turned back, and the Lord says to the twelve, "Will ye also go away?". Notice the word 'twelve' -- I may say the only allusion to
{18}
the official position on the part of the saints in John. "The twelve", he says. The use of the numeral as alluding to the selected apostles would be the testimony. It is not the idea of the testimony in a locality. Twelve is universal. Many of us are too local; others of us are too universal. We begin locally and then become intelligent and see that the testimony is universal. The woman of Samaria belonged to a town; the nobleman thought of his house, and he shone there. The twelve were taken up in relation to the testimony in its universal bearing. You know the fellowship has two features; the local feature and the universal feature. They must merge, the one into the other, otherwise the local becomes a mere congregational church, because in truth there is only one fellowship, and it has a local aspect and a universal aspect. Now the twelve would refer to the testimony in its universal bearing because they were to go into all the world. The Lord says to the twelve, "Will ye also go away?". One might say if they all went away what would become of the testimony? But the Lord can look after the testimony. But He says, "Will ye also go away?", as if it were possible for the leading men of the testimony to go away. Peter says, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life. And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God". What a wonderful word that was! There is a son of the light. He has got apprehension of the light, of the light in regard to the whole testimony. He is one of the twelve. What would hold John, or Peter, or what would hold Paul? Christ! He is the great attractive centre for all, "To whom shall we go?". The apostles were as dependent upon Him as we are. 'Where shall we go?'. "To whom shall we go?". There is none save One; He had words of life eternal.
Then the next great example is, I think, the man that had his eyes opened. He was a son of the light
{19}
in chapter 9 in regard of the works of God. Now that is a very important thing when one person is to be a testimony of the works of God: not only the work but the works of God should be manifested in him. An astronomer or a scientific man would testify to the work of God. The Lord does not say anything about the cause in chapter 9; He says that this man was not born blind because he sinned but that the works of God should be manifested. How great that thought is, that I am taken up as the subject of the work of God, the works of God. That is, the man in chapter 9 is the one that bows down and worships the Son of God. Every man that is the subject of the work of God worships God. "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?". "Who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him?". The Lord said, "Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he". He said, "I believe, Lord", and he worshipped Him. That is a son of the light in regard of the Son of God. How much we need that at the present moment. The enemy is darkening our minds whereas the Spirit of God would insist on Scripture, and Scripture speaks for itself. If we want to apprehend the Son of God we want to apprehend the first chapter of John. That is where it is set out, the Person of Jesus. This man said, "Who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him?". And he said, "I believe, Lord". How delightful to Jesus! They were both outcasts. That man was cast out of the synagogue and when the Lord heard that, He found him. He takes account of outcasts for the truth. Let us not be afraid of that, to be an outcast for the truth that the works of God might be manifested. He said, "I believe, Lord", and he worshipped Him.
Well then, to finish, the twelfth chapter is a sort of constellation of light. I suppose the stars would be alluded to. John is very astronomical in his references, although he was not an astronomer by profession,
{20}
but God changes things about, and John got to know far more than his teachers. He knew more about astronomy than Newton. He had the spiritual understanding: by faith we understand. I have no doubt his reference to the sons of light would be that, the stars. Daniel speaks about them too: "They that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the expanse; and they that turn the many to righteousness as the stars". That is a great thought. So you get a cluster, so to say. We read of the sweet influences of the Pleiades, and there are beautiful influences here in chapter 12, at the beginning of the chapter. We have a wonderful shining of Christ in chapter 11 where the glory of God and the glory of the Son of God shone, for this gospel would put the Son and the Father on equality: he that honours the Father honours the Son, and the glory of the Father and the glory of the Son shine together in chapter 11. It is a wonderful shining in chapter 11. No wonder we have a cluster of sons of light following in chapter 12. Bethany was the centre of the sons of light; they were there together. The thought enters into a local company of christians. Jesus came there to be glorified amongst them. He names the stars, He calls them all by name, those that shine.
So they made Him a supper. It is not the house of Simon the leper. Here He secured the company of sons; it is, "They made him a supper". It is a question of the spiritual setting; no one is saying anything. According to the record not a word is said to Jesus when He arrived. Not like chapter 11 where Martha came to Him and talked to Him on orthodox lines. We often do. She knew that at the resurrection her brother would rise at the last day. That was orthodox. The Lord says, "I am the resurrection and the life". He who is, and was, and is to come! John presents Him *who is*. Martha bowed and He said, "Believest thou this?".
{21}
She said, "I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, who should come into the world". Then she goes away to her sister. She got help; she was illuminated; and there she spoke. But when He came this time not a word was said by anyone, because the point is spiritual power, spiritual affection. It is a question as to whether we can sit still and let the love of Christ permeate our souls, and let our affections go up to Him, no speaking, not a word said. We ought to learn how to sit together in assembly in spiritual silence. I do not know anything more difficult myself than to sustain spiritual silence, but it belongs to the assembly. We read of silence in heaven for the space of half an hour. Think of the intelligences that are in heaven; they are made silent for half an hour. I know it has a prophetic meaning, but I am just referring to the fact that there was silence. So there is silence at Bethany. Lazarus sat at table, Martha served and Mary worshipped. The house was filled with the odour of the ointment; all was delightful spiritually; Judas breaks the silence, but I do not dwell on that. It is a group of sons of light: they know what to do, how to go and how to keep quiet when necessary; and the Holy Spirit pervades all. You will all remember how when the glory entered Solomon's temple the priests could not minister. The thing was so full: God was there. The enjoyment is not to be defined; it is to be enjoyed. But then I am speaking of the light that governed them, for they were sons of light. So, in this chapter John says, "While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light". That is the point, dear brethren, if you are sons of the light.
So in @Romans 8 all this merges into sons of God. What marks them is the consequence of what I am speaking of. They are led by the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God has entire control in our hearts,
{22}
as sons, to lead us into His presence. Those that are led by the Spirit of God are the sons of God. One would like to have said more about the sons of God. Indeed any one of these scriptures that I have brought forward would be quite enough, but I do not know that I am to be here to speak again, so I want to bring this subject briefly but comprehensively before you, so that in our localities we may shine in these features and be led by the Spirit, that we may know how to be in our local assemblies to be led by the Spirit. Where will He lead us? He has come out from the Father and He leads us in, and He hands us over to the great Minister of the sanctuary; Christ is the Minister of the sanctuary, of the true tabernacle pitched by the Lord and not man.
{23}
GLORY IN TESTIMONY AND PRIVILEGE
@Revelation 21: 9 - 11; @Ephesians 3: 14 - 21; @Romans 5: 5; @Romans 8: 14, 15
J.T. I was thinking there are two lines running from the outset when the gospel is received: one toward glory in the assembly for testimony, for shining out; and the other for glory to God in the assembly. In @Revelation 21 the assembly is carrying the glory of God and her light most precious, that is she is coming down, evidently to illuminate the coming world. The other line is the family line, so that it is glory to God. The *Father's* Spirit is mentioned in @Ephesians 3. In chapter 5 of Romans we have the Holy Spirit shedding abroad the love of God in our hearts, and in chapter 8 the Spirit of adoption crying, "Abba, Father". It may be we shall be helped to see how the Spirit operates on both lines. In @2 Corinthians 3 and 4 we have the glory of the covenant, subsisting glory -- the ministry of the Spirit subsists in glory -- and that glory working out in chapter 4 as the glory of God in the face of Jesus. That is the line it takes. In Ephesians it is the family line, so that it is the Spirit of the Father; the passage in @Romans 8 would link on with that, that the Spirit of God will lead in that direction. In @Hebrews 2: 10 we are told that God is leading many sons to glory. In @Romans 8, "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are the sons of God", and then we are told that we "have received a Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father". I thought we would get help perhaps in looking at those lines of truth, both converging on the assembly, the one the family line and the other working out in testimony here.
F.S.M. I was thinking the one would be the shining for the shining forth. God is glorified in the
{24}
shining forth, but the other is for the gratification of His own heart in affection; one testimony and the other affection.
J.T. That is what I thought.
F.S.M. You were putting emphasis on the idea of glory in the present. I feel for myself I have lost a good deal by regarding it purely as a future thought; but the idea is you awaken to the thought of the glory of God in the assembly now. It is not merely something we are to enter into at the rapture.
J.T. So that now is the time of the investiture. The assembly is intended to be the residence of the glory and to be invested with it; in principle she has it already. So the Lord's supper makes us familiar with the thought.
-- .B. "Much more that which remaineth is glorious".
J.T. Tell us more about that.
-- .B. I thought it would mean the thing being present, glorious now in the assembly.
Eu.R. What is the idea of glory?
J.T. I suppose it is the shining out of what God is; He is the God of glory and the Father of glory. The God of it, I suppose, would mean that He disposes of it; the Father would be the source of it. Then the Lord Jesus is said to be the Lord of glory. Then the question is, What is it? It seems to be what a Being is, what God is in the expression of what He is. It is in the expression you get radiation or display. So that the Spirit of God awaited Stephen to use that expression, "The God of glory"; there was some expression of it in him. It was not a mere abstract or technical thought; the man who was saying it was expressing it.
F.S.M. It was shining forth in him.
J.T. Yes. It awaited Jesus, I suppose, for the shining out; there is the expression of what God is in His varied attributes in Christ, I suppose, taken
{25}
together, these are what are in mind in glory. But then we are said to be "vessels of mercy"; it says, "That he might make known the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared for glory". The idea is that you have a great realm of beings capable of receiving and showing off glory, radiating the thing in the vessels, the aggregate of that being in the assembly. "Having the glory of God" would allude to the saints viewed as the city, each being a vessel of mercy fitted for glory; the riches of His glory shine upon us who are vessels fitted, the word 'vessels' alluding to what is usable, what is available for that purpose.
F.S.M. Would it be at all a parallel thought that the tabernacle was a vessel being prepared, or fitted, for the glory, and when it was complete the glory filled it? Is it suggestive of the assembly in that sense as that which can contain the glory?
J.T. That is what I was thinking, that the vessels were there. In principle, Abraham was a vessel of mercy fitted for glory, but you get no collective thought till you come to Sinai. Abraham was taken out to look at the stars, and one star differs from another in glory; that is, they are not viewed as a collective thing, each one has his own glory, and star differs from star in glory. But Abraham would be one of those, and so would Isaac, and all the men of faith; there would be the radiation in each one of them. Wherever faith was, there was some reflection of glory. For instance, Gideon says to the kings of Midian, "What sort of men were they that ye slew at Tabor? And they answered, As thou art, so were they; each one resembled the sons of a king", @Judges 8: 18. There was glory there. Well, he says, they were "the sons of my mother"; that would mean she had some idea far beyond her husband in those sons. They were like sons led to glory. I think that all the men of faith were that. But when you
{26}
come to Exodus, you get the collective thing, and what is meant there is not, I believe, our eternal relations in sonship, but our relations in the body, as doing the will of God, as keeping His commandments. There is glory shining out to anyone doing the will of God, keeping the commandments of God, for that is the basis on which the whole physical system is set -- "He spake, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast". It is a question of things being under God, His will; and I think the first thing in regard to vessels of glory is that the tabernacle represents those who provide the material. They were all subject; every item in the tabernacle is in its place under Moses. Aaron is not officiating at all, but Moses represented the authority of God, not sonship, although sonship is in Exodus; it begins with that. "Let my son go" is a collective thought; to reach that there must be the keeping of the commandments of God, the entire submission to His will, and having something; everyone brought something.
F.S.M. It says seven times in @Exodus 40, "As the Lord commanded Moses". Obedience was the basis of it.
J.T. That is what I was thinking. That is the first thing as we sit down together that we are here keeping the commandments of God, each in his place. God sees that is suitable for the wilderness where everything is contrary to the will of God, that there are those who are together meeting according to the will of God; it is morally the greatest thing in a world of lawlessness.
-- .S. Do you connect that with @Romans 5?
J.T. Yes. We rejoice in hope, for there must be that basis of righteousness and carrying out the will of God.
Ques. Would the walking worthy of God who has called us to His eternal glory have any bearing on that?
{27}
J.T. That is the great idea. Exodus is the great type for that, showing us how the saints are not only moving individually, but together, so the only wood in the tabernacle is acacia. It is not only the saints in their eternal relations, but it can carry the gold. When all is set up and anointed, all functioning, God says, so to speak, 'That suits Me', for the bearing of the assembly in that setting is toward man, a vessel here for the will of God, "By the which will", it says, "we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all", @Hebrews 10: 10. So that the glory is there, and that would be particularly at the present time. It is on a moral basis. When we come to Solomon's temple we have a variety of woods, and there is the glory filling the temple and beautiful unity in singing and music. God's mercy enduring for ever, His sovereignty; all is set up on that basis, and the glory fills the thing. It has relation more to the saints as sons in their dignity.
F.S.M. So you get adornment there, and beauty and sweetness of singing.
J.T. Yes, you feel you are on a high level. When you come to Revelation the thought is singers harping with their harps in heaven. I suppose that is the most exalted idea in singing. Harps seem to be the only instrument of music mentioned there, and there is a company on earth able to learn that song. I think the idea is the extreme refinement in the heavenly song. It is well to see what a vista opens up to us. We have to take into account that *we* are the persons, "He that hath wrought us for the self-same thing is God", @2 Corinthians 5: 5. We are vessels of mercy fitted for glory; it is in us that God is working out all this, whether it be the line towards testimony in the millennium in @Revelation 21, or towards Himself eternally, as in @Ephesians 3.
F.H. Would the psalmist have this in view when he says, "Let the saints be joyful in glory", and
{28}
then "the high praises of God", as following it (@Psalm 149)?
J.T. Quite so, the last book of Psalms is full of it, from @Psalm 107 to the end.
Ques. Would you say a word as to @John 17, where the Lord says, "The glory which thou hast given me I have given them, that they may be one, as we are one"? In what connection does that stand?
J.T. I think that would be the glory of sonship; the Lord gives us that glory. That is the unity of the Father and the Son, a very exalted thought. He speaks of the glory that He had with the Father before the world was, that is, a glory belonging to Themselves alone; then He speaks of the glory conferred; that is, I think, what we share in. The glory that He had with the Father before the world was was not sonship; it was peculiar to Himself as a divine Person; He does not impart that to us. It is the glory of sonship we share in.
-- .B. "God, minded to show his wrath and to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering vessels of wrath fitted for destruction ... that he might make known the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared for glory", @Romans 9: 22, 23. Why does it say "before prepared"?
J.T. The word 'before' there would allude to counsel, I think, but it is a component idea to what you get in @Ephesians 2, the good works "which God has before prepared that we should walk in them". Probably the allusion is to the life of Jesus here, the idea of good works would work out there, but they are prepared for us to walk in. Here we are prepared for glory, working out from His counsels, He has it in mind.
F.S.M. With regard to the city having the glory of God, would it suggest it must have acquired it? There must have been some specific operation of God
{29}
a bring to pass a vessel that could be spoken of as having the glory. Is that going on today?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. I believe the glory of God alluded to would be the glory of the new covenant.
F.S.M. The thing ripe for display.
J.T. Yes, I think that is the idea, it is what God is in love working out in us. One can understand how it works, and that the apostle speaks of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ that is being caused to shine into our hearts for the shining forth. Evidently he is speaking about the glory of the covenant.
F.S.M. Yes, chapter 4 follows the third.
J.T. Quite. That glory is being effected in us by the Lord the Spirit. He is viewed there mediatorially, that is, He is the mediator of the new covenant. He has brought us to look at the glory of the Lord as in His face, as it were, and thus we are changed. It is not simply by the look we are changed, there is an effective work of the Lord in the thing -- "even as by the Lord the Spirit" -- and I suppose that would be the investiture that is proceeding from glory to glory. So that it enters, I believe, into our assembly meetings peculiarly, how the Lord serves us and how we take on glory, so that we are more glorious after the meeting than before.
-- .P. It becomes treasure to us.
J.T. Yes. The allusion there is to Gideon's torches. It emphasises that it is not in the future; is working out now, we are becoming accustomed it.
F.S.M. To revert to Stephen, is it not beautifully demonstrated in him? He was characterised by looking; he looked into heaven and saw the glory of God and Jesus. The result of that is he was able to bear glorious witness, and the spirit of Jesus was in evidence in him.
{30}
J.T. There was the face of an angel, too, to remind them of heaven; but then, as we go on in his speech, what ground he covers, from Abraham down! He touches on the most high note: God dwelling not in temples made with hands, suggesting that all this glory is in a greater residence than that, and the final exhibition in him, the glory is seen, not only in his face, but in him -- that is, he corresponds with Christ in death, kneeling down and praying. What glory there was there! Praying for his murderers; love overcoming that murderous state of things.
F.S.M. May I ask further as to whether glory is that which distinguishes one person from other persons, and is the outstanding feature that at once comes to mind when that person is mentioned? Is it some distinct character that makes that person outstanding?
J.T. I think that is right. The stars are used as typical of the saints in that way, one differing from another in glory, all glorious, but there is variation, a wonderful thought! What we were saying yesterday comes to mind forcibly, as to all the tribes being mentioned; each of the tribes has some glory. It is the universal glory, but in variation.
Eu.R. They would shine on the breastplate, each in its own glory.
-- .P. Tell us something about what we have in @Ephesians 3, the all-various wisdom of God seen in the assembly.
J.T. What a vessel it is that even angels see that. How it comes back to us now, in the making, as it were, of vessels of mercy: the all-various wisdom of God must enter into the glory that is there.
-- .P. That is the wisdom of divine grace shining out in the assembly.
J.T. Yes. Nothing, in a way, brings out what the assembly is more than that, the all-various wisdom of God seen, as it says, "In order that now to the
{31}
principalities and authorities in the heavenlies might be made known through the assembly the all-various wisdom of God, according to the purpose of the ages, which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord". Then the prayer, "For this reason I bow my knees ..." The apostle is so weighted with that that he prays that the Spirit of the Father might operate, the Father "of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named".
-- .L. I was going to ask if, in connection with the practical bringing in of the glory, the discipline of the Father of spirits helped in view of the gold?
J.T. I am sure it does, especially in regard of holiness, for it is the holy city Jerusalem. In the passage we have read the word 'new' is not included. In verse 2, it is, "the holy city, new Jerusalem" in view of the eternal state of things, but in verse 10 it "the holy city, Jerusalem" in its bearing towards the coming world, the glory of God being there. So that I suppose the discipline of the Father of spirits would have in mind the working out of holiness, so that the shining is of that kind. It is a holy love, so the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit. It is interesting to see the different titles the Holy Spirit receives in Romans. The first title is "Holy Spirit" in view of this, I think, the holy city Jerusalem, so that we are to be in His hands.
Rem. So that the tribulation and experience would come in as help on this line.
Ques. Would you say that power is necessary to take the glory on inwardly, which is the thought in @Ephesians 3?
J.T. Well, it is; it is a question of taking on, whether I can take on. To use a figure, there are certain materials that will not take on certain things, and there are materials that will take on dyes and the like. Well, the glory in @2 Corinthians 3 is very much like that. We are in an environment of glory,
{32}
can we take it on? Judas was in that environment, the same as John, but he did not take it on. I suppose the apostles were all radiating it in principle, though they did not have the Spirit yet, but, if you had been in that circle, the Lord in the midst, what glory there was! Judas went out; he did not take that on.
F.S.M. Would that apply to local companies? I was thinking of the assembly, Christ's glory. As individuals take on the glory, so local companies can do so and become glorious in the Lord's account.
J.T. That is what I understand, so in taking the money to Jerusalem they were messengers of the assembly, Christ's glory. That is the idea, they took on the thing, it was not simply a question of the money, but of those who carried it.
F.S.M. It would greatly help us to have that in view.
J.T. Not merely meeting local needs, but operating at a distance. I believe that one great thought in all that instruction about giving is in view of the distance -- persons you have never seen.
Eu.R. It works out in love for all saints.
J.T. Yes, "All" in @2 Corinthians 3 would involve what is collective, the fruit of drinking into one cup, and the Lord Jesus getting His place as mediator.
Ques. Would we take on the glory after the breaking of bread as nowhere else?
J.T. I think that is the thought. It is a remarkable time of investiture there. It is what is in us.
F.S.M. So the heart is strongly emphasised in this prayer, "That the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts".
Rem. And "the inner man". It is most important what you say as to what is going on in the minds and hearts of the saints, that is where God is operating, so the apostle got down on his knees over this matter.
{33}
J.T. "The inner man" is a thought that covers the whole inner being.
S.S. So Romans would lead us into this glory.
J.T. Yes, we have all the elements there of the mystery which is mentioned at the end.
S.S. Does it not lead to the liberty of faith?
J.T. Quite so, and how He was "declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead". The spirit of holiness, that is the element to start with. That is to run through when the gospel is received, so the Holy Spirit comes out on that same line. He has in view the investiture of the saints with that glory. What can be more conducive to it than the positive thing, the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the Spirit? It is a mediatorial service corresponding with @2 Corinthians 3.
F.S.M. Is it in view of Christ dwelling in your hearts?
J.T. It is. It shows us the mediatorial service of the Son and the Spirit. We are baptised to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit; the Son and the Spirit operate mediatorially with the Father in mind. They have been pleased to take this place to bring about the state of things God intended. God retained in the Father His own distinctiveness and majesty.
Eu.R. How do you distinguish between our attitude of heart and mind as, in some measure, in covenant relations, and when the Spirit of sonship is free, crying, Abba, Father?
J.T. Well, the Spirit takes another form. The covenant line may lead this way or it may lead that way. It helps us towards the family line, but in testimony it shines out.
Eu.R. There is not, as it were, a cessation, and a new beginning in sonship, but the covenant love has freed us, and we can enter into eternal thoughts.
{34}
J.T. So that @Romans 8 lays the basis for the family as well. I am amenable to the Spirit of God if He has been filling my heart in relation to the covenant, "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God", we are marked off as being led, and then verse 15 is to clarify that, "For ye have not, received a spirit of bondage again for fear, but ye have received a spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father". We are amenable for the Spirit to act, but then we have the principle of His leading there.
S.S. Do we see the working out of the two in Stephen: one working out in testimony and the latter working out in regard of what was in him?
J.T. Well, he tells us many things, beginning with the idea of the glory, he himself the expression of it. We speak of these things as in some little way the expression of them. He begins with the glory. He does not go back to Abel. @Hebrews 11 does, but Stephen does not; he is occupied with the more elevated thought of glory. He begins with the God of glory, and takes us on to Solomon; but then "the Most High dwells not in places made with hands". That suggests Paul's ministry, Paul coming in to bring in the house, that is, the residence of the glory. Stephen does not go so far as that, it was not the time for it, but he leads them to a point. "Being full of the Holy Spirit, having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and said, Lo, I behold the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God". He does not tell them about the glory; I suppose that is recorded by Luke by the Spirit, having in mind that the thing is there, that what he began with has an actual substance now and is visible to men.
Ques. Why does he say "the Son of man"?
{35}
J.T. I think he speaks as the minister exactly what should be spoken. He does not lead them inside; he tells them of the Son of man, meaning that God was about to operate on wider lines.
F.S.M. And his testimony was to the effect that the glory was departed so far as Israel was concerned, but he sees it in another place.
Rem. Very much like the wife of Phinehas. She says, "Ichabod", but the Spirit of God has in mind that the glory would be reinstated and @Psalm 78 says it was.
J.T. That is a good connection. God honoured Stephen; he was a reflection of the glory so far as he could be at the beginning of his speech, but now he sees it in heaven. The counterpart of Stephen is Paul, who does not say he is the mediator of the new covenant, he is a competent minister of it, but Christ is the Mediator of it. Not that it was not there amongst the twelve, for it was, but the vessel was not yet formed, the full thought was not there yet, that is our position now. It is a marvellous thing that it is so, that what is going on today is the investiture of the assembly with the glory.
F.S.M. And, though we are but a few of the assembly in any given place, there is a possibility of taking on the glory.
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Did Paul take on the glory when the Lord appeared to Him and wrought with him?
J.T. I am sure he did. He said to the Lord, "What shall I do, Lord?"; that is glory. Look at that over against what had been in his mind, darkness, breathing out threatenings and slaughter.
Rem. He was consciously a vessel of mercy.
J.T. He was. Then he goes into the city and he takes on the glory, he is filled with the Holy Spirit.
{36}
Ques. Following, do you think, an impression of Stephen when he was minding the clothes of those who stoned him?
J.T. I suppose he got some impression there and was kicking against it.
F.S.M. Is this the same as we get in Revelation, a great and high mountain? Is that the position we have to be in if we are to see the glory?
J.T. Quite So. It is getting away to a great and high mountain. The same set of angels who saw the wicked Babylon character of the public body now sees it in its true setting, coming down from God out of heaven.
-- .P. Does Mary of Bethany take on the glory on the three occasions spoken of? She sat at the Lord's feet, with some sense of the glory of His Person and the value and preciousness of His word, in @Luke 10. Then at the tomb of Lazarus, she gets a view of the glory of God, and of the glory of the Person who could bring resurrection in. Then the house is filled with the glory in @John 12, a greater appreciation still.
J.T. A very good example. The man in @John 9, too; the Lord finds him as he is cast out and says, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" Is he able to take that on?
F.S.M. So the assembly is composed of persons who, by the Spirit's power, are formed after Christ. They are Christ-like persons, and the more Christ-like we are, the more there is glory connected with the assembly.
J.T. So @John 12, I suppose, helps. The Lord says there, after the wonderful scene alluded to, "While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light". That is what was available to take on the glory, sons of the light; it is alluding to stars.
Ques. So does God seek in the assembly at the present time that which will be displayed without
{37}
any hindrance when the holy city comes down out of heaven?
J.T. That is what is going on. If we only take that thought on, we shall see how important our assembly meetings are. The Lord comes in on our side as the mediator of the covenant, as head of the assembly, and He serves. It is what is alluded to in @2 Corinthians 3, what He is effecting, the Spirit of the Lord as investing us with the glory.
Rem. It is a present formation; it is glory in heaven, but not something that is formed there after the saints are taken up.
J.T. That is the thought.
Eu.R. What is the idea of "riches of his glory", @Ephesians 3: 16?
J.T. We have it first in @Romans 9, "That he might make known the riches of his glory"; then, in that verse you allude to, "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named, in order that he may give you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man". What a thought that is, that the service is according to that, a most exalted thought!
Eu.R. Does "the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" involve sonship?
J.T. I think so.
Eu.R. Would that glory here be akin to what John says, "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father", and should this bear on the latter part of our assembly service after the breaking of bread?
J.T. Exactly. The whole chapter is a parenthesis beginning with verse 2 of chapter 3. The apostle is dealing with the greatest thought, his own particular ministry, that is the mystery, and the weight of it,
{38}
as it were, diverts him. The parenthesis would mean that the thing is so weighing upon him that he goes the full length, and then tells us that he prays, and prays in the sense of bowing his knees, which would be great exercise. Then he alludes to the Father in verse 14, "our Lord Jesus Christ" may not be there, it is questionable -- it is very possible that the weight of the thought lies in "the Father ... of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named", that is, that Person in the Deity viewed in that way; God in that way as having to do with this great line He has before Him, glory in the assembly. So, if we leave out the words "of our Lord Jesus Christ", then it would read, 'For this reason I bow my knees to the Father, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named, in order that he may give you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man'; I would take that to be the Father's Spirit. The Lord had said in Matthew, speaking of times of stress and persecution, that "*ye* are not the speakers, but the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you" (@Matthew 10: 20); that is more on kingdom lines in Matthew. Both Mark and Luke say "the Holy Spirit". The Lord stresses the Father in Matthew, but here, I think, it is more the Father in relation to all the families in eternity, a grand and magnificent connection. It is a question of the one family He is dealing with now, that is the assembly. The Father is the predominant thought all round.
F.S.M. Would that be that the result of the Spirit's operations would produce an upward flow of response to the Father?
J.T. That is what I was thinking, that this section of Ephesians is the Father's matter and the family line. In @Revelation 21 it is to shine out, corresponding with @2 Corinthians 4, but here I think it is what is going in to God.
{39}
Rem. Expressly for His own heart, the shining out of all He has wrought for His pleasure in display. If there were more of the features of the glory found amongst us, there would be more to go up to God.
J.T. Quite so. We are being formed for this now, particularly in our assembly meetings. The idea of preparation, glory to glory.
S.S. Does this suggest that sons take on the Father's spirit?
J.T. Yes, we are able to take on that much. Certain fabrics take on certain things. They take on a dye and then they take on another one, it is a question of the fabric, I suppose. The assembly is capable of taking on more than any other family.
Eu.R. Is "That ye may be filled to all the fulness of God" like taking on the glory in this setting?
J.T. Filling there, I think, would also carry with it stability, for how can we carry this save as creatures we are steadied -- "filled to all the fulness of God". Another thing is that it is "the assembly in Christ Jesus" here. "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages".
Ques. So are these various aspects of glory intended to produce movement?
J.T. I think so; it is glory to glory, there is no end to it, you might say.
Rem. The first aspect of glory presented to Abraham produced movement.
J.T. Yes; it does not say the glory appeared to him, it was the *God* of glory. It is Stephen who tells us that, for he is the other end of the line and he sees what God had in mind.
S.S. Would you say that Paul's ministry begins where Stephen's testimony ends, in the glory?
J.T. Quite so. What Stephen saw is worked out Paul. The assembly is invested with it through the ministry of the Spirit of God through Paul in the glory. "In Christ Jesus" -- the 'in' is a preposition
{40}
of power implying that the Lord has to say to all this in the glory. I think the force of the preposition is that there is power operative all the time; it is not merely fixed, but it is always operative.
F.S.M. He is the living Head.
Eu.R. And will He maintain this system of glory eternally?
J.T. "In Christ Jesus" means that.
Eu.R. And if we give Him His place in the assembly now He will maintain this service in the assembly.
J.T. Exactly. It is very doubtful whether any creature can take in the idea of eternity. We use the word, but when we are using the word, we are really thinking of time as far as our minds are concerned. No creature can take it in, so far as I see.
Ques. Would glory in the assembly be the full answer to God appearing to Abraham?
J.T. I think so. The great terminus is the assembly, the great residence of the glory. There will be glory in every family, but God is dealing with one family now, and that is what the apostle is speaking of, that God "may give you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man".
{41}
OBEDIENCE AS PREPARING FOR THE GLORY (1)
@Exodus 12: 28; @Exodus 15: 22 - 27
J.T. This book ends with the tabernacle as the residence of the divine glory and movement consequent; all is linked with obedience, things being done as divinely directed, great stress being laid on this in the closing chapters. So it seemed as if we would be helped to trace the thought of subjection, obedience to the word of God, to see how the glory links on with us as thus subject. We are said to be sanctified "unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ"; so the standard is high, and in order that we should reach it, it is necessary to begin at the beginning of the instructions which we may link with the verse in chapter 12. It is to be remarked, too, that Exodus is ministerial. Obedience, of course, is found in Genesis, but the ministerial side is not stressed there, but it is in Exodus, and the great minister himself, Moses, is subjected to much in the way of discipline to bring him to the attitude of subjection to the will of God. What appears at once in the exercise of his ministerial service is that the people were affected. First, in chapter 4: 28, it is said that: "Moses told Aaron all the words of Jehovah who had sent him, and all the signs that he had commanded him". They are affected by the ministry of Moses and Aaron, and then in chapter 12: 21 - 28, we have an epitome of the instructions Jehovah gave Moses as to the passover. Instead of giving them verbatim he epitomises -- the principle of ministry, abridgment and presenting things briefly -- and then we are told that they worshipped. "And the people bowed their heads and worshipped. And the children of Israel went away, and did as
{42}
Jehovah had commanded Moses and Aaron; so did they". We have the idea of ministry and the moral authority attached to it. So that the effect of divinely accredited ministry in Moses and Aaron is that it causes the people to worship in chapters 4 and 12, but we have added in chapter 12 that the children of Israel *went away*. That is what we might dwell on first. They went away. Moses and Aaron were not present. They received the instruction and went away and did all they were told to do. That is the principle that I think is laid down in this book, obedience existing even when we are away from the eyes of the Lord or the eyes of the brethren or the eyes of the ministers. It is the principle of obedience that continues even though there is no one watching or looking after us directly.
W.J.C. What bearing has the head bowed in worship? What does it signify? Does obedience flow out of that condition?
J.T. I think that is right. God is brought to us in the ministry by the Spirit, and what is said in the ministry in chapter 4 causes our hearts to be affected. Then again in chapter 12 the same thing is seen only we have added that the children of Israel departed and did what Jehovah had commanded Moses and Aaron, "So did they". The Spirit of God is stressing that; as left to themselves they are obedient.
A.J.D. Are you looking at Moses and Aaron as ministering servants?
J.T. That is what they are.
H.H. The ear is connected with ministry, "He that planted the ear, Shall he not hear?" @Psalm 94: 9.
J.T. I suppose the ear is the organ of reception of the word of God and is the root of obedience. Obedience is the outcome. Is that what you have in mind?
H.H. In these last days we need to listen to what the Lord is saying. The voice of the Lord now is a
{43}
matter of ministry. We are to hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches.
J.T. "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches".
J.S. Initially, does hearing come first?
J.T. I think so, "faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God". So that the ear is anointed. The ears of the priest were anointed. We have it constantly in the Scriptures, "Hearken, O daughter", @Psalm 45: 10.
J.S. Would receiving be another step in subjection? "They received the word with all readiness of mind", @Acts 17: 11.
J.T. Just so. Receiving, we are told, "the engrafted word which is able to save your souls", @James 1: 21.
A.R. Does this fit in with @Romans 6: 17? The apostle in writing to the Romans could say, "but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you". The form of teaching delivered to them was obeyed from the heart.
J.T. Form of teaching, yes. Paul's teaching.
Ques. Is there the thought of subjection in the Lord Jesus Himself?
J.T. Well, He says, Jehovah opened His ears morning by morning. You marvel at His saying that, but He did. He was not rebellious.
J.S. It speaks of the Son becoming subject in @1 Corinthians 15.
J.T. The principle right through is that the assembly is subjected to Christ, and the Son shall be subject to Him who is all in all. The principle runs right through into eternity. We are to be learning now.
A.J.D. Is it seen in the Lord at the age of twelve? He became subject to His parents.
J.T. He *was* subject; He always was. He is seen in the temple hearing and asking questions.
{44}
You can understand how the Lord would listen to the doctors and hear what they said, and ask a question now and again. You can understand how it would arouse interest in the temple, and then He is subject to His parents.
G.F. "He learned obedience from the things which he suffered".
J.T. A very touching thing. The point there is not that he was ever ignorant in the moral sense of things, but being God He could not learn obedience. As becoming Man He learnt it experimentally through suffering.
H.H. Would you not say Moses listened to God himself? Would that not come in, too? Would discipline be necessary to take in divine thoughts?
J.T. I suppose he represents that great feature. The number of times that is alluded to is impressive: "the Lord spoke unto Moses saying", that would mean that he had acquired an ear, because God spoke oracularly. Perhaps we are not much accustomed to that, but that was how He spoke to Moses. The principle of it is in @Numbers 7: 89, Moses went in to speak to Jehovah and "he heard the voice speaking to him from off the mercy-seat which was upon the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubim". That was the appointed way of divine communications; that is what is called oracular. One would require an ear to understand, so that one should hear aright. In hearing, Moses was responsible to convey exactly what was in the mind of God. So that he would have to have a careful ear to hear. I am glad you brought that up for he represents the great principle of hearing oracular communications.
R.A.L. Samuel was not accustomed to hearing.
J.T. Quite so. This is important. We were speaking of that the other evening in Brooklyn; that children, however well cultured they may be by their parents and laid on the altar for God's service,
{45}
the time has to come when they have to have an ear to hear what God says directly to them. Lest we think unduly of this boy, Samuel, it is said that "he did not yet know the Lord". One evidence was that he thought Jehovah's speaking was Eli's speaking. He mistook God's voice; he thought it was just Eli speaking, and God was about to reject Eli. It is rather discrediting to him that he mistook Jehovah's voice for Eli's voice. An important word for us, for we are apt to think God is speaking when He is not, and to think man is speaking when God is speaking to us. So we may miss much by not being accustomed to oracular speaking, "He that hath an ear, let him hear". It is that kind of an ear that can hear.
J.R.H. Reference has been made to Romans. Would you say we are defective in the teaching of Romans if we are not obeying the commandments?
J.T. I think we shall see that Romans is a great basic epistle; it is written in the most authoritative way. Paul is very pronounced as to his apostolic authority both in that letter and in those to Corinth. It is a question of ministerial authority which we are all prone to disregard. Some will disregard the thing that is said and others will disregard the person who says it. It is an old device of the devil to discredit the person, "All who are in Asia ... have turned away from me" -- not from the teaching; that is, it is personal. Those who had turned away from Paul would soon discredit his ministry; they would soon begin to question what God said if they turned away from Paul.
A.H.P. Is that why obedience is stressed?
J.T. It is obedience of faith in Romans, "If any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord", @1 Corinthians 14: 37. That is to recognise the things themselves.
{46}
H.H. The Lord supported Paul. It was not just that Paul was feeling things himself. The brethren turned away, but the Lord supported him in the seven letters to the assemblies in Asia.
J.T. Quite so. All in Asia had turned away. The Lord says to John, Write them seven letters.
S.McC. Does not the heart, as suggested in @Romans 6, obedience from the heart, play an important part in this? It says of Lydia, "whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul", @Acts 16: 14.
J.T. Not simply the things *spoken*, but *spoken by Paul*. There it is the speaker and the speaking.
S.McC. And the heart enters into it, not the mere outward bending of the head like the Pharisee.
J.T. Obeying from the heart, yes. Now this ministerial matter is well worth our consideration, so that we should be balanced in discerning what is of God. Paul very graciously and humbly said, 'Even if you are not ready to receive me, certainly do not set aside the commandments, because what I write are the commandments of the Lord. Give attention to them anyway; you are to do what is right even though we be reprobates'. It is important that the ministers and the ministry should be identified in our minds. Because it is not a bit likely that God would take up men and use them unless they are morally in the good of what they are speaking of. It is not a bit likely that He would support them unless they are right morally. So that it is well to keep the two things in our minds.
Ques. Would Samuel be a good example of one who moved along these lines?
J.T. I think he is. He did not yet know the Lord but Jehovah revealed Himself to him by the word of Jehovah. It was not merely a vision, it was an intelligible matter, God revealing Himself to His servant; and then we are told that it was known from
{47}
Dan to Beersheba that he was a prophet of Jehovah, and the confirmation of it is that none of his words fell to the ground. The words are identified with the minister. It affects the mind, the intelligence; that is what is needed.
A.B.P. Would you say that the repetition of the names: Samuel, Samuel; Saul, Saul; Martha, Martha; indicates the intense interest that the Lord has that we may hear?
J.T. I think that is right. Joseph told Pharaoh that the double repetition is that the thing is established by God (@Genesis 41: 32). Samuel has an established place in heaven.
R.A. Would the term the Spirit of God uses, "Children of Israel", speak of subjection? It is not the *children* that murmur, it is the people.
J.T. I think that is suggestive, children being the relationship to which learning is attached.
A.R. It is like a conference; Moses is the man who is doing the speaking, bringing forward the mind of God; the brethren leave and go to their houses and localities and work the thing out.
J.T. Quite so. They went away; that is where the test comes, as to whether the things are carried out.
W.B-w. Would John on the isle of Patmos be an example of good hearing? He heard a great voice and he took it down very accurately in the book of Revelation. Would that not illustrate proper hearing on the part of a minister?
J.T. I think that is good. It is said that he changed his position five times throughout the book, as if he would have to hear things from a different viewpoint in each instance. He evidently missed nothing.
C.A.M. When the children of Israel went away they did as Jehovah commanded Moses and Aaron. Would it not be right to feel that in going away from something that is the word of the Lord it must of
{48}
necessity be that a living impression is made on the soul; is not that largely bound up with the ministers?
J.T. I think it is. The ministers are very responsible. The epitome that Moses gave here in these verses 21 - 28 is seven verses in length. The previous part of the chapter is twenty verses. So that Moses reduces the instructions from twenty to seven verses. He gives the idea of ministry, that you are able to condense, and not only so but to add things. The minister is supposed to be spiritual, not merely repeating what he hears, but putting it into his own mould, and it pleases God, when the man is in the Spirit. So that he tells the people in seven verses what Jehovah told him in twenty verses and adds certain features besides. Then the people worshipped when he finished, and went away and did as Jehovah commanded *Moses*, not merely what Jehovah *commanded*. We hear it said often that it does not matter who says it, but it does matter. It is what Jehovah commanded *Moses* and *Aaron*. They are being signalised. The lesson for those of us who minister, or attempt to minister, is to put the thing rightly, not merely the repeating of words but presenting something that we have ourselves.
S.P. The apostle in @1 Corinthians 2: 13, seeking their adjustment, speaks "not in words taught by human wisdom, but in those taught by the Spirit".
J.T. Quite so. "That the excellency of the power may be of God". It is Moses and Aaron that God has taken up. People say, What does it matter? But it does matter. Paul says, "That by me the preaching might be fully known".
C.A.M. Is it not important that the thing comes through men, or through a man?
J.T. Quite so. It is a ministry of authority. Miriam and Aaron said, "Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he not spoken also by
{49}
us?" @Numbers 12: 2. This point is important because God is not going to be diverted. God has great pleasure in His vessels; they are His own handiwork. He has pleasure in what they are doing. He loves variety. He shows us that He has saints in different localities and He can speak through them. Paul says, "The Holy Spirit testifies to me in every city, saying that bonds and tribulations await me". What does it matter whether in cities or in fields? But it does matter; God is stressing what he has in cities. It is the temple character of things, not mentioning any names, but emphasising what He has in every city, the means of speaking by the Spirit.
A.H.P. He says "Enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do", @Acts 9: 6.
J.T. Quite so. He went into the city, that was the word, "and it shall be told thee what thou must do". It is a remarkable thing to be put under obligation, to be sent into the city and to do what he hears in the city.
E.P. It says they "went away". I was thinking of Paul's words, "as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much rather in my absence", @Philippians 2: 12.
H.H. Hence the importance of following on what Moses was saying here. If we get a defective start we carry our defects with us. What comes next as to killing the passover was to be rightly understood by the saints, and that was the result of listening to what Moses was saying.
J.T. Paul makes a point of getting the thing right, exactly as it is intended. In @1 Corinthians 14: 6 he says, "And now, brethren, if I come to you speaking with tongues, what shall I profit you, unless I shall speak to you either in revelation, or in knowledge, or in prophecy, or in teaching? Even lifeless things giving a sound, whether pipe or harp, if they give not distinction to the sounds, how shall it be known
{50}
what is piped or harped? For also, if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself for war? Thus also ye with the tongue, unless ye give a distinct speech, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye will be speaking to the air". I think we ought to observe all that. Those who minister should speak plainly. They are to be intelligible and I think that those who are ministered to should see that they get the right thought. Do not go away with a wrong thought. It is a most mischievous thing; people go away and say a thing was said and perhaps it is something erroneous. Something that was not said at all that is being carried away. It would be very serious if they took up a wrong construction on this great matter of the passover.
Ques. Would you say that effectual ministry would be on the line of what we have in @Nehemiah 8: 8?
J.T. It comes into what we are saying just now, if we do not hear one another it is good to say so because if anything is of God it is worth hearing.
A.R. I was wondering if it was of interest to note that this word which comes from Moses and Aaron has a bearing on, and the effect of adjusting, the saints in their houses. Is there not a great test in this, if a word comes from the minister about what is going on in my house, whether I will go home and adjust my house in relation to the ministry?
J.T. Yes. It says here, "And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say to you, What mean ye by this service? that ye shall say, It is a sacrifice of passover to Jehovah, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt when he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses". All that is very significant. The household principle is stressed in Exodus and this point before us is of great importance, getting things accurately and then identifying them. You say, They come from God. Yes, but we are to identify them with the persons
{51}
through whom they come. God attaches great importance to His vessels: "He is a chosen vessel unto me". He has pleasure in Paul in all his ministry. Some might say, We would rather hear someone else, but Paul says, "That by me the preaching might be fully known". God is not giving him up.
A.J.D. That is what would be authoritative.
J.T. Paul, knowing that the Lord had much people in that city, determined that they should be taught the word of God for a year and six months. It is coming through Paul. It is authoritative morally as the word of God and then there is the person used. He is divinely qualified. He had the ministry and the ministry takes character from him.
J.S. Luke gives his authority for writing his gospel; he was accurately acquainted from the origin with all things (@Luke 1: 3).
S.McC. The tendency at Corinth was to nullify the ministry by discrediting the minister (@2 Corinthians 10: 10).
J.T. Quite so; that was the way the enemy attacked at Corinth. They certainly did discredit the minister: "his bodily presence is weak". They could not soon get rid of the ministry, it had had too much effect there, but they aim at discrediting the minister. You can understand how that would affect a person listening to him.
H.H. They did not know what Paul had heard in the third heaven. It coloured his ministry. A brother's ministry is coloured by what he knows.
J.T. It would have entered into it. It would affect him. Hence the need for coming into the sanctuary, getting into the presence of God for the ministry. You have an outline, but entering into the presence of God about it will give character to it. You are able to abridge yet give enough, sufficient to affect people. This instruction in the previous twenty verses has been broken up by the Spirit of God, "We know in part, and we prophesy in part".
{52}
It is well to see that we should learn to be brief and concise in what is said. Moses is concise and yet he adds features that you do not have in the earlier part. He speaks about the hyssop and the basins, the vessels in which the blood was to be contained. All that is very significant. Why did he bring this in when Jehovah did not say anything about them? That is the power of ministry, because the Spirit of God being here in the minister you get thoughts from Him yourself.
C.A.M. It is remarkable about that; that is the proper way to amplify things. Do you not think this is emphasised all through the Acts of the Apostles, the way those men are moving?
J.T. So that in this connection Jehovah says to Moses, "Who hath made man's mouth?". If God made that wonderful organ, has He not pleasure in it? He has! He has pleasure in the speaking. Whether the minister is speaking to others of God or whether he is speaking to God of Himself, God loves what comes through man's mouth.
C.A.M. That is emphasised all through the Acts of the Apostles. I was thinking of what is brought before us in the end of chapter 15. It says that Judas and Silas were themselves also prophets, and then it goes on to speak of Barnabas and Mark.
Behind all these personalities is the background which God knows; we have to keep our eyes on that. Do you not think so?
J.T. Quite so; because heaven has part in these meetings, I mean spiritual meetings. Heaven is intensely interested, and has part in them, and history is made in heaven in all of these meetings. God has His vessels, every saint here is interesting to God. Everything that is said in subjection to the Spirit, God has His part in it.
A.J.D. Are these meetings an evidence of the love of Christ for the assembly?
{53}
J.T. They are a provision for the assembly, so that He ascended on high and *gave* "some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers". They are all of His own handiwork. He *gave* them, the assembly is endowed with them, those persons.
H.H. They are the evidence of the work of the Comforter. The gatherings of saints, like these, provide an opportunity for the Holy Spirit to add to His work in relation to each one.
J.T. I think they are peculiarly in relation to the Comforter. The word 'Comforter' is the same as the word 'Advocate' in the epistle. "Jesus Christ the righteous". This is a very important thing for us at these meetings. He is taking care of us down here. One who is alongside of us, in complete charge of matters. What sanctity, what dignity it affords to us! How we should comport ourselves in what we say so that all is in the power of the anointing. "He that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts". "For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen, for glory to God by us". Think of that '*us*', what it is in the mind of God! It is to bring out, first, the dignity of the brethren, that is, they are God's. He has sealed us and marked us off as God's; then, they are rich inwardly, they have in their hearts the earnest.
Rem. "Remember your leaders ... imitate their faith", @Hebrews 13: 7.
J.T. That is the past leaders, remember them, but there are the present leaders, "Obey your leaders and be submissive; for they watch over your souls". Submission as to those who have to give account. It is all one thing whether past or present.
Rem. The principle of obedience and subjection runs right through.
{54}
A.J.D. The elders are addressed here.
J.T. I thought we should see that it works on to the glory, God honouring that principle right through this book.
A.R. I was wondering if it is not important to see that the carrying out of this word that Moses is giving is done by calling the elders together.
J.T. Yes, quite so. They represent the intelligent, responsible, experienced element in the locality.
C.H.H. You were speaking of God taking pleasure in our speaking. The deaf man's ears were opened and "he spoke right", @Mark 7: 35.
J.T. The relation between the ear and the tongue is remarkable. The Lord groaned about that; such a terrible condition in that man! He could not hear or speak right. The Lord groaned and lifted up His eyes to heaven. He is so profoundly affected, that man is so deranged under the power of the devil. He touched the tongue and we have the Lord's own, exact articulation in that word, 'Ephphatha'. It is the actual Aramaic word. It is ever to remind us of the importance of this matter; the Lord's own accents are brought down to us in regard of this great matter of hearing and speaking.
Rem. When Paul spoke of himself to the Corinthians he said it was foolishness for him to do so. Is it not very humbling that the Lord sees fit to call this to our attention now?
J.T. They had compelled him, they were so opposed to him, these leaders.
C.C.S. It speaks of the hearing and the speaking, "Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply thine heart unto my knowledge. For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee; they shall withal be fitted in thy lips", @Proverbs 22: 17, 18.
H.H. "Obey your leaders, and be submissive; for *they* watch over your souls as those that shall
{55}
give account". It says further, "Salute all your leaders, and all the saints". The thought of leaders is important.
J.T. I am sure it is.
H.H. There are the deceased ones, those gone before, who have been a very great help; but we have leaders now, not just one but many, and we have to give place to them.
J.T. We have to be submissive. The word 'submissive' is important because we have arrived in the history of the world at a democratic period, when the idea of leadership and authority is despised and set aside. So that we do well to see the trend in the world and to avoid it, to set ourselves against it. The point is to be submissive and obedient even to one another. Submit yourselves to one another, so that the principle comes right down to all the saints, that I am to be submissive to the brethren. "The children of Israel ... did as Jehovah had commanded Moses and Aaron; so did they". We shall come to this in another setting later.
W.B-w. In chapter 12: 50 you get that repeated.
J.T. Quite so.
J.S. The principle of obedience is being seen now in them.
J.T. Samuel says to Saul, "To obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams". The question of obedience arises in regard to the setting of Marah, that is, it is a question of state, state is being experienced. God brings about circumstances in our histories that affect us; they are intended to affect us and create a soil in us for His intent, whatever it may be. I believe that Marah here is bitterness, it creates a state in the brethren for divine impressions. So that it says, "The people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?". The waters were bitter. "And he cried to Jehovah; and Jehovah shewed him wood, and he cast it into the waters, and
{56}
the waters became sweet. There he made for them a statute and an ordinance; and there he tested them. And he said. If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, and do what is right in his eyes, and incline thine ears to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none of the complaints upon thee that I have put upon the Egyptians; for I am Jehovah who healeth thee", @Exodus 15: 25, 26. I was thinking of the state that is occasioned by the bitterness, God rolls in discipline upon us and causes us to taste what Christ tasted in death. You feel things and you are now ready not only for the commandment, but for the statute and the ordinance. The stress is laid upon the commandments, "Let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", @1 Corinthians 14: 37. It is a fixed matter now. I thought we might see that in this section we have fixed things in the way of commandments, statutes and ordinances. They can be always appealed to, not only a word for the moment but a word that can be appealed to at all times, a word that goes through for all time, the divine word must go through. One is affected by the bitterness of death, the bitter waters, and how they have become sweet through the apprehension of Christ. His going into death was a question of the will of God, "Not my will", the Lord said, "but thine be done". The wood was "cast in". He entered into death on that principle. That is to be a fixed matter; it is not to be optional at all. You say, I do not think so, or, I do not see that. But there are things which are there, God has put them there -- right principles -- and it is for us to see that they are fixed.
A.R. We can only arrive at them in the measure in which we understand Christ here in manhood.
J.T. Exactly. Now we have Christ in manhood in the wood. We shall have Him more so in the
{57}
manna but here it is the wood. Why should it be wood, and why should it not have been seen earlier? It is God calling attention to Christ as if not discerned by men; He is there and God calls attention to Him. He is casting the wood into the waters.
S.McC. Does that not call into activity another sense? It is *speaking* in @Exodus 12 but in our chapter here it is *showing* (chapter 15: 25).
J.T. I think it does. We have these two things, speaking and showing; and in @Genesis 22 Jehovah showed Abraham the mountain. He did not mark it on the map for him. We are shown a thing as we reach it and as we are ready for it. The Holy Spirit showed that the way into the holiest was not yet made manifest; not only what is stated abstractly, but what is shown. Until Christ became Man there could be no entrance into the holiest; the way was not made manifest. So the wood was there; it does not say God put it there. God showed him the wood and he cast it into the waters and they became sweet. He knew what to do, he was not told to cast it in. The minister is there, knowing what to do.
E.P. Would that fit in at all with the second epistle to Corinth? Paul's exercise in relation to death and the thought of the dying of Jesus being brought into it?
J.T. Quite so.
E.P. Is this an additional thought to @Exodus 12? It is not simply the commandments of the Lord but something that would reach the heart.
J.T. Exactly. This word 'cast' is to be noticed. Moses cast it in, as if Moses understood what to do. That was what happened. It was stressing God's will. These things are mentioned to create an impression. The ministers knew what to do.
H.H. There is yielding in the way of obedience. In the appreciation of the things of God, things are,
{58}
so to speak, sweeter to us. Death is still a bitter thing but where there is acceptance of the will of God and yielding the ear to the commandments of the Lord it is taken up in a way that is for God's pleasure.
J.T. The thorn in the flesh was sent to the apostle and he besought the Lord thrice about it, but the Lord says, "My grace suffices thee; for my power is perfected in weakness". So Paul says, "Gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me". That is the thing here, it is accepted.
A.R. Is the idea that in the minister bringing forward this thought of Christ in humanity, it is to affect the saints now so that Christ is seen characteristically in all of us?
J.T. That is the thing, to bring out this casting in by the hand of another. The Lord was absolutely at the will of God as in Gethsemane. He did ask that the cup might pass from Him, "Not my will, but thine be done". The will of God is fixed so that we might "prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God". "Most gladly therefore", I think there is joy in the acceptance of the death of Christ for He has been in it; now you are in company with the Lord ("planted together in the likeness of his death") when this happens. "There he made for them a statute and an ordinance and there he proved them". Now we should be immune from the complaints that are put upon the Egyptians. They are judicial, God accentuates them. There are terrible diseases, morally, amongst men and how are the saints to be immune? Backbiting, debating, envying, strifes, hateful and hating one another, in the world; God accentuates these things. They are diseases from which you will be immune in recognising fixed principles and abiding by them.
{59}
E.P. Do you think that each difficulty or crisis the Lord is pleased to pass us through should be an occasion of a statute, a recognised principle?
J.T. Every crisis where the Lord has His way a fixed principle is established so that a landmark is reached. You get that constantly in Scripture. So that that can never be opened again. Abiding by that we are preserved; it is a fixed thing.
S.R.McC. Did these complaints overtake the Corinthians because they did not recognise the commandments of the Lord?
J.T. That is the idea. The sort of complaints the world suffers from were creeping in at Corinth. That is abroad today in the religious world.
H.H. "I am the Lord that healeth thee" (@Exodus 15: 26) would indicate a change effected in the Lord's people.
J.T. How often you see it! Many of us here have been through these things for the last forty or fifty years. As we revert back to them we see the change that came about as God gave victory, a complete change takes place and we see His will prevail. The diseases are gone.
Ques. You regard the moral diseases worse than the physical?
J.T. God accentuates them, diseases that arise from the working of our wills. God makes me to *feel* that it is a disease and it is judicial. Our poor brethren who have ignored these crises are subject to these diseases, those who have departed in these crises. It is a most sorrowful thing.
Rem. A wonderful example in connection with Peter is that he could subsequently write of "our beloved brother Paul". Showing the disease was checked and that his constitution could throw it off.
J.T. I think that is good. Certainly there was a disease at Jerusalem. Peter went up there, after he saw Cornelius, and you see the state they were
{60}
in; some were Pharisees. They contended with him that he went in to eat with the gentiles, and they contended with Paul and Barnabas too, when they went up. The same disease was there; and I believe it went on until Paul went up there before he was in prison. There is not a word said about the saints lending any help to him at that time.
C.H.H. Would not a statute have to be clearly established, based on Scripture? We could not look back to what valued servants had written about certain things. A statute would have to have its foundation on Scripture.
J.T. Quite so. When a statute is made it is God manifesting that the thing is scriptural. Something has come out and it is a fixed principle; we did not have it before. We have arrived at a landmark, at something we have not arrived at before.
J.R.H. Have you in view the happy unity amongst the brethren accepting divine principles and seeing them as set forth in the Lord Himself?
J.T. That is what happens, "Most gladly therefore". There is happiness where divine principles obtain. God is with His people; there is a happy state of things, and we are immune from diseases. Take, for instance, the Galatians, who were diseased; legality had come in. And so at Corinth, they were diseased with pride and rivalry. "I am the Lord that healeth thee". As we set ourselves to take up the attitude of dependence and subjection for the carrying out of the will of God, we are immune from these things.
Ques. That happy unity costs us something, does it not?
J.T. And so it runs on, "By the which will we are sanctified". In that subject condition we are immune from these diseases that God has put upon the Egyptians.
{61}
A.R. If we are going to make progress in the wilderness, this is the first lesson to be learned. It is the first, is it not, after crossing the Red Sea?
J.T. Quite so. There is a fixed state of things in the statute and ordinance. The statute spiritually is a great fixed principle. Now you are impressionable. The Lord says to the people, You have suffered; you have tasted the bitter, and sweet waters; you have been brought into accord with Christ. Now you are ready for a fixed order of things, and christian fellowship depends on a fixed order of things. There are fresh things coming in all the time but it is a fixed order of things.
A.B.P. The statute and the ordinance divinely established in @1 Samuel 30 seemed to issue out of a crisis and there it was in direct opposition to the opinion first expressed. I wondered if that shows a statute issuing from a crisis.
J.T. Just so. The first opinion was expressed by the sons of Belial. We shall give every man his wife and children and let them go. Nothing to eat or to wear; but David says, that will not do at all. David sets up a statute, a fixed order of things. David says, Those that remain behind with the stuff, are to share alike with those that go down to the battle. A very comforting thing which really enters into meetings like these, because we are apt to forget our own meetings, to neglect our local settings in attending these meetings. If the Lord is deprived of His proper service while we are away, He is not getting any gain by our presence here. We ought to bear that in mind, that those abiding behind by the stuff share alike with those that go out.
E.P. What is the thought of an ordinance?
J.T. A statute is a great fixed principle, but an ordinance is subordinate to that, something that is less extensive. A statute is usually a greater and wider thought.
{62}
H.H. As our brother was saying, it is early in the wilderness. The wood cast into the water, would that not suggest the Lord's supper, so that in our local settings we would desire to see all those who belong to the Lord moving in relation to this?
J.T. There is a fixed order of things now in the Lord's supper. I believe the casting into the water of the wood would link up with @Hebrews 10, "by which will we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ". 1 Corinthians brings us into accord with that. That brings Christ in as entirely in accord with the will of God. "We being many are ... one body", @1 Corinthians 10: 17. I believe that fixed statutes and ordinances would bear much on the Lord's Supper, what supports our fellowship.
A.R. Do you think that would be worked out by chapter 14 and possibly the idea of special collections as a fixed principle seen in the epistle to the saints at Corinth?
J.T. Quite so. There are things that are fixed as attaching to assembly service publicly, but when we come to the spiritual side we look for freshness all the time, but there are public things that stand.
G.F. When the Lord said, "This do in remembrance of me" (@Luke 22: 19), was that a command?
J.T. "This do" is a request, but certainly I would regard myself as lawless if I did not do that. It has moral obligation attached to it. It is a request of affection by the Lord, but it is obligatory upon us.
C.H.H. Would @1 Corinthians 11: 24 make it a command?
J.T. "The things that I write to you ..." (@1 Corinthians 14: 37), one great idea as included in the epistle. 1 Corinthians is a great statute enacted to govern us in our public position.
{63}
OBEDIENCE AS PREPARING FOR THE GLORY (2)
@Exodus 16: 9, 10; @Exodus 19: 1 - 8; @Exodus 24: 1 - 11
J.T. We left the last verse of chapter 15 to be considered at this reading. In chapter 16 we have the idea of the glory appearing. The thought is to weave the two lines in the book, that is obedience and glory and see how they run through and make way for the residence of the glory; that is, the glory coming in complacently and residing in the tabernacle, the component parts of the tabernacle being just representative of what is reached in the saints through grace, and the work of God, but all on the basis of subjection. So that the glory begins to appear. The glory is first promised in verse 7, "In the morning, then shall ye see the glory of Jehovah"; and then we have it in the verses read. Then in chapter 19, the great privileges arising from obedience in that the saints are to be on the ground of it, "A kingdom of priests, and a holy nation" (verse 6). In chapters 24 and 19 we have the idea of the covenant, that is, the covenant involving two, God and the people, a new kind of covenant. In Genesis, of course, it was on God's side only. God gave Himself to it, but here it is contingent on the people, too; it is dependent on obedience. In chapter 24 the great privilege of ascension is in evidence on the ground of obedience again. That is what we may have before us perhaps during this session.
H.H. Would you say a word as to the last verse of chapter 15, the twelve springs of water, and the seventy palm trees?
J.T. It is quite apparent that the two things come in together in relation to what we are speaking of in relation to obedience. It has to be borne in mind that these thoughts are all of a constructive character.
{64}
We advance steadily in the book until we arrive at the dwelling place of God from the standpoint of entire complacency, complacency through the obedience of the people.
W.J.C. They came to Elim on the principle of obedience. It was not an instinctive move on their part. They were directed there, apparently.
J.T. Evidently it is distinguishing what there is on their side. They are moving now in the light of a covenant, fixed principles, and of the statute and the ordinance, a fixed state of things, which as pointed out, enters into our fellowship. Our public position is marked by certain fixed principles which do not change. Inside of these principles, these walls, we have fresh things that 1 Corinthians does not develop. 1 Corinthians is on the line that we are on, the line of commandments, a great fixed thought. They should be regarded as one great fixed thought. The prophet or spiritual one would recognise it, too, and give up questioning and quarrelling with what exists, recognising that what the apostle wrote were the commandments of the Lord. The position is not subject to human innovation or variation; it is a fixed state of things and the saints move in that setting. It has been remarked that they come to Elim; there is movement right through here. In chapter 16 they journey from Elim to the wilderness of Sin. Then again in chapter 17 they journeyed from the wilderness of Sin and encamped at Rephidim; and then in chapter 19 they came to the wilderness of Sinai and encamped in the wilderness before the mountain. So there is steady movement on their part in relation to what is fixed according to God in the promised immunity from the afflictions, plagues, or ailments that were put upon the Egyptians.
A.R. Do the twelve wells of water suggest that they had arrived at fixed principles, and that all administration is carried out now in the power of
{65}
the Spirit of God? Does it not shut out man's mind altogether?
J.T. I think they are moving that way definitely to points involving a manifestation of grace. They moved in that way so that they came to Elim where these things were, seventy palm trees and twelve wells of water. We move, I think, where divine fixity is understood, governing us here in our public position. We move to points of advantage.
J.S. These movements are all to be under the authority of Moses, the leadership of Moses, are they not? "So Moses brought Israel from the Red Sea" (chapter 15: 22). Do you regard all these subsequent movements as under his leadership?
J.T. That would be the position, I think, as under the Mediator, in Christ as Lord having authority over us. Paul says we are "legitimately subject to Christ", @1 Corinthians 9: 21.
H.H. What do you say as to the seventy palm trees?
J.T. The twelve wells of water is the idea of administration, a ministry of refreshment, and I should say the palm trees would be shelter, only connected with the same thing, as we view these two ideas from the standpoint of the New Testament. The seventy would be extending the thought, the numeral denoting responsibility plus the Spirit, I think. Seventy is ten times seven.
J.S. @Exodus 24: 9, 10 refers to the seventy as well as chapter 15. In @Luke 9 you have the twelve apostles and in @Luke 10 the seventy disciples.
J.T. I think that is a connection, the New Testament antitype, you might say: what the saints come to as affected by death, death and discipline having rolled in upon us in different walks of life, the bitter waters of Marah. That is, God is saying, 'Now my Son has gone into this in His death, and it is for you to taste it, so that you may understand'.
{66}
Then you see how it brings us into association with Christ, that is, the wood cast into the water makes it sweet. We have tasted the thing, and now it is made sweet by the apprehension of Christ as having been in it. So that we are impressionable now, and move on to where these positive things are administered, for we find in the twelve the administrative side of things involving love, and the seventy, involving shelter as well.
H.H. Would you say the man with the pitcher of water would take them into a privilege which they had not known before? They are moving now. I thought it might fit into the Supper. Something they had not known before.
J.T. Quite so. The man was carrying a pitcher of water, doing something for others. That is the result of the healing power of the Lord.
C.A.M. I think you made a remark this morning about this condition in the earlier verses you were referring to. Is productiveness the result of the healing power of the Lord as affording a place where there was something produced through discipline?
J.T. I think it is; the adjustment that results from the acceptance of discipline.
C.A.M. Jericho, I think, is called the city of palm trees. After all that had gone on in that place, it is a very remarkable thing that there should have been fruit there when the Lord passed through. The palm cannot, it seems, grow except where there is water. I suppose that accounts for the water being mentioned first.
J.T. That is obvious; it is what is called an oasis, but having this additional thought, seventy, the exact number; and God had to say to it. It was not an accident. So with the eunuch and Philip in the wilderness, the eunuch says, "Here is water", in the wilderness. Well, you would say, that was an
{67}
accident; but it was not. It was as much divinely ordered as Philip's presence there; Philip was a divine provision there; he was provided carefully by God, specially to be there when the eunuch passed by. There is that side of it, that ministry is a divine provision, not accidental. So the water was essential, too. There is such a thing as being saved by water, and such a thing as being saved by fire as well as by water.
E.P. Is there a sense of victory over the world in it? As John speaks of it, "This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith", @1 John 5: 4. I was thinking of the diseases of Egypt, that we are to be relieved from them, to be immune from the plagues. I thought perhaps the palm trees might suggest the thought of victory, victory over the world.
J.T. Evidently there would be a sense of victory over wilderness conditions there, and these are not accidental. Where you get accurate measurements in an incident like this, it is sovereignty. It is no accident but sovereignty, and coincides with the movement that is normal after the previous instruction where we accept discipline in the bitterness of death, affliction rolling in upon us. That is bitter, and then God brings back to us that Christ has been into that, and that alters the whole aspect of affairs. Now you are moving on in subjection, and that is where we get the gain of such a time as this; it is divinely prepared for us. The eunuch really needed the water at that juncture, to be saved. He was to be saved by water.
A.R. They encamped by the water; it does not say they encamped under the palm trees; I was wondering whether this would be in the full recognition of the activity of the Spirit of God.
J.T. That is the sort of thing you get in Exodus. Moses sat by the well, and here they encamped by
{68}
the wells. It is the collective idea, the word running through also.
A.H.P. Is there any correspondence with 1 Corinthians, twelve wells of water? We had suggested to us this morning the liberty of ministry from chapter 12 on.
J.T. There is plenty of it, twelve, God's special provision, involving authority; but here it is refreshment. Seventy is the same thought carried through; only involving responsibility, I think, in the persons and their recognition of the Spirit in them in the seventy.
A.J.D. Would you say that the wells and the trees are representative of a meeting like this?
J.T. Quite so; a meeting like this ought to furnish what we have here. There can be no doubt that the idea of victory enters into it, but also shelter.
J.S. Had they not gone three days journey from the Red Sea? Temple teaching would help us; we have to experience the necessary exercises in the light of the death of Christ.
J.T. I was thinking that each of these movements has something in it. Deliverance from the Red Sea, "And Moses brought Israel from the Red Sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur; and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water". That is, we are now in the wilderness definitely, three days, being testimony as to what a given thing is. They are now tasting what the wilderness is, and the first great thing is bitterness, the brackishness of Marah. God is saying, You will have discipline now, "For whom the Lord loves he chastens, and scourges every son whom he receives", @Hebrews 12: 6. He disciplines them; the bitter waters of death rolled in. It is the keenest kind of discipline, but creates a state in us that is impressionable. God shows the wood, so we come to see that, and Moses cast it into the water. He knew what to do with it
{69}
and the water became sweet, meaning in the antitype that we accept death and discipline. We accept death. Christ has been into it, and it is sweet to be in it with Him. @Romans 6 brings out the truth of it; I think that is Marah.
C.A.M. The Ethiopian seems to help in this; he was really on a journey in view of the worship of God, he "had come to Jerusalem to worship". I was impressed with what you said about this all moving on towards the dwelling place of God, and that was unquestionably a desert scene. That is emphasised, is it not, that oasis in the desert?
J.T. Quite so. What I was thinking was that the water was as much provided there as Philip was; both were essential. So that Philip identifies himself with that and goes down into the water with the eunuch. There is complete identification with the eunuch.
H.H. That is what we have to learn all through the wilderness, God's provision for His people. Is that not so?
J.T. That is it: those three days there bring out the first thing; and then the sweetness occasioned by the wood and then the statute, meaning God can now trust us with fixed principles. They move on on those lines and they came to Elim.
A.B.P. In @John 5, the diseased in the porches of Bethesda and the water which required to be moved before it was beneficial, seem to be the opposite to this, do they not, as though it is what a disobedient religious system fell into? It is in contrast to what we have at Elim.
J.T. That is good. The water was moved by an angel coming down "at a certain season" meaning that it was a very scant affair; God was showing that He was still acting in mercy but in a very small way; but the wood cast in meets the whole situation and brings in joy.
{70}
H.H. The epistle of James speaks about sweet water and bitter water. Have we not these two thoughts -- the bitter water of Marah and the twelve springs, sweet water?
J.T. It is for refreshment, not for bathing; the water in the wilderness was for salvation; it is not for salvation here. In the case of the eunuch the water in the wilderness was for salvation; baptism is always for salvation. Peter says salvation is by water, and that is essential, but here it is for refreshment.
J.S. Twelve springs of water, as suggestive of the Spirit.
J.T. I think so; springing water is manifestly a type of the Spirit in the believer.
C.H.H. Would that have any connection with the water in @John 4, and then the bread in chapter 6? Does that answer to @Exodus 16?
J.T. I think that is right. The Lord alludes to it, at least, the Jews did; and He then brings in Himself as the bread come down from heaven. Chapter 16 here is manifestly Christ apprehended as He was here in flesh and blood in everyday life, carrying out the will of God, as food for us; hence the promise of the glory in chapter 16. It is a very rich thought, I think, coming in there. Moses says, "And in the morning, then shall ye see the glory of Jehovah", and in the verse read, they see it: "And it came to pass, when Aaron spoke to the whole assembly of the children of Israel, that they turned toward the wilderness, and behold, the glory of Jehovah appeared in the cloud". It is the result of Aaron's speaking. It is a very fitting thought, I think, in this wonderful chapter about the manna. It is Aaron speaking, and Moses announces it. It would be seen, too. It really comes out in Aaron's speaking; it is in Christ in this typical way as Priest.
{71}
A.R. Is that why the high priest's speaking precedes the manna?
J.T. Well, I think it throws light on the whole chapter. Why does Aaron speak and Moses announce the thing? He is seen authoritatively in the chapter, "And Moses spoke to Aaron, Say to all the assembly of the children of Israel, Come near into the presence of Jehovah: for he has heard your murmurings. And it came to pass, when Aaron spoke to the whole assembly of the children of Israel, that they turned toward the wilderness, and behold, the glory of Jehovah appeared in the cloud". Now you have a people turning toward the wilderness. Moses brought them from the Red Sea, and they go three days journey into the wilderness and they find this bitterness: but now after all that and the recurrent murmurings, when Aaron spoke they turned toward the wilderness; although their hearts were toward Egypt, they looked toward the wilderness, meaning Christ had become attractive in His gracious speaking. They looked toward the wilderness; that is the point here and our accepting it; they looked toward the wilderness instead of looking back to Egypt; looking forward instead of backward.
J.S. As pointing the way to the glory.
J.T. That was their specific outlook for forty years, the glory was before them all through and they are learning this now and being prepared for it.
Rem. I was wondering if @John 2 would fit into this; when the vessels were empty and there was no wine Mary said, "Whatever he may say to you, do", so the Lord becomes attractive in that way, through obedience.
J.T. Mary said that. Mary led the way; she was subject. She had not always been subject, she thought she could order the Lord, but now she is subject. That throws light on the whole subject.
{72}
Ques. Are wilderness conditions conducive to murmurings, generally speaking, combined with the whole of the world's system, creating this condition which is offset by priesthood in Aaron?
J.T. Yes, that is what I thought we might see in chapter 16, that God intends to overcome all that in young christians. They come to the meetings and get encouragement, but then the world is found in the heart, and it shows itself as soon as they get outside into the individual path. Chapter 16 is to make direct provision for the wilderness. In chapter 15 it is water, that is, Christ in death carrying out the will of God. There you get the beginning, I think, of the Person of the Lord Jesus as an objective for the mind. He is cast in. Well, you say, It is the will of God -- not His will; He is entirely for the will of God, and I am in association with Him in this Marah. Well, now, chapter 16 enlarges upon that. It is a question of the Person of Christ, alive, risen from the dead; for Aaron now indicates Christ as priest, Christ dying and as risen from the dead. I think Moses announces the glory prophetically; it is to be seen the next day. That is authority. But now he says, Aaron, you are to speak; because they need more than authority, the announcement of promise; they need grace, with your lips, not mine. So Aaron spoke and "it came to pass, when Aaron spoke to the whole assembly of the children of Israel that they turned toward the wilderness, and behold, the glory of Jehovah appeared in the cloud". Now the speaking turns them right round toward the wilderness from Egypt, and the Lord says, I will give you grace to induce you to keep looking that way; because that is where everything is to come out. The cloud is to continue, forty years ahead of you; it is to be a period of wonderful disclosures following on that. I want to impress your minds with a man speaking to you; and then the glory appeared in the
{73}
cloud in a fixed position; so that our minds and hearts are to be held in that direction.
A.R. Is it under these circumstances that the manna comes? It says, the manna was on the face of the wilderness.
J.T. That is right. They had not been accustomed to look toward the wilderness for things before. It becomes attractive so that we look toward the wilderness for things; that is where it is to be. The Lord says, I will give you something to hold you. Priestly ministry in our localities brings in the glory.
H.H. In connection with murmuring, I suppose the thought of Aaron's rod comes in on that line. Aaron silences the murmuring, does he not?
J.T. Quite so. It is Christ in priesthood, in grace. He becomes attractive. It is a very striking passage; so that they look toward the wilderness, and God says, I will give you enough to hold you, the glory. If that does not hold us, nothing will.
A.J.D. There is the priestly ministry in the locality which will bring in the glory.
J.T. The kind of speaking that even those who do not love Him notice, "And all bore witness to him and wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth", @Luke 4: 22.
C.A.M. I can see the importance of speaking, so that it changes the point of view. Instead of looking back or into ourselves, or something of that kind, the attention of the persons is directed towards the glory.
J.T. That is the idea. It is a question of ministry really here. Stephen gives you the other side. He "looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God". That is another place, but this is the wilderness. The point is the wilderness here and our acceptance of it.
E.P. Does the glory of Jehovah appearing in the cloud imply that God would say, 'I have accepted this
{74}
position, whatever you may think of it'? God has accepted it.
J.T. Quite so; that is, He is going to be there. What a time is before them for the forty years that are coming! It is going to be a glory period, yet a period that tests the flesh, and the flesh does not like it.
J.S. It means rejection of the flesh.
J.T. Quite so: and the more I am reduced as after the flesh, the more I am ready for the glory.
J.W. Would it be connected with the glory of the Father in @Romans 6?
J.T. I think that is right. The Lord was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father.
A.J.D. Applying the thing to our present position, could you say what the glory might be?
J.T. Well, it is not easy to say much as to it here. When we come to the New Testament, it is the glory in the face of Jesus. It is where it is most attractive. It is like a jewel set in a perfect setting; it is in the face of Jesus. "We all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". In chapter 4 it is the glory of God in the face of Jesus, shining in our hearts (@2 Corinthians 4: 6).
J.B. Would John the evangelist have this in view in the opening chapter of his gospel, where we have John the baptist and his speaking in relation to the wilderness? He has the Lord in mind, and immediately the Lord comes into view. The disciples are attracted to the Lord through John the baptist's speaking.
J.T. Yes; it is said as John was looking on Jesus as he walked, "Behold the Lamb of God", it is glory because it is a sacrificial title, sacrificial glory; and that really is Exodus.
Rem. In the death of Stephen we have another magnificent view of the glory that would be stimulating
{75}
to the people of God at that time in view of the great pressure in that day. He looked in a concrete way at the glory of God and Jesus. Was it not a stimulant to the saints? And it must have impressed the great apostle himself.
J.T. I think that is right. The whole chapter is shrouded with glory, before the minister begins to speak. They saw his face as the face of an angel; that is, heavenly glory; and then he begins to speak of glory, "the God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham"; and he pursues the line right down and "looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God and Jesus", @Acts 7: 55. He does not say exactly what he sees but puts it into his own language, "I behold the heavens opened, and the son of man standing at the right hand of God"; but he saw more than he spoke of. That is the true ministerial instinct. He says what is needed, but it is full of the idea of glory.
A.B.P. Is there a link between this glory and the sufferings of Christ? It says of Moses, "esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt", @Hebrews 11: 26. I was wondering if it was what he saw that enabled him to go into the wilderness.
J.T. I think that this book of Exodus is the book of glory, in the sense of sacrificial glory; because sacrificial glory is what is in mind, God coming out in Christ in Exodus, and on the mount of transfiguration which we have in Luke. That is what they had in mind when they spoke of the Lord's decease or exodus that He should accomplish at Jerusalem; it was sacrificial glory. He was to go out of the body and Stephen is a reflection of that; it enters into the ministry of Paul. The ministry of Paul is peculiarly a ministry of glory.
H.H. Do you not see that in @John 13: 31? "Now is the son of man glorified and God is glorified in him".
{76}
What you get in that chapter is the thought of having part with Him. Is not that carried through until the coming of the Lord? Are not the hearts of the saints to be cherishing the glory?
J.T. That is the position exactly. John, of course, does not develop the covenant glory as much as Paul. Exodus is really covenant glory and attaches to the Lord's supper; it is the whole wilderness through. But Stephen goes beyond the wilderness; he looks into heaven and sees the glory of God there in the face of Jesus. That goes beyond the wilderness which is another additional feature. What we are at today is a question of the wilderness and what enters into it. What there is for the young christian; what a realm of glory he is introduced into, and it is to go right through. It means that you are going to have that right through.
W.B-w. In chapter 16 there is no evidence of worship on the part of the people. Is that because of their state not being right? In some other scriptures you get worship following glory, but you do not here. Is that because of the murmuring state of the people?
J.T. I think you are right. This chapter contemplates a young christian's experience. What is stressed is grace.
W.B-w. That side of the truth, grace, so as to attract us.
J.T. Yes; the murmurings are all met with grace. Even the glory meets the murmurings here. It is the glory of God's grace, to attract us in the wilderness.
R.A. Say a little more about coming into His presence. Now Aaron was to go into His presence. As yet there was no tabernacle in the wilderness.
J.T. That is the idea here. Moses spake to the children of Israel, "Come near into the presence of Jehovah", in so far as it could be. The idea of coming
{77}
near we shall get in chapter 19, as God has brought them to Himself. It is the moral thought; it is not yet the tabernacle position. It is simply God apprehended in whatever sense it was at that time. The cloud was there, for it says, "The glory appeared in the cloud". The cloud was the symbol of the divine presence. Nothing of Egypt was there.
J.W. Does the glory of the morning (chapter 16: 7) allude to the manna?
J.T. I suppose it would. It had an actual fulfilment as Aaron spoke.
J.W. "And in the morning the dew lay round the camp" (chapter 16: 13).
J.T. That, of course, is the manna, but I think this glory that Moses alludes to would come out in connection with Aaron's speaking. What did Aaron's speaking effect? Well, it effected this much, that they looked towards the wilderness instead of toward Egypt. God honours that and says, I will hold you by appearing in the glory for you to see.
E.P. Do you think that priestly speaking in that way would ensure moral results in the people?
J.T. It brings out the importance of right speaking in ministry; not only what is said, but how it is said. Moses stresses that when he says to Aaron, "Say to all the assembly of the children of Israel, Come near into the presence of Jehovah; for he has heard your murmurings". I think the allusion is to the need of sympathetic speaking in ministry so as to attract the young, and then God helping as you have right words and right thoughts. Come near into the presence of God. What an appealing thing that is! And when he spoke, the glory then appeared, as if securing them definitely in looking in that direction.
C.A.M. I suppose if one were asked what sense he had of glory in such meetings as these, for instance, it would be that there was some impression left upon the soul that God's presence was there.
{78}
J.T. Exactly; a certain thing comes into view in the speaking; perhaps something you could not express; but you are impressed by it, the fact that the glory is there.
C.H.H. Would that be seen in the attractive way that John the baptist spoke of Christ? He says, "Behold the lamb of God" and they virtually left John and followed Jesus. In that sense they beheld the glory, the moral excellency.
J.T. I think so. John suffered that, being turned away from, and accepted it gladly, but it meant there was sacrificial glory because that is what is meant by "the lamb of God".
C.H.H. I was thinking that that is the attractiveness of priestly speaking.
J.T. Quite so; this is what is meant by the glory of God. It diverted their view from him to Christ, because of the sacrificial glory in that walk.
W.J.C. Do you mean us to understand that the ministry as given here through Moses and Aaron is of such a character and has such an effect upon them that it causes a murmuring people to come near before the Lord, and then the second thing is that in coming before the Lord the ministry has an effect; they look toward the wilderness and then the glory appears?
J.T. That is the order of the passage, and what we should notice is the carefully arranged matter; it is not accidental. It is not any brother speaking; it is authoritative speaking. It was Aaron. Moses was speaking, but he tells Aaron to speak now, as if it were an arranged matter. The exigency of the matter required that Aaron should speak.
J.S. And when Aaron spoke they turned.
J.T. It was not what he said exactly, but it was the kind of speaking. It was when he spoke.
A.R. So that in our prophetic meetings we should make room for Christ. There might be an Aaron there.
{79}
J.T. I think that is important; we should have in mind who is speaking. As has been remarked, everyone may not know who is speaking. I want to know who is speaking. You say, What difference does it make? It makes a great difference; it is not only the words but the person who is saying them.
J.S.T. God commended Aaron earlier in Moses history when he said, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well".
J.T. Quite so; it is an arranged matter. Moses knowing that this kind of speaking is now needed to hold the people. I believe it is important that it is not only what is said, but who says it, who spoke the words.
H.H. The priestly lips.
J.T. That is the idea, I think. Luke presents it in Christ. Luke presents the adornment proper to a minister.
C.A.M. So when the Lord Himself reads from Isaiah the prophet it was not only the reading: "The eyes of all them ... were fastened on him".
J.T. Quite so; the Scriptures were read in the synagogues, but there was never a reading like this.
H.B. Peter says, "Thou hast words of life eternal", @John 6: 68.
J.T. Quite so. "Thou hast words of life eternal".
W.B-w. Does the expression, "Come near into the presence of Jehovah", mean there was a system where the glory personally was linked up in the wilderness?
J.T. I think that is right. From the time it begins to move it is the symbol of the divine presence, the cloud. Later on it is the tabernacle, but in the meantime it is more an abstract thought, but still there is something there to denote the divine presence.
W.B-w. The thing was there; the presence of Jehovah was there.
{80}
J.T. That is right; the presence of Jehovah was there. The glory appearing was more than the cloud, more than the sun shining out of the cloud.
A.R. And is the manna coming in not something substantial?
J.T. Quite so. This passage, I think, throws light on the whole chapter. It is what marks the wilderness.
S.McC. In relation to the service of God in the assembly, do you not think we need to understand the glory in relation to the public position in the wilderness?
J.T. That is the point right through here, it is the public position in mind in Exodus. For going in we have to wait for Leviticus. This is the public position. Chapter 16 is a fixed position, and the glory here is public. It is what anyone in the camp could see in the wilderness; so that is what always marks those that are subject to God. People say, We have the same thing as you; we have the breaking of bread and all that. They have the imitation minus the glory. We must have the glory to go on in moral value. There is such a thing as that. The spiritual eye discerns it, that where there is subjection to God, the glory shines.
E.P. I thought perhaps turning towards the wilderness in response to such a voice would have a moral effect upon them. It gave a touch of glory in connection with the people. You get the expression, "The whole assembly of the children of Israel", and then later on, "The house of Israel". I thought perhaps the turning towards the wilderness in response to such a voice would have had a moral effect upon them and given dignity to them as such.
J.T. I think it did. You can see yourself that people who are turning away from the world and beholding the glory and directed by it take on the thing, there is something about them that is dignified. The chapter has that in mind; so they
{81}
had manna all the period of the wilderness, "until they came into an inhabited land", @Exodus 16: 35. Now this passage in chapter 19 follows on rightly, for the glory shone. We have a further movement. The passages are constructive; there is more there. It says, "In the third month after the departure of the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai: they departed from Rephidim, and came into the wilderness of Sinai, and encamped in the wilderness". Now they are settling down to the position. They encamped before the mount. Now it is a question of resources, potential resources, because it is the mountain of Jehovah. It is a question of what is going to be disclosed here. "Moses went up to God, and Jehovah called to him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel: Ye have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, and how I have borne you on eagles wings and brought you to myself. And now, if ye will hearken to my voice indeed and keep my covenant, then shall ye be my own possession out of all the peoples -- for all the earth is mine -- and ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak to the children of Israel". Now I think we are beginning to see that God is referring to their experience. It is not what He says here, but what they saw. He says, "Ye have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, and how I have borne you on eagles wings and brought you to myself". He is alluding to what they had seen, alluding to their experience. What He is going to open up to them now is based on that. There is more material to work on now than there was in chapter 15. They have experience; they have seen what God did to the Egyptians and to themselves; how He bore them on eagles wings. That is a very fine thing to allude to, borne by divine
{82}
power and brought to Himself. What do we know about that? "Hearken to my voice ... then shall ye be by my own possession ... and a holy nation". This is a new thing that He is opening up to us, what we are going to be to Him. And then there is to be a covenant of a new kind involving two parties. God is going to have us commit ourselves to it. As much as to say, 'I love you now, not only in an abstract way, but because of what you are, and I want to have you in a fixed relation with Myself'. It is fixity between God and His people which is very attractive, I think.
Ques. Would you say He spoke of the children of Jacob, because of what they were?
J.T. "Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel". It brings the people in on the side of their responsibility, and origin and dignity, too, as the children of Israel. God is taking us up now from the standpoint of all our experience, so far, and intimating to us that He likes it. And He says, I want to be in close, fixed relations with you. You will be a "peculiar treasure unto me".
Ques. What does, "Borne you on eagles wings and brought you to myself", indicate in regard to the people?
J.T. They would look back on the three months in the wilderness and the time in Egypt, and they would say, God's power did all this. The spiritual person would say this: 'It is not my own power. He has brought me to Himself'.
C.A.M. Who is the real christian who does not experience anything like that? This answer that they give seems to be in relation to this very glory itself, because God does not anticipate any breakdown. Is that how you look at that?
J.T. Yes; but it is on the basis of obedience: "If ye will hearken to my voice indeed and keep my covenant". It is still dependent on obedience.
{83}
H.H. These things are made with the people of God; not with unconverted people. Covenants are only made with those who are in relationship, those in the kingdom and viewed as priests.
J.T. Quite so.
S.McC. Would you say in connection with encamping before the mountain, and God referring to bearing them on eagles wings, that He would bring their minds into a sphere of moral elevation such as is suggested in the verses you have quoted?
J.T. I think so. The meaning is moral elevation, and it is greatly stressed here; and in that elevation, there are resources, as already alluded to. Moses met Aaron there, and Jehovah had spoken to Moses there. It is a place with a known history, and the people are encamped there, and Israel "came into the wilderness of Sinai, ... and Israel encamped there before the mountain". There is a double thought there; they are accepting the wilderness and are now before the mount and God is going to open up to us great things now.
A.R. How did this work out in connection with the speaking you have been referring to? "And Jehovah called Moses to the top of the mountain, and Moses went up. And Jehovah said to Moses, Go down, testify to the people that they break not through to Jehovah to gaze, and many of them perish". There are only a few words to tell them what to do.
J.T. I think the incentive is what they are going to be to God, "My own possession out of all the peoples ... and ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation". This is what God proposes. And Jehovah says, "These are the words which thou shalt speak to the children of Israel", and Moses came down and "laid before them all these words which Jehovah had commanded him". Notice that; he laid them before them. It is a very deliberate
{84}
matter. It is a short message, but a very great matter and done in a very deliberate way. Then it says, "And all the people answered together, and said, All that Jehovah has spoken will we do!". They are committing themselves now in what you might call this covenant or contract. We get the actual terms of it in the next chapter. And then we have it ratified in a most marvellous setting in chapter 24. Not only now is Moses ascending, but Aaron, Nadab and Abihu and seventy of the elders. You can see you are on the up line now right through.
R.A.L. What does Moses stand for here? Is he the mediator?
J.T. Yes; he represents the man between God and the people, Christ, of course, in glory when we come to chapter 24. We cannot take it up now. It is one of the richest chapters in the Old Testament. The Lord may give us to see it is cumulative, and all that we have said here today carries us on to elevation, not only for Moses but the people, where we see the God of Israel.
J.B. Has Peter this in view: "Ye are a chosen race, a kingly priesthood"?
J.T. He takes up these points. As we began this morning with reference to the early part of the first chapter, "Sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ", @1 Peter 1: 2. It is a standard. That is what is before us in these meetings, and those who stumbled at the word are, of course, disallowed and set aside, "But ye are a chosen race, a kingly priesthood, a holy nation, a people for a possession, that ye might set forth the excellencies of him who has called you out of darkness to his wonderful light", @1 Peter 2: 9. The thought is carried through.
W.B-w. What is the meaning of the sprinkling of the blood?
{85}
J.T. Chapter 24 is cumulative. The idea of obedience is carried through. The people undertake to serve and do all that Jehovah said, and then Moses builds twelve pillars and offers sacrifices, and then he writes down the things. As much as to say, You have committed yourselves thoroughly to them; I will write them down. Chapter 24 is the ratification of the whole matter. You have the basins or vessels in which it was; then the sprinkling. The blood of Jesus Christ, not of bulls and of goats. He is alluding to chapter 24, the volume of blood; that is what is stressed, on the altar, people and book. So that chapter 24 is the great sprinkling chapter.
W.B-w. What is the difference between the sprinkling on the door-posts and the covenant?
J.T. In @Exodus 12: 22 he says to the people, "Take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is in the bason, and smear the lintel and the two door-posts with the blood that is in the bason". That is what he says to the people. Jehovah says to him, "And they shall take of the blood ..." (verse 7). The word 'sprinkling' is in this chapter and in chapter 24, and twice at least in the New Testament. It is alluded to in Hebrews, and by Peter, and seems to be a larger thought, the sprinkling of the altar and the people and the book. Chapter 24 is the great sprinkling chapter; it is the blood in its fulness, the fulness of the death of Christ, in that chapter, entering into ratification of the covenant. The whole position is sealed (@Hebrews 9: 22) and without it there can be no remission, nothing can be established without it.
C.A.M. The words 'ratification' and 'sealed' should help everybody.
J.T. And then to bring in the people, the sacrificial side of the system, the people and the book. The whole position is ratified, established permanently on the ground not only of the blood in an abstract or small way, but in the fulness of it. The blood is
{86}
there in the basins; it is there in the most concrete way to be considered and applied. We shall have to go into that more carefully.
Rem. The Lord said to Peter three times, "Lovest thou me?" @John 21: 15.
J.T. That is right. Peter being tested three times as to his love, and really what is suggested is good. It culminates in Peter's being entirely resigned to the will of God (@John 21: 18, 19). That is the fulness of obedience. God is glorified in his death. The saints are taken up on the ground of experience in chapter 19, but in chapter 24 we are in the presence of the greatest richness in regard to the death of Christ.
A.B.P. Is there any development of spiritual sensibilities? We had the idea of taste in the water. There is also hearing and seeing. Spiritual sensibilities are developed in this sphere.
{87}
OBEDIENCE AS PREPARING FOR THE GLORY (3)
@Exodus 24: 12 - 18; @Exodus 34: 29 - 35; @Exodus 35: 20 - 29
J.T. The subject is subjection, or obedience, as seen in this book and its relation with glory, or the relation of glory with it. We had Chapter 12 yesterday morning. It was pointed out that Exodus is the ministerial book. Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers but particularly Exodus, so that what is seen developed for God in type is through ministry. God uses qualified persons to convey His mind, calling for subjection to what is said, an ear to hear and to obey the commandments of Jehovah through Moses and Aaron. So that in chapter 4 we have the people worshipping Jehovah in that connection, the ministry being effective, and in chapter 12 likewise. In addition to worshipping in chapter 12 the people departed from Moses and did exactly as God had commanded through him, meaning that the idea of obedience was not simply carried out in the presence of the mediator but as having departed out of his sight. The idea of obedience was carried into their homes and into their ordinary positions. In chapter 15 we have the principle of a state being developed in the wilderness, an impressionable state through discipline. The brackish waters of Marah cause complaint; that is, the bitterness of death was tasted by the people and Moses was shown wood which he cast into the waters, and in that way they were made sweet. The experience of bitterness and sweetness, the sweetness occasioned by the fact that Christ is understood to have been in death, having tasted death fully, as it is said, "for every thing", @Hebrews 2: 9. The people tasted it also and in that way are brought into correspondence with Christ. So that we have a
{88}
statute and an ordinance by Jehovah, implying that at this stage of a believer's progress he is able to take account of fixed principles and to abide by them and to be immune consequently from governmental afflictions such as God put upon the Egyptians. Then in chapter 19 they are brought nigh to God and said to be three months out of Egypt. There is now more extended experience than at Marah; they have gone a step further. We are told that they pitched in the wilderness and they encamped before the mountain. They had come from Rephidim, having gone through all that experience and now they are in the presence of the mountain. Jehovah proposes that on the ground of obedience they should be to Him a holy nation, a kingdom of priests, a great privilege proposed on the ground of obedience. The idea of a covenant is included in chapter 19. They are to commit themselves to a covenant, which they did. This chapter (24) was also touched on. The covenant is ratified and it will be observed that the word 'judgments' is added here, that is, in verse 3, "And Moses came and told the people all the words of the Lord, and all the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words which the Lord hath said will we do". They are now put into writing, and he "built an altar under the mountain, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel", as if now, in this committal to the covenant, we are to have the exercise of love. The brethren are to move on in love together. The chapter is full of that to bring out affection and patience. The volume of blood is put into basins then sprinkled on the altar and the people, and on the book also, as in @Hebrews 9: 19. The whole position is ratified by blood in fulness.
It may be noticed now in this chapter that the idea of going up is proposed, not only for Moses, but for Moses, Aaron, Nadab and Abihu and seventy of
{89}
the elders of Israel. It should be observed that it is simply the idea of going up in verses 1 and 9, but when we come to verse 12 to the end, the word 'mount' or 'mountain' is very frequent, occurring seven or eight times. As far as I can see, it is not mentioned in connection with Aaron, Nadab and Abihu and the elders going up. It is mentioned in connection with Moses going up. That is, the idea of *place* is stressed in connection with Moses, but the going up is all that is stressed in connection with the others, which the Lord may help us to understand at this time.
J.S.T. Would you enlarge a little on the thought of judgments which you were suggesting?
J.T. I think we are progressing, as was remarked yesterday. The subject is progressive. We find the word 'judgments' in the beginning of chapter 21, "Now these are the judgments", or 'fixed ordinances' it says in the note. In chapter 19 it is, "If ye will hearken to my voice indeed and keep my covenant, ... These are the words which thou shalt speak". In chapter 20 we have the actual ten words and then in chapter 21 the word "judgments", or 'ordinances', which runs on, I suppose, to chapter 23, various laws, and then in chapter 24 we have, "Moses came and told the people all the words of Jehovah, and all the judgments"; that would be inclusive of the intervening chapters between chapters 20 and 24, more obligatory than what is stated in chapter 19. So that the burden is not lightened, but the people are willing; they accept all unqualifiedly, and then everything is written down as if the thing is fixed, a sort of covenant or contract. Then there are the twelve pillars and the offerings and the basins, pointing to the overwhelming testimony of love in the death of Christ. Alongside of this is the thought of ascension, not exactly to a place, for really we do not enter our place on high until we are translated. But there is the
{90}
principle of ascension in assembly service, and Christ has entered into the place which I think is what is in mind in the verses read.
C.A.M. Do you think in that way the matter of judgment coming in between God's word about their going up and their actually going up would show that every question is settled prior to going up?
J.T. I think that is the meaning of it, and we ascend with clean hands; there is no unsettled question behind us. You cannot think of an unsettled matter above, any disregard of the will of God. Things are to be done on earth as in heaven. As in heaven we are viewed as entirely according to the mind of God. The thought of ascension is to be observed and Moses going up to a place, as it is said, "Jehovah said to Moses, Come up to me into the mountain, and be there" (@Exodus 24: 12), as if pointing to the present place of Christ, the Mediator on high.
Ques. Would the seventy represent the whole of Israel placed on the ground of responsibility?
J.T. I suppose so; viewed in that way the elders are representative of the whole.
H.H. You were possibly thinking of @Psalm 24 when you spoke of ascending with clean hands. "Who shall ascend into the mount of Jehovah? and who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath blameless hands and a pure heart".
J.T. Quite so. That is just what I was thinking about.
E.P. What bearing has the Hebrew servant on all this? I was thinking of your reference, "These are the judgments thou shalt set before them".
J.T. Would it not be the one who loves, taking the lead? The Hebrew servant is the first one to say, "I love". So that we have the principle of keeping the commandments set out in Christ. We have leadership in the Hebrew servant.
{91}
E.P. Would it correspond at all with @John 13: 1, "Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end"?
J.T. That is right. He was going to the Father; He is the leader. So that although chapter 20 contemplates "thousands of them that love me", we have only one man saying he loves and showing that he loves. It is the way of love in chapters 22, 23 and 24, set out in Christ.
H.H. That is very helpful. Love enables us to fulfil the law, does it not?
J.T. There is no other way, love is the fulness of it.
H.H. The Hebrew servant accepted the committal. He would not go out free. His master had given him a wife, she had given him children, but he plainly said he loved his master, his wife, and his children and he would not go out free. He had accepted the commitments. Would that not be so in connection with the covenant; our hand is on the table in committal to all?
J.T. So you can see how the glory shines in Christ. @Psalm 19 is the glory: "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handiwork"; that is the first part of the psalm where Christ is spoken of as the Sun, as the "bridegroom coming out of his chamber and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race". It is the glory in the heavens; but the second part of the psalm has to do with the earth, the law and the ordinances, when Christ becoming Man took all this up. There is a complete circle of glory in this psalm, the first His personal shining out in the heavens, the second in a moral way here below in Jesus.
C.A.M. The glory is under His feet in the psalm. You would say it is not only above, but the glory is under, too.
J.T. Exactly; the glory down here in the second part of @Psalm 19 is the shining out of the glory in a
{92}
moral sense in Christ. So that John, in looking upon Jesus as He walked would see glory in that walk. When he saw Him coming to him he said, "Behold the lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world", @John 1: 29. That is one sacrificial glory, and then "looking upon Jesus as he walked, he saith, Behold the lamb of God!" (verse 36). He became attractive to John's followers.
A.J.D. What about the glory that John contemplates? He contemplated the glory, "a glory as of an only-begotten with a father", @John 1: 14.
J.T. That is a higher glory, how He was with His Father. It is the glory of family relationship. That was contemplated by the disciples.
A.R. Is that why there is this volume of blood in this chapter. It is not from sin-offerings, but from burnt-offerings. Does it suggest the glory of the Person that has been slain, Christ here in perfection for God?
J.T. Burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, quite so. They are delightful. Delightfulness enters into the thing, these burnt-offerings and peace-offerings. Peace-offerings bring the saints into it.
A.R. I was wondering about the idea of youth, representing freshness. There is freshness now seen in the saints corresponding to what was seen in Christ.
J.T. Well, the youthfulness is freshness and vigour of life; that is the idea. It is not the priestly side exactly, but rather youthfulness and persons wholly subservient, youthful persons.
C.C.S. Would you say that the thought of the Hebrew servant coming in here would fit in with the Lord's words in @John 14: 15, "If ye love me, keep my commandments"? What He was enjoining upon His own was found livingly in Himself.
J.T. Quite so. It has been remarked, "Having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to
{93}
the end"; that is the spirit of the Hebrew servant. But then He is going away, and He is exercising what you may call parental affection towards them. There are three kinds of love; there is the ascending love to the master and horizontal love to the wife (for the principle of the wife is equality in that sense), and the descending love to the children. In @John 13 it is descending love: "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves". That is the thing in quality amongst them. The love is there amongst them.
J.B. Does @Psalm 16 fit in with what we have here? Would the expression "at my right hand" suggest the glory, and the words, "I have set Jehovah continually before me" have in mind complete committal to Jehovah?
J.T. The whole psalm might fit in with what we are saying. He set Jehovah continually before Him, and then he said his goodness did not extend to Jehovah, a wonderful expression of self-abnegation, what you might call compression in the Lord. How He compressed Himself to say that! Then He says, "To the saints that are on the earth, and to the excellent ... . In them is all my delight". That is horizontal love. When He says, "I have set Jehovah ... before me", that is ascending love in Christ. "My goodness extendeth not to thee; to the saints that are on the earth ... in them is all my delight", so that there would be the ascending love, and the saints viewed horizontally as alongside of Him. Then the psalmist abominates the idea of idolatry.
H.H. That helps; it comes into line with this chapter, the abomination of idolatry; there is no other god.
J.T. Quite so. So that the psalm runs on to what is at God's right hand. He would show him the path of life: "Thy countenance is fulness of joy; at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore". The psalm
{94}
contemplates ascent, that He would ascend in that sense to the right hand of God.
S.McC. Do you think that if the volume of blood suggested in this section were better understood and enjoyed amongst us, we would have an environment in which there would be more readiness to take on this spirit of obedience and subjection to these things? "All the words that Jehovah has said will we do!" (chapter 24: 3).
J.T. The chapter is full of rich thoughts and carefully set words and terms. The word 'mountain' is kept in the background until you come to verse 12. It is the spiritual thought that is in mind. The first part is that ascension is possible, the type pointing on to Christ and the covenant. Ascension is possible in this connection, not at the beginning, but in this connection as we progress in the understanding of the love of God. How pleasing His commandments are to us as they are accepted unqualifiedly by us, inclusive of judgments.
C.A.M. In that way this matter of being under His feet is the thought of the "transparent sapphire, and as it were the form of heaven for clearness". The very beauty of the thing is that it is below. So that now there is on earth a glory which corresponds with heaven, but it is under His feet. How do you understand that?
J.T. It points to what we have as we ascend. We ascend out of the wilderness conditions. We begin with the wilderness but we ascend out of the wilderness conditions. The wilderness conditions imply that the walking place is sand and God tells us later that He walked with Israel forty years. That would be His coming down to their circumstances; but these special occasions imply that we ascend out of wilderness conditions into divine conditions. We are brought up to see where God walks.
{95}
H.H. Is not the sapphire a blue stone, a heavenly colour? Would it not suggest the heavenly side of things for us?
J.T. I think it does. We are brought into it on the principle of ascension. In a spiritual way we are brought into divine circumstances where the walking is; Habakkuk says, "And he will make me to walk upon my high places", @Habakkuk 3: 19. He had been walking here below in a scene of discipline and felt it, too; but now whatever happens he says, "Yet I will rejoice in Jehovah, I will joy in the God of my salvation. Jehovah, the Lord, is my strength, and he maketh my feet like hinds feet, and he will make me to walk upon my high places". Then the praise is upon the stringed instruments to the chief Musician. This passage has that in mind, that faith is enabled by the power of the Spirit to ascend into divine circumstances so that what is under the divine feet is sapphire pavement, "Under his feet as it were work of transparent sapphire, and as it were the form of heaven for clearness". It is a question of the clarity of the position, beautiful transparency that belongs to the people of God in these circumstances.
A.H.P. Does that correspond with @1 John 1: 7, "If we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin"?
J.T. That is down here where the fellowship is, that we walk in that light; not God walking in it, but God in it. Here we have what is under His feet a heavenly thing. He is going to come down. In the next chapter He says, 'I am going to come down and dwell among you'; that is, in wilderness circumstances.
J.S. Would "under his feet" suggest the work completed (chapter 24. 10)?
J.T. It is a created thing that we can have part in. It is not an uncreated condition. It is what God
{96}
has come into in grace in the heavenly side of it. It is a "work of transparent sapphire, and as it were the form of heaven for clearness". It is what His feet are on. It is what we touch, our privilege to touch on the principle of ascension. Not exactly a place, but it is to see what is under His feet. We are brought into divine circumstances, and as seeing those circumstances on high, we all the more value what He proposes to do in love; that is, to come down here and walk upon the sand.
A.R. As having gone up they are called nobles there, and it says, "He laid not his hand" on them (chapter 24. 11). Would it suggest that they are in correspondence with the place?
J.T. I think that is in it. It is clearly what we are as ascended, equal to the place, and at liberty to eat and drink and see God.
A.J.D. In @John 20, the Lord comes into the midst and it says that He stood, "He stood in the midst". He did not sit down among the brethren. Do you think that denotes that He has in mind ascension for the saints? He was not going to remain with them on that level, indicating that there was something further on the ascension line which you have in mind.
J.T. "He stood in the midst" would mean that He had not reached finality. The position was tentative. He was going on to finality, so that standing would not be a permanent state of things. Stephen sees Him still standing at the right hand of God, meaning that the final point had not been reached yet. The idea is that He was waiting in grace on the Jews.
Ques. Is it a progressive thought in verse 11: "And on the nobles of the children of Israel He laid not his hand: they saw God, and ate and drank"?
J.T. The idea of nobility is mentioned. The words are set like jewels here, each in its place. The
{97}
word 'nobles' comes in in verse 11 to set us free. The truth of the matter is that the covenant is to release us for sonship. Great and glorious as it is, it is a means to an end. It is to release us in intelligence and affection for sonship in the position above. Sonship is implied in the word 'nobles'; then there would be liberty to eat and drink in the presence of God.
W.B-w. I thought the mountain was suggestive of heavenly atmosphere come down into the sphere of administration.
J.T. That is no doubt true. The way in which the word is introduced here leads up to the present session of Christ in a place. Jehovah says, "Come up to me into the mountain, and be there", and then we are told at the end of the chapter that Moses was on the mountain forty days and forty nights; as if to call attention to a session there and the people left below under Aaron and Hur. That is to say, if any matter comes up they are there, but the mediator is on high. It says in chapter 24: 15, 16, "And the cloud covered the mountain. And the glory of Jehovah abode on mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days". Then in verse 17, "The appearance of the glory of Jehovah was like a consuming fire on the top of the mountain, before the eyes of the children of Israel. And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and ascended the mountain". The word 'glory' comes into its place. There is great stress laid on the mountain, and to ascension, pointing to that which attached to Moses alone; no one else was to be there. Joshua was there, but only as an accessory; he is not there mentioned as a man of privilege. He was only an accessory to the mediator. It is the minister that is in mind. We should have Christ in His personal distinction before us in this matter, the idea of the place on the mountain being connected with Him, and only the idea of going up connected with us.
{98}
C.H.H. Would that be similar to @Matthew 17 enhancing the mediator? In @Isaiah 42 Christ Himself is spoken of as being set a covenant.
J.T. The mediator is everything on the mountain. Matthew is the gospel of mountains. It is Christ in a variety of ways, on seven different mountains; each one brings out some different glory of Christ. On the mount of transfiguration we have the Supreme thought; it is to bring out who He is. That, I think, enters into this. The distinction that is seen in Moses is that although the glory was like a consuming fire, he goes into it.
A.R. As if the only man equal for such a position.
J.T. Only one man is equal to that. The others are allowed to see the God of Israel and where His feet were. But now the glory is a consuming fire and who can face that? I think the true Mediator's distinction is in mind.
J.S. In Matthew it says His face shone as the sun.
J.T. That is right; it is the administrative side and so the mountains are prominent there.
C.H.H. In Luke the cloud does not overshadow them until Moses and Elias have departed.
J.T. Just so. Luke alone gives us the departure of Moses and Elias before you get the cloud. Peter had said, "Let us make ...", but it is only Christ, it is to bring out the glory of Christ personally.
E.P. You mean that Moses was greatly distinguished at this point. He says to the elders, "Wait here for us, until we return to you" (verse 14). They were left in the position to which he had brought them.
J.T. I do not think they were really left there; I think the idea is that the ascension contemplated in the first half of the chapter really does not take us away literally from the earth at all. After assembly session, for instance, as we had to do with this morning, when we come back to what is normal, we are on the earth. It is all a question of the state of our
{99}
minds, and I think that is what is in mind here. Aaron and Hur are amongst Israel, not simply amongst the seventy elders; they are forty days below with the people. It throws great light on our position here. When we return in mind from proper assembly privileges we are just here, as Aaron and Hur are here in the midst of all the people of Israel.
E.P. So Moses says, "Behold, Aaron and Hur are with you: if any man have any matter let him come before them".
J.T. That is the whole people; the subsequent history shows that it was so. Instead of Aaron being true they make the calf during these forty days.
A.R. Do you think the position is higher and higher? In verse 13 it says that Moses went up to the mountain of God with Joshua his attendant.
J.T. Notice it does not say that Joshua went up into the mountain, I am only calling attention to that so that every word is to be noticed here, "Moses rose up, and Joshua his attendant; and *Moses* went up to the mountain of God" (verse 13). It does not say Moses and Joshua went up; it is Moses going up into the mount. Joshua would go, of course, but the wording is so accurate. He is not to be viewed as a person of any special privilege or distinction here. The idea is Moses going up to the mountain and Moses alone. He is only attending Moses in an accessory way.
A.J.D. Would it enhance the rights of the mediator?
J.T. It is what belongs to Christ. It is to bring out that He is the one that went into the mountain.
A.R. In the last verse of the chapter it says, "And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and ascended the mountain". It is said of the Lord that He "ascended up far above all heavens", @Ephesians 4: 10.
{100}
J.T. That is just what I thought we would get to. We must be sure that we are not making Joshua a *person* in that position. He is not mentioned at the beginning of the chapter at all; not that I would make light of Joshua. We must not detract from the pre-eminence of Christ, the only One who is said to have gone into the mountain. In verse 18 "Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and ascended the mountain", not simply going up as the others did; he went to the highest point.
Ques. This morning in the giving of thanks you referred to God, "that spared not his own Son but delivered him up for us all", @Romans 8: 32. Is that the point you are stressing? The greatness of the mediator as the One who has brought in the love of God and sustains it eternally.
J.T. That is right and how distinguished He is! He can go to the highest point and be there. He is there at the present time. As I understand it, the present mediatorial session of Christ is there; He is there in regard to ourselves.
W.J.C. Does Joshua represent the saints position as rising up and able to go so far, but not going all the way; not into an uncreated sphere or into the elevation to which Christ Himself is gone?
J.T. Well, it is just a question of attending: "Joshua his attendant". It is that thought introduced here, not to bring out any distinction attaching to the person of Joshua yet, for as he comes down after the forty days his ear is not good.
H.H. He is not presented in this chapter in that light.
J.T. He is just mentioned as a certain element there, and what is stressed is Moses, and Moses alone going up, "Let Moses alone come near Jehovah; but they shall not come near" (verse 2).
F.N.W. I had in mind verse 11, I was wondering if there was a way in which we might take up nominally
{101}
this position and God might have to lay His hand upon us, perhaps in view of lack of obedience and subjection.
J.T. I think the fact that He did not lay His hand on them was because they were thoroughly in accord with His mind.
R.A.L. Is that why He is also called the God of Israel? He acknowledged that they had accepted the position. Is the thought of complacency in that?
J.T. I think so; "they saw the God of Israel". It is to bring out the spirituality of the position. It is an entirely spiritual matter. We see that going up in the first part of the chapter is an entirely spiritual matter for us, but the second part of the chapter is a literal thing; Christ has personally gone up to the highest point.
H.H. Nadab and Abihu are mentioned here, but they are not later.
J.T. Quite so. It is the people taken up as they are; their state is not yet brought into it. It is a question, I think, of the way God looks at us as we are in these circumstances. I could not say very much as to what happened subsequently to Nadab and Abihu. It has to be taken account of in the judicial ways of God. Here they are just part of the whole system, which is brought into view.
H.H. It was very serious that such privileged and prominent men came under judgment later on. They evidently used their own minds and wills, disregarding what the anointing should be in a priestly way.
J.T. Quite so.
J.S. Moses was in the midst of the cloud in verse 18. Would that indicate the position that Christ has in glory?
J.T. It would seem so. It is to bring out Christ's personal greatness, that He can go so far beyond the points we reach; so that "in all things he might have the pre-eminence", @Colossians 1: 18.
{102}
A.R. Is there any significance in the fact that it says in the last verse that he ascended the mountain, and then it says he was on the mountain, as if he has a position permanently?
J.T. God says, "Be there" (verse 12). God has Moses in His mind in that distinctive way from the beginning of the chapter. Now He says in verse 12, "Come up to me into the mountain, and be there". In the last verse Moses was on the mountain so many days, like the present session of Christ on high.
A.J.D. Would "Be there" correspond to the New Testament, "Sit thou at my right hand"?
J.T. "As *I* also have overcome, and have sat down with my Father in his throne", @Revelation 3: 21.
C.A.M. I was wondering if, in that connection, linking it on with the privilege of the morning meeting, whether we do not come back together with that sense of the pre-eminence of Christ; whether this whole matter which you are alluding to would be a picture of what we now experience anticipatively.
J.T. Yes, quite so. We have to go to chapter 34 to get the full thought of Moses coming back. When he came back in chapter 32, it was to execute judgment. The point we are on now is not that, but to see how Moses came back and how the glory shone in his face. I think we ought to link chapter 34 with chapter 24 to bring out how Moses came back from God with glory, with his face shining; and the connection with the assembly service is that we shine, we take on that glory, "*We* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory". We take on that glory "even as by the Lord the Spirit". There is a great function or service in which the Lord changes us so that we take on the glory, and I think that is what we get in the end of chapter 24. Chapter 34 is another going up, and in the meantime
{103}
Moses has taken on greater glory, greater distinction. So that he is allowed now to hew out the tables for himself. Chapter 34: 2: "And be ready for the morning, and go up in the morning to mount Sinai, and stand there before me on the top of the mountain". No Joshua now, no seventy, no Aaron, it is Moses alone. "Let no man go up with thee, neither shall any man be seen on all the mountain; neither shall sheep and oxen feed in front of that mountain" (verse 3). Then Moses went up, we are told, and Jehovah came down in the cloud and stood beside him there, so that now we have the action of Jehovah there. What happened up there in regard of Christ, what distinction, and how the glory passed by! Then we are told, "It came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai -- and the two tables of testimony were in Moses hand, when he came down from the mountain -- that Moses knew not that the skin of his face shone through his talking with him. And Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, and behold, the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come near him. And Moses called to them; and they turned to him -- Aaron and all the principal men of the assembly; and Moses talked with them" (verses 29 - 31). Now you have the full thought of what happened up there. In chapter 24 it is simply Moses going up, and in chapter 34 it is what transpired between Jehovah and Moses. Moses came down and the skin of his face shone and they were afraid of him, but they turned towards him, "And Moses called to them; and they turned to him". That is a beautiful picture of how they are set at liberty as they spoke to him. The principal men and Aaron are happy with him.
J.S. Do you regard this shining as the outshining of glory?
J.T. I was thinking that is how glory is connected with obedience, how it is interwoven with obedience
{104}
throughout this book. It takes its place in the face of a man, the most attractive place it could be in.
S.McC. I was wondering if there was progression in that regard in which this glory is seen. In chapter 16 the glory is seen in relation to the cloud; in chapter 24 it is abiding on mount Sinai, and now it is seen in relation to the face of a man, in that narrow compass.
J.T. Well, is not that very beautiful? Where can it be more attractively set than in the face of Jesus? It is the most attractive thing. The glory is placed there so that we should be drawn to it. They were afraid, it says here, but "Moses called to them; and they turned to him -- Aaron and all the principal men of the assembly; and Moses talked with them. And afterwards, all the children of Israel came near; and he gave them in commandment all that Jehovah had spoken with him on mount Sinai". Now there is a happy state of things set up, the glory in the face of a man. I am using this from a typical point of view as seen in 2 Corinthians. The centre of the system of things that God has set up, is glory in the face of a Man.
J.S. Is the glory for our contemplation? I thought the shining was for our contemplation.
J.T. Exactly, and that it should shine out, too, "The God who spoke that out of darkness light should shine who has shone in our hearts for the shining forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ", @2 Corinthians 4: 6. So that it goes the full length of the administrative position at the present time in the gospel. "But if also our gospel is veiled, it is veiled in those that are lost; in whom the god of this world has blinded the thoughts of the unbelieving, so that the radiancy of the glad tidings of the glory of the Christ, who is the image of God, should not shine forth for them", @2 Corinthians 4: 3, 4.
{105}
Ques. Is there any instruction for us in the fact that it was the second time that Moses came down?
J.T. Well, so much enters into the second visit. So much intervened in the golden calf being set up, and Moses faithfulness in dealing with all that. God exalts him. He progresses in greater and greater glory; it is simply Christ coming out more and more. The more the sin on our side, the more the glory of Christ shines. Chapter 34 contemplates what had intervened, how faithful Moses had been, and God is committing so much to him that he is allowed to make the two tables of stone; we are told he also made an ark at the same time (@Deuteronomy 10: 3). So I think it is Christ increasingly before us.
H.H. The ministry is now after the breakdown, the church breakdown.
J.T. And does it not enhance Christ in your soul, in all our souls?
H.H. Yes, it does.
C.H.H. In this case, are the saints represented in the stones to be taken up?
J.T. Well, if we take it as a type they are. We are the material for the writing; that is the way it works out in 2 Corinthians.
Ques. Would the first epistle to the Corinthians correspond with Moses coming down in @Exodus 32, and then the second epistle correspond with chapter 34, his face shines? It is the same person because his love is still the same, found in administration against evil and showing sin dealt with. God is coming out in love more than ever.
J.T. There is greater glory in the second letter than the first letter; in fact, he tells us that he had been down even to the gates of death, and now he says, "Our heart is enlarged", and he is able to write the second letter.
{106}
A.R. Is the second letter written to change the faces of the saints at Corinth, so that their faces might begin to shine?
J.T. Quite so. It is not that Christ becomes greater personally, but He becomes greater to the ministers, and is seen to be greater through their ministry.
A.H.P. Would "From glory to glory" indicate the variety of glories connected with Christ?
J.T. I think it would. The glory is endless. The best illustration you can get of that is Stephen. He began with angelic glory; his face shone as an angel, and then he began to speak of the God of glory. If you think of the God of glory the whole range of glory must come into that. The moral side is seen in him in the wonderful way in which he reflected Christ. Then he says, I see the glory of God in heaven.
H.H. The covenant is better appreciated after a breakdown, is it not? I thought there was more abundant entrance into the covenant after the breakdown at Corinth, and the general breakdown in connection with the church; more abundant appreciation of things now than what you get, for instance, in @1 Corinthians 11, where Paul speaks of the Spirit. What things are there in relation to God in the cup?
J.T. Enlarge a little on that.
H.H. I thought the cup is connected with God; the loaf with Christ. Paul gives a distinct setting to the Supper in @1 Corinthians 11. It was to correct bad conduct there, I suppose, but when you come to @2 Corinthians 3 there is a heart on which things can be written, and it would still carry and maintain a right impression of the covenant. So that it is written on the fleshy tables of the heart, that which God can use so that the saints may carry right impressions of the covenant, of the love of God, and in affectionate response answer to it.
{107}
J.T. I am glad you said that. It brings out how things are, the saints taking on glory. I do not know of anything more interesting than that, the way glory is worked out in relation to obedience, and how in the ministry the ministers are glorious. Paul was glorious, really more glorious in the second letter. Stephen begins with glory in his own face. It was in his face but it was angelic glory, I suppose, pointing to that particular period in the ways of God. Angelic service was still there for they are "sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation", @Hebrews 1: 14. But then that is not all the glory, for the Old Testament was by the disposition of angels in the hands of a mediator. The old system was on that principle, and Stephen reflected that fully; but it was not all the glory. Stephen begins his subject with glory, with the God of glory, as much as to say, There is a domain of glory and God is the God of it and there is the working out of it in the Mediator. Stephen goes over the ground of the Old Testament and he begins to shine in moral glory. He is like his Master in the end, there is the shining out of moral glory. He says. "I see the heavens opened" (@Acts 7: 56) and there is more glory there. The glory of God is there and Jesus is there. Stephen is able to say just what he saw; he does not say much, "I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God"; but there is a young man standing by who is going to say much about it. There is to be the opening up of that glory. I believe the second letter, corresponding with our chapter here, is from a great vessel of glory. He says of the saints, "Vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared for glory", @Romans 9: 23. That is the idea; Stephen is representative of that and this chapter points to the second letter to the Corinthians. How great Paul was, and how he would bring the saints into that greatness! There is to be fixity of glory
{108}
down here, a taking on of glory, going "from glory to glory". There is no end to it.
C.A.M. So that the last with God is always the best. The most glorious thing is at the end, I mean in connection with the present dispensation. The last glory is most glorious.
J.T. I think what was suggested to us was that the breakdown in the assembly has given the Lord an opportunity to bring out the glory of Christ in the assembly, as perhaps has never been presented before in such detail.
C.H.H. Are you suggesting that what Paul saw in Stephen was the foundation of his ministry?
J.T. I think so. He would never forget that; he tells the Lord later about it, that he was there when His martyr Stephen was put to death.
Ques. I would like to ask in regard to the end of @Acts 20. It says, "They all wept sore; and falling upon the neck of Paul they ardently kissed him, specially pained by the word which he had said, that they would no more see his face". I was going to ask in regard to his face whether the great thought of the covenant was reflected in Paul himself, that the elders of Ephesus were so touched that they would not see his face again.
J.T. I think that is a good link there, especially in relation to what we were saying about Stephen's face and about Jesus face and now the greatest minister really is Paul. What a face it must have been to the saints!
{109}
OBEDIENCE AS PREPARING FOR THE GLORY (4)
@Exodus 35: 20 - 29; @Exodus 39: 32, 42, 43; @Exodus 40: 9 - 38
J.T. The verses in chapter 35 show how obedience continued according to what we have in chapter 12, as they departed from before Moses. Obedience to the extent of sacrifice, of unselfishness, is seen strikingly in verses 20 - 29. It says, "And all the assembly of the children of Israel departed from before Moses. And they came every one whose heart moved him". Obedience and rectitude are often apparent, happily in our gatherings, as in each other's presence and in the presence of the Lord; but as we depart and enter on our own ordinary occupations, especially if we are isolated, the test comes in. These verses show that obedience was maintained to the extent of sacrifice, and that it extended to, and included, the women as well as the men, and also the principal men, as it says in verse 27. So that in verse 29 we have, "The children of Israel brought a voluntary offering to Jehovah, every man and woman whose heart prompted them to bring for all manner of work, which Jehovah, by the hand of Moses, had commanded to be done".
C.H.H. You remarked in the first meeting that this material represented the saints as being formed. Would that correspond to @Romans 12 as being formed you offer yourself?
J.T. That is right. That is the order of the truth in Romans. The chapter begins, "By the compassions of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God". The saints are eligible as sacrifice. "And be not conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove". Thus I think we are formed, and the various needs for the building of the tabernacle
{110}
are developed. So that as you run down the chapter you see a great variety of service all working out from the first part of the chapter, and that each is to consider himself, his measure in his service, that it is according to the measure of faith that God has dealt to every man, and that involves calculation. All that enters into these chapters.
H.H. Everyone would in that way be a vital part of the system. Their contribution would be themselves, in that sense. Would that be right?
J.T. That is what is meant, so that it becomes very practical. Instead of reading up this material, you think of yourself, what you are, and what I am, all as finished and brought to Moses, so that his eye passes over everything. Every one of us as in assembly comes under the Lord's eye. We are to be there on His terms and not on ours.
A.B.P. Would you say that the house of Stephanas would fit in here?
J.T. Quite so. Wherever you have instances of persons functioning according to God in relation to the saints, that is the antitype of what we have here, such as the house of Chloe and Stephanas in Corinth. In Romans you have a large list of persons who are saluted. That means that they are material acceptable for the tabernacle. The idea was they should be at Rome in the very midst of the world, the wilderness, that God's will should be apparent there. So that you can understand that when Phoebe went there and brought her letter and it was read (and possibly the epistle was brought by her), what exercises there would be as to all this in Caesar's very capital, that the will of God should be maintained in His people.
A.B.P. The household of Stephanas, the first-fruits of Achaia, was baptised, and we find a long time later they were all addicted to the service of the saints.
{111}
J.T. That is a good illustration, as I was remarking, of what is acceptable.
H.H. It would enter into what is local. You would expect to find assembly features in any local company; such a meeting's commencing would not be justified if the material were not there.
J.T. Quite so; there must be some material of this kind. The principal thing is subjection.
A.J.D. The great principle of subjection is referred to in that connection in the end of 1 Corinthians referring to the household of Stephanas. "I beseech you, brethren (ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is the first-fruits of Achaia, and they have devoted themselves to the saints for service), that *ye* should also be subject to such, and to everyone joined in the work and labouring". The great principle of subjection enters into that kind of thing.
J.T. Quite so, and right through.
S.P. Does the appreciation of this wealth that is found with each man and woman preserve us from being purely local in our thoughts? It has all Israel in view.
J.T. It is one thought; it is one tabernacle; so that the principles in all the gatherings must be of the same kind.
Ques. Would it be exemplified in the churches in Macedonia? "But they gave themselves first to the Lord, and to us by God's will", @2 Corinthians 8: 5.
J.T. Very good.
Ques. Is Lydia like one of these women? It says the Lord opened her heart. In chapter 35 is it not a heart matter?
J.T. That is what we should see. It is a heart matter, and the heart is functioning according to God even as departing from Moses, not immediately under his eye and direction. We are trustworthy, that is what is meant, I think, in these verses, and can be relied upon, and all are brought into it, men and women
{112}
and the principal men, too, I believe that is the test, when we are out from under each other's eye. It is all well when we are together in times like this, but when we depart each into his own setting, his own house and business, then how is it? Can we be trusted to carry out the impressions that we may get here under the Lord's influence and direction?
C.A.M. Your reference to saluting the saints seems to be an interesting matter. Saluting one another has been a great exercise, whether we can really salute one another as having respect for one another as assembly material.
J.T. That is the idea in @Romans 16. The salutations are each based on something; something that enters into tabernacle construction. How can I salute what is incongruous? You cannot do this. It is what is worthy of salutation. Hence the idea of a holy kiss, that our salutations are not worldly. The shaking of hands and expressions of sympathy and fellowship ought to be holy, not promiscuous or loose, because the tabernacle is to be in mind, and all is to be in accord with the material proper to it. We cannot salute anything else, brethren under discipline and the like. Discipline is essential; it is impossible to get through the wilderness without it and in all these matters "endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace", @Ephesians 4: 3. That is, we are moving together, otherwise the tabernacle is only a term; it ceases to be what it is meant to be.
H.H. The thing took form in @Romans 16, "Salute Prisca and Aquila ... and the assembly at their house". It was all there, was it not? The apostle's mind is concentrated on what stands connected with the assembly.
J.T. The assembly is being led up to, as mentioned in the last paragraph of the book. In regard to salutations, it says at the end of the list, "Salute
{113}
one another with a holy kiss", @1 Corinthians 16: 20. Salute *one another*. Paul had mentioned certain and given reasons, but every saint in Rome is to be taken account of in this way. The salutation or kiss, or symbol of affection, is to be holy, and it cannot be holy unless it recognises the material proper to the tabernacle.
J.S. Do you think the salutations there would be in accordance with the formative work of God only?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. He begins with Phoebe -- what a sister she was! -- then Priscilla and Aquila, "my fellow-workmen in Christ Jesus (who for my life staked their own neck; to whom not *I* only am thankful, but also all the assemblies of the nations) and the assembly at their house", @Romans 16: 3, 4. There is a reason for these salutations.
Rem. In mentioning names it is not the names, not any particular persons, but certain features represented in the meaning of the names.
J.T. That is good; so that you have tabernacle construction in principle in those salutations qualified.
Ques. We all value Priscilla and Aquila in view of what they did for Paul; we have profited greatly, have we not?
J.T. "To whom not *I* only am thankful, but also all the assemblies of the nations", @Romans 16: 4.
C.H.H. Would the material in @Romans 16 form the basis of Ephesians as the teaching in Exodus would pave the way for Leviticus?
J.T. That is right. We must have the tabernacle set up. That is what we are coming to in the last chapter; it is the structure set up. What a pleasure it was to God! That would all be in mind. Leviticus is in mind, for that is where the service is carried on. Here it is the tabernacle set up and the material all marked by, "as Jehovah had commanded Moses". Everything is according to that, and then it passes under the eye of the mediator; that is, Christ in type, as in the verse read in chapter 39, "according
{114}
to all that Jehovah commanded Moses. So had the children of Israel done all the labour. And Moses saw all the work, and behold, they had done it as Jehovah had commanded -- so had they done it; and Moses blessed them". I think that is a very fine thought to have in mind; that things are all done. They finished the work, it says, "according to all that Jehovah had commanded Moses"; but after all that, it comes under Moses. It comes under the eye of Christ.
C.H.H. Chapter 40 is what Moses does; whereas chapter 39 is what the people do.
J.T. What the people do and what he does in passing his eye over it.
J.S. Do we see in chapter 35 how the people take all the instructions given by Moses? We see the inward work in those whose hearts were moved and whose spirits prompted them.
J.T. That is the setting according to what we had yesterday; that is, chapter 34 is the counterpart of chapter 24. What intervenes is only to throw lustre on chapter 34 -- what Moses was. What an increase there was in him, so that he comes down from the mountain shining! The glory was there where it could be most appreciated, in the face of a man, and the meekest man in all the earth. There was nothing retaliatory about him. It is in his face, the face of Jesus. Now it is to take on that glory, 2 Corinthians opens up the idea of the saints taking on glory; they "are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit" (chapter 3: 18). There is the image of Christ. We are all to be alike from this point of view. There is enrichment, "from glory to glory". I believe that is what is implied in chapter 35. The saints are glorified. They have taken on glory from the face of Moses and all these sacrifices and gifts are just what we are ourselves in obedience. As Paul says, "When your obedience is
{115}
fulfilled", @2 Corinthians 10: 6. When the generality of the saints are brought into obedience, then the Lord can deal with special cases that are hardened.
H.H. Does it not say that God must have a vessel of habitation? In Noah's day it was the ark; now it is the assembly. Everything is here in Christ. Does it not emphasise the importance of responding to divine requirements in that way?
J.T. As to having the ark?
H.H. I mean Noah's ark. If God was to bring in another world, the ark was a necessity. If God was to be in Israel, the people had to supply the material that God might be amongst them. Does it not carry forward to our day, that we are to be for God's pleasure as apart from every other thing?
J.T. So that as Moses scrutinises all, he not only approved but blessed them. The word 'approved' is an important word, too, "approved of God"; but then there is more than that. Chapter 39 is approval; chapter 40 is complacency in the approval, the complacency of love. God says, I not only love you, but you are great enough to be the residence of My glory. What an immense thought that is! so that obedience is the thought running right through here.
A.R. Hence the importance of chapters 35 and 36, to develop a general state of holiness amongst the saints, do you think?
J.T. That is right. It worked out from the glory in the face of Moses and then the sabbath in the beginning of the chapter; that is to say, the saints are learning to take on the glory and take on the benefits of the environment. "*We* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face", we take on things. The sabbath in chapter 35 means the saints are to learn to lie fallow; not simply to read books but to absorb the thoughts, the glory of the environment; and then that works out in the second
{116}
section, where they depart from Moses. It is remarkable how the Spirit of God goes over these items. He is thinking of the saints; He tells them what is needed. He loves to go over the ground and look at us, and speak about us. That is the first half of the chapter; then they depart from Moses and verse 20 shows their response, and how they love to bring all these wonderfully rich things out of willing and prompted hearts.
A.R. Because chapter 36 shows that they were so willing they had to be told not to bring; they were bringing so much.
J.T. What a difference that is from chapter 32, after Moses first visit to the mountain, where they had the golden calf! What should have been for the tabernacle was devoted to it.
C.H.H. So in taking on the glory, as you say, it would be a result of subjection and obedience, leading on to the extension of glory as seen in the end of chapter 40. There would be glory to God in the assembly.
S.J.H. Is this bringing to Moses a definite act? They brought their gifts to Moses. Is there a definite transaction in it?
J.T. I think so. The Lord is saying virtually. If you are to be in the tabernacle, it is to be on My terms. So they give themselves to the Lord, as has been remarked; that meant that the rights of the Lord and the rights of God were fully owned by the saints in Macedonia; then in Thessalonica Paul says of them, "Ye became followers of us, and of the Lord" (@1 Thessalonians 1: 6), another touch. Paul was their ideal so far, but they were not content with that; they became followers of the Lord. Paul was not a party man, great as he was. As they followed him, they became followers of the Lord. The Lord must be the test throughout.
{117}
S.P. Would you say that the contribution of this great wealth to the tabernacle as coming under the scrutiny of Moses would remove any thought of conspicuousness in the gifts presented? The giver would be content with Moses scrutiny.
J.T. You do not want your contribution to be intruding; everything has to come under the Lord. Moses blessed it all; then in chapter 40 "Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying, On the day of the first month, on the first of the month, shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of meeting", and in verse 9, "Thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is in it". The fact that everything was well done, everything done in obedience, and with willing hearts, was not enough. God says, I must put the finishing touches on this. *The anointing* means the heavenly touch; that is what verse 9 means.
A.R. I was wondering if first coming under the hand of Moses and taking account of material, we would become willing now to be put in our places in the tabernacle according to his disposition in chapter 40. I have to be submissive as to the place he may put me in, do you think?
J.T. Yes, I have passed the scrutiny of Moses now, and I am conscious the Lord is pleased with me, because that is the idea here, one gets clear for oneself. Then the next thing is that you are to be doing well in your own house; you are reading and making headway, and the Lord is pleased with that, too; but the tabernacle is another thought. It takes on others as well as yourself, and you must fit in with them. There are those who would like to drag things down to a lower level. There were others also. Paul says to Timothy, "The things thou hast heard of me in the presence of many witnesses, these entrust to faithful men, such as shall be competent to instruct others also", @2 Timothy 2: 2. Now we are in the period of the "others" and we may think in ourselves that
{118}
our measure is equal to their measure, but it is not. @Romans 12 shows that you must see to your own measure. There may be men far beyond you even among the "others". The principle is that 2 Timothy does not make 1 Timothy obsolete; 1 Timothy is still in force, and what God gives must be there. A man is what he is, even if he comes in on the last day of the assembly's history on earth, and we must recognise that. @Romans 12: 3 recognises that. Every man must find his measure, according to the measure God has apportioned to each. That makes me humble, "But to think so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith", because after all, it is all God's work. Look at that brother, God would say; he calls attention to this one and the other one, and the salutations mean that; that each is distinguished. So that each of us, therefore, has to be sober, although you say I belong to the "others", how are you going to measure up with the "others"? because in David's history the mighty are at the beginning in Chronicles, and at the end in 1 Samuel. The idea runs right through. It is the work of God and as the work of God we must recognise it.
C.H.H. So Paul would be anxious for you to think just as well of different brethren as he did.
J.T. Quite so. Well, we have to keep all this in mind; because we are so apt to flatter ourselves that we are equal to the "others", but after all a man is what he is. Let him not mistake it; there is no mistake in heaven. The measure of God is the measure of God and we are each to take account of it.
J.H-t. Is that what the apostle is bringing forward in the end of the epistle to the Colossians? He mentions three persons there as being beloved, but then he also brings in certain distinctive features about them; and at the end of the epistle, he asks that the letter be read to the Laodiceans also.
{119}
J.T. That is good. In each of these cases, generally the salutations are on a certain basis; there is a good reason for them. Perhaps we may see now, so as to get all we can, that chapter 36 is the outcome of the glory in the face of Jesus. That is the setting of it, and that the saints are trustworthy; you can trust them when they are out of your sight; they will not change their minds after they leave the meeting. They departed from Moses, and everyone brought his offering unselfishly. Notice how the women gave up their earrings and that sort of thing. It is the work of God in them to do that, to give up their mirrors; you may be sure it is a real work of God that leads women to give up these things.
E.P. The apostle says in @Romans 16, "Your obedience has reached to all, I rejoice therefore as it regards you", and then he closes with that passage, "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you".
J.T. How much that thought is stressed; it is really a universal thought, "For obedience of faith among all the nations", @Romans 1: 5. So that we have one tabernacle. There are universal conditions; so that in observing these things, we keep the unity of the Spirit. We have an ear to hear what God is doing everywhere and what the enemy is doing also, and know what is what. We do not put a premium on ignorance. I ought to know what is current.
R.A.L. What is involved in the last verse of chapter 39, "Moses blessed them"? Not only did God put the finishing touch on the tabernacle, but "Moses blessed them".
J.T. It is the sense you have of the Lord, as you bring yourself to the Lord. It is great to weigh over in the presence of the Lord our whole history. The Lord likes that; because in that wonderful grace chapter in @Luke 15, the idea is a "repenting sinner". It is one that is always at it. The longer you live, the more you will repent according to that, and that
{120}
means I am in the presence of the Lord, and the Lord gives me to understand what He thinks of me. We ought to think of understanding with the Lord as to what He thinks of us. I believe that is what is meant.
A.R. Do you think the reason we are so ignorant of what is current is because we have the wrong kind of books in our book cases?
J.T. Quite so. These features which are to be contributed to the tabernacle are to be found also in the households.
J.H. As "Salute Prisca and Aquila ... and the assembly at their house".
J.T. I think so. The assembly in the house would mean the tabernacle is there, and that the books around are in accord with that; that what is around the house is in accord with the assembly. I believe it is a distinction attached especially to Priscilla and Aquila; they had the assembly in their house.
J.R.H. As to this thought of taking on glory, how far does the assembly enter into that?
J.T. If you look at the connection in @2 Corinthians 8: 6, I think you will see that enters into it. "So that we begged Titus that, according as he had before begun, so he would also complete as to you this grace also"; that is, You are to complete the doing of it in chapter 35. "But even as ye abound in every way, in faith, and word, and knowledge, and all diligence, and in love from you to us, that ye may abound in this grace also. I do not speak as commanding it, but through the zeal of others, and proving the genuineness of your love. For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that for your sakes he, being rich, became poor, in order that *ye* by *his* poverty might be enriched. And I give my opinion in this, for this is profitable for you who began before, not only to do, but also to be willing, a year ago. But now also complete the doing of it; so that as there
{121}
was the readiness to be willing, so also to complete out of what ye have. For if the readiness be there, a man is accepted according to what he may have, not according to what he has not. For it is not in order that there may be ease for others, and for you distress, but on the principle of equality; in the present time your abundance for their lack, that their abundance may be for your lack, so that there should be equality. According as it is written, He who gathered much had no excess, and he who gathered little was nothing short. But thanks be to God, who gives the same diligent zeal for you in the heart of Titus. For he received indeed the entreaty, but, being full of zeal, he went of his own accord to you; but we have sent with him the brother whose praise is in the glad tidings through all the assemblies; and not only so, but is also chosen by the assemblies as our fellow-traveller with this grace, ministered by us to the glory of the Lord himself, and a witness of our readiness; avoiding this, that any one should blame us in this abundance which is administered by us; for we provide for things honest, not only before the Lord, but also before men. And we have sent with them our brother whom we have often proved to be of diligent zeal in many things, and now more diligently zealous through the great confidence he has as to you. Whether as regards Titus, he is my companion and fellow-labourer in your behalf; or our brethren, they are deputed messengers of assemblies, Christ's glory. Shew therefore to them, before the assemblies, the proof of your love, and of our boasting about you", @2 Corinthians 8: 7 - 24. In the next chapter he also touches and enlarges on these same thoughts, so as to bring out their obedience in this matter. So that manifestly what we are speaking of now in Exodus is a type of what we have got in 2 Corinthians, how the glory of Christ is seen in the messengers of assemblies, entirely subject in carrying out the divine thought of
{122}
giving, giving freely, giving voluntarily, according as each one is able to do.
A.R. Giving in relation to another assembly is really a question of what you have in a material way.
J.T. That is what is dealt with; but it is a question of your love, so it is really the same thing. Whatever the giving may be, whatever the sacrifice, it is all the tabernacle material.
Ques. Is there any analogy between the end of @Luke 24 and the end of @Exodus 39? The Lord Jesus speaks to the disciples and tells them to remain in the city until they be endued with power from on high; and then He was taken up into heaven, and as going up He blesses them. It says here, "Moses blessed them". I was wondering whether it precedes in that way the gift of the Holy Spirit.
J.T. I think that is good. The Lord blesses them as going up, but then there is something following the anointing. The anointing comes down which is an additional thing, and that is what we get in chapter 40.
C.A.M. We have a sort of tendency to make this matter of giving apply to some specific material gift, but what the Lord is pressing is what is behind the gift. It may be very small, but the thing for us to be exercised about is what is behind the giving.
J.T. "God loves a cheerful giver", @2 Corinthians 9: 7. It is not a cheerful *gift* but *giver*. It is the person behind all this.
A.B.P. As a practical application, if I get an increase in salary I should be concerned about why the Lord gave it to me. There may be need somewhere that the Lord intends it to fill.
J.T. That is a practical way to put it; not that we are here to get out of the brethren material things. After all, they are very little, but what is behind them? "The proof of your love", he says. "God loves a cheerful giver". If I have an increase of
{123}
income then I afford an incentive to God to love me. The Lord looks upon me in that way, "The Father loves me, because I lay down my life", @John 10: 17. If I give Him an incentive He gives me to understand that He loves me on account of that. That is really the way saints progress, I believe. It would be wholesome for us to think if there is an increased income, what does the Lord intend me to do with it? What are we doing with it? Why has He given it to us?
A.J.D. The Lord puts a very wonderful appraisal on the widow's two mites -- she gives more than they all, "For all these out of their abundance have cast into the gifts of God; but she out of her need has cast in all the living which she had", @Luke 21: 4.
J.T. On that line there are two things to be said. The Acts contemplates men who are well off that give. Those well off in Antioch give to meet the famine conditions, but in 2 Corinthians the apostle speaks of people who are very poor, but he says, "free-hearted liberality", @2 Corinthians 8: 2. That is what God likes. It is the persons. A man is accepted according to what he has; because it is material for the tabernacle. You say, that man in that town, he is standing alone. Is he tabernacle material? That man at Decapolis, if he is tabernacle material he will link on with what God is doing everywhere.
Rem. What the Lord gives us spiritually should be for those that need it spiritually, and not money, not our material wealth. We should be exercised that we should have spiritual wealth to minister to the poor of the flock, not poor in money, but poor in spirit.
J.T. Do not say, 'not money', because God says a good deal about the money. How it shows what the man who gives it is. Do not forget that money is a great thing with God; not that He looks for the money in itself, but because of the givers of it, and why they give it.
{124}
Rem. @Hebrews 13 speaks of spiritual sacrifice, "The fruit of our lips" and "To communicate forget not" (verses 15, 16).
J.T. Quite so; they are called "such sacrifices"; they are not spiritual exactly, but the man is spiritual, and with such sacrifices the Lord is well pleased.
J.H. Some of us have been hearing lately that the glory is radiant love. Does the thought express that the love of Christ is to radiate through His assemblies, through these messengers?
J.T. I think that is the meaning of it, "Christ's glory", that is the meaning of it; it enters into giving, "He was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor", @2 Corinthians 8: 9. So that Christ's glory is in that question of giving. The chapters end with this, "thanks be to God for his unspeakable free gift", @2 Corinthians 9: 15.
F.L-s. I was wondering if we do not see it in the end of @Acts 2, the Spirit of what you are referring to, in a beautiful way behind the material giving; there was a spiritual wealth in the souls of these men. There we see the first love of the assembly brought out.
J.T. Quite so; you see the tabernacle set up there and it says the Lord added to that "such as should be saved"; as much as to say, 'I can add to that'. It is tabernacle conditions and what is suitable to it; so the Lord added "such as should be saved".
A.R. @Numbers 7 shows the tabernacle is set up, and twelve men giving. God gives them a day each.
J.T. Quite so. There you see the giving develops into speaking, oracular communications from God, another great side to our position. We shall have ministry from God if we are liberal in giving. God will not go on with us if we are not moved by what is already given us. The giving in @Numbers 7 leads to oracular communications in the sanctuary, in the holiest, an immense thought! Perhaps we never thought of that; that depends on our giving and
{125}
liberality, spiritually or otherwise. But here the giving leads up to a residence for God, for His glory; as much as to say, 'I am so pleased with all this, I am coming in to fill the whole scene with My glory'.
A.J.D. It is important that all our localities should be put on a right basis from the point of view of liberal giving.
J.T. I believe the local gatherings are small in this country because of the want of liberality. As soon as we begin to give, to sacrifice, you will see God increasing. In @Acts 2 the Lord added; He will add to the conditions. We should have these conditions.
J.H-t. Is that not a promise? In @Deuteronomy 14, the saints of God tithing themselves, it says, "that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in all the work of thy hand which thou doest" (verse 29).
E.F. Do you think those who are responsible in care meetings, those who take up matters, making arrangements, should provide circumstances in which this giving can take place. I was thinking you have the opportunity for spiritual giving in what we call the ministry meeting, and the counterpart of that is the special collections for the Lord's work. If we do not have them, there is not the opportunity for giving in that way.
J.T. I believe that is good. There is a good link there, the opportunity for spiritual ministry in what we call the ministry meeting. So that brethren who have something can contribute; and then the counterpart of that is a special collection for the Lord's work. If these two things go together, we shall have communications from God, and we shall have conditions.
S.P. It would contribute to better circulation.
J.T. Quite so.
C.A.M. I am sure that what you say as to this matter of getting rich by giving is encouraging. It
{126}
seems that would be a great leverage. Paul speaks of God's "unspeakable free gift", @2 Corinthians 9: 15.
J.T. Where the spirit of liberality is, we shall find throughout this country and the United States, as the opportunity is given for it, that we shall have increase. I believe that is the line exactly on which we shall have increase. "There were added", it says in @Acts 2: 41; it does not say who added them; but the conditions were better lower down; they continued steadfastly in the apostles doctrine, in the breaking of bread and prayers, and in giving; and then it says, "the Lord added". The Lord says, 'I am ready to own that; I can add to that; it is suitable'. I believe that is the basis of real gathering and of real increase amongst us.
J.S. Does it show formation in the divine nature, that we become like God as a giving God?
J.T. Quite so; the tabernacle is to reflect what God is.
A.R. The wilderness is no place for us to stay in. The tabernacle was to suggest the idea of movement. We are not here to stay; we are just on a temporary basis. I think the idea of giving would save us from having big houses and settling down here in the wilderness.
J.T. Quite so; big houses and big cars.
W.J.C. Would you say that God Himself has been enriched by giving?
J.T. I think morally He has become greater in our eyes.
W.J.C. What He has secured for Himself He would have got in no other way.
J.T. Quite so. The Lord talks with the woman of Samaria, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is", @John 4: 10. "Thanks be to God for his unspeakable free gift", @2 Corinthians 9: 15. Moses came in here; we see what this means; they passed Moses and he blessed them. As in the end of Luke, the
{127}
Lord blessed them, and went up, and the answer to that was the Spirit coming down. They were to remain at Jerusalem until He came down. After all the excellent workmanship seen in the disciples they must wait for the Spirit's coming down, because the tabernacle is to represent what is in heaven. It is a type of the assembly of our own times. It is not millennial. It is what comes down; it is the Spirit coming down, like verses 9 to 16 here: "And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is in it, and shalt hallow it, and all its utensils; and it shall be holy. And thou shalt anoint the altar of burnt-offering, and all its utensils; and thou shalt hallow the altar, and the altar shall be most holy. And thou shalt anoint the laver and its stand, and hallow it. And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons near, at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and bathe them with water. And thou shalt clothe Aaron with the holy garments, and anoint him, and hallow him, that he may serve me as priest. And thou shalt bring his sons near, and clothe them with vests. And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may serve me as priests. And their anointing shall be to them an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations. And Moses did so: as Jehovah had commanded him, so did he". Now we have heaven come down in its dignity and power. So the whole scene is moving as reflecting what is above. The garments of the priests here ought to be mentioned, they are glorious. Allusion has just been made to @Luke 24, "Do ye remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high" (verse 49); that is the garment, the glorious power of the Spirit come down and covering us; and so the priesthood here, the garment, as mentioned, is stressed here; our clothing is to be dignified and glorious.
J.S. I thought there could be no true representation of what was in the heaven apart from the
{128}
anointing of the Spirit; He who is from heaven. He is holy.
C.A.M. I suppose this matter of clothing is one way of God's emphasising the personal distinction of each one, the matter of persons. I can see that giving is according to the persons, but this clothing makes them distinctive, does it not?
J.T. Yes; and then here you will notice the repetition of the thing, "that they may serve me as priests" (verse 15). That must not be overlooked in all this wonderful array of wealth in the saints for a dwelling for God. We must remember that He is to be ministered unto.
W.J.C. There is a distinction evidently in these verses as to what is to be anointed; the first is certain things, the tabernacle, and then you get persons.
J.T. The first is "Thou shalt take the anointing oil and anoint the tabernacle and all that is in it, and shalt hallow it and all its utensils; and it shall be holy". That is a great general thought; and the tabernacle is anointed in all its parts. That is the first thing, inclusive of what is inside, and, of course, would include persons as well as what is specified now; only what is specified now alludes more to what is public. "And thou shalt anoint the altar of burnt-offering, and all its utensils; ... thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons near, at the entrance of the tent of meeting". It is the public side of the position that is specified here. The other is generalised. We get later all the utensils mentioned one by one as anointed and set up; but here it is the great general thought first, and then what is more public; that is to say, what we are as coming together publicly in assembly in any given place.
C.H.H. What is the distinction between receiving the Holy Spirit and anointing? Would you say all who have received the Spirit are anointed?
{129}
J.T. Only in the sense of potentiality. The apostle brings three things together as if applicable to the Corinthians after they had judged themselves. He says, "He that ... has anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts", @2 Corinthians 1: 21, 22. There are three features of the Spirit, and the first thing is the anointing; it is as if that is the point at Corinth, what is public. Anointing is more in what is public, what men see. So in the assemblies, it is the anointing first. Everything is to be done in the power of that when we come together. But the Spirit is also viewed as the seal of God's ownership of us; that is, the assembly of God in the place. Then finally it is enriched by the earnest of the inheritance; so that as we are together, I think the order is the Spirit saying, "Lord Jesus" (@1 Corinthians 12: 3), and all being done in the dignity and power of the anointing. So in @1 Corinthians 12: 12, "So also is the Christ", that is the public thing here anointed; and as we proceed in our service, I think the Spirit comes in as the Spirit of adoption; it is more an inner thing; and that is the reason why I think the outward things are specified here as anointed; because God is concerned that the public situation should be according to Him, according to the anointing; otherwise we cannot enter inside.
A.J.D. Does the anointing refer to what others can take account of in a dignified and orderly way?
J.T. That is right; it is what is public.
H.H. It justifies the notices.
J.T. Quite so; the giving out of notices -- all that comes into the public side. The anointing is stressed as attaching to that. If the public side is right, it will take care of the private side. The private side is the normal issuance from that. We get a spirit of adoption.
A.R. Perhaps we are concerned sometimes as to how we end our morning meetings, but should we not
{130}
be concerned as to how we commence them? If we begin right, we shall finish right.
J.T. I think so; the Spirit of adoption will find its place if the public side is right, if the anointing is there. Elsewhere, we are told the altar was anointed seven times because it is a question of giving, of sacrifice; it is a spiritual thing, not merely to make a show of myself.
W.J.C. The giving out of a hymn should be in the power of the anointing.
J.T. Quite so.
C.C.S. Why is the altar described as most holy?
J.T. I think because of being public; we are so apt to discredit and think lightly of the public side of things.
W.J.C. The anointing is available for us in all that we do.
J.T. Quite so. The anointing oil is there; so the Lord goes up and the Spirit comes down according to that.
Ques. In @1 Corinthians 12: 3, you referred to the saints saying, "Lord Jesus". Is that the thought you are stressing, that it brings in the power of the anointing?
J.T. I think that is where the power of the anointing is applicable. No one can say. Lord Jesus, except by the Spirit. An unconverted man can easily say Lord Jesus; but the apostle is speaking about assembly service and how it cannot really be said aside from the power of the Spirit.
E.P. Do you think in that way we are preserved from human innovations? Moses had great dignity in this chapter, did he not?
J.T. I think so; the anointing is the test of everything.
R.A.L. Is giving out a hymn at the beginning of the meeting in connection with the anointing or in the power of the Spirit?
{131}
J.T. The anointing is the Spirit.
R.A.L. Is there not a difference between the way announcements are given out and the way in which I stand up to praise God?
J.T. The anointing here as a type alludes to the thing being done in the power of the Spirit, that you do not do it as a natural man; that is what is meant. But the additional thought as to the Spirit is the spirit of adoption which belongs more to the inner side of our position.
C.A.M. I was thinking in that connection, the great desire amongst the saints to know this inner thing, this wonderful matter about the Spirit of sonship. The very fact that the Lord is calling attention to these outward things to rid us of human ideas, should in itself be an encouragement that our spirits should not faint in any way about it, do you not think?
J.T. Quite so. I think the Lord is greatly helping as to what is according to His own mind spiritually. The tide of apostasy is more rampant than most of us are aware of. The Lord is meeting it by reality; however small or despised the people may be, the Lord has something answering to the mind of heaven, it is the tabernacle conditions. It is an immense victory that it is so. We shall be helped if we see the order of the thing and each placing himself under Moses and taking on the idea of the tabernacle. There shall be one tabernacle, whether I am isolated or in a small meeting, the one tabernacle applies. I must be in the light of that to keep the unity of the Spirit, to know about what is current everywhere, to have assembly ears, to hear and be in accord with all that is according to the tabernacle. So that the testimony is maintained universally. So now what you get after the anointing is in verses 17 to 20: "And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first of the month, that the tabernacle was set
{132}
up. And Moses set up the tabernacle, and put in its bases, and fixed its boards, and put in its bars, and set up its pillars. And he spread the tent over the tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above over it; as Jehovah had commanded Moses. And he took and put the testimony into the ark". Think of the magnitude of that expression. The ark of the testimony is there and he put the testimony into the ark: what God has in His mind. Everything now is set up and is functioning, everything in the ark as the ark has its place and the testimony is in the ark; and then he put the staves in the ark, meaning that it is to be a movable state of things. We are to be moving on. "And put the mercy-seat above on the ark. And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and hung up the veil of separation, and covered the ark of the testimony; as Jehovah had commanded Moses. And he put the table in the tent of meeting, on the side of the tabernacle northward, outside the veil". It is functioning; and he "arranged the bread in order upon it before Jehovah; as Jehovah had commanded Moses, ... And he lighted the lamps before Jehovah"; they are functioning, too, and there is fragrant incense burning as the altar is mentioned and then "He hung up the curtain of the entrance to the tabernacle. And he put the altar of burnt-offering at the entrance to the tabernacle of the tent of meeting, and offered on it the burnt-offering and the oblation; as Jehovah had commanded Moses". No time is lost; the service is already on: "And he set the laver between the tent of meeting and the altar, and put water in it for washing. And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet out of it, when they went into the tent of meeting". It is also functioning, and "He set up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar, and hung up the curtain of the gate of the court. And so Moses finished the work". Now there
{133}
it is; the whole thing is there, and every item is doing its part, there is no unreadiness; each one is in his place and functioning, and then we have the cloud covering the tent; as if God said, 'Now I am taking all that on'. God set dignity upon all that; God protects it; and the glory filled the tabernacle.
A.J.D. It is remarkable how many times, "as Jehovah had commanded Moses" is repeated in this paragraph you have just read.
J.T. It is very noticeable. What can it be but God stressing the idea of obedience upon us? There are to be no innovations at all.
C.H.H. There are seven different groups of things ending by "as Jehovah had commanded Moses". I was wondering if those things could be put together as separate items, but hanging together.
J.T. There is a good deal in that. In verses 16, 19, 21, 23, 25, 27 and 32; as it has been remarked, the repetition of that phrase is very striking.
A.H.P. Have you any thought why in @2 Chronicles 5, Moses, David, and Solomon are all brought together in relation to this great service, the glory of God filling it? I was wondering whether that would be a counterpart to the full thought.
J.T. To bring that together is very interesting.
A.H.P. Solomon assembling the elders of Israel.
J.T. Quite so.
H.H. Is not that the record of things after the breakdown in Chronicles, the record of things after everything has gone to Babylon publicly; so that the appreciation of these things is cherished in the hearts of the saints while the breakdown continues publicly?
J.T. It is said very early in 1 Chronicles that Judah was carried away captive because of their unfaithfulness, and then we have all the wonderful display of glory in the ministry by David and
{134}
Solomon, as if Judah missed all that in spite of the wonderful privilege in their midst.
C.H.H. In connection with the ministry of Moses, would it not teach us to put things together in order? should we not attain intelligence as to putting things together in order in the service?
J.T. The thing comes home to you that each one is an item. It is the parts being put in by the mediator, all passed upon and commanded, and being put in their place by the mediator, each put in its place. The instruction is, Am I in my place? Is the Lord having His way with me? Am I functioning? That is the way the thing should come. If I am not, I am marring the situation. The matter here is so pleasing to Jehovah. It says Moses finished the work and the cloud covered the tent of meeting. God says, 'I will take on all that; it is all pleasing to Me'. The cloud means I have the protection that God extends to that position. Our position is invulnerable, for the cloud covers us. The next thing is the glory of God filled the tabernacle. He is perfectly restful to abide and take up His resting place within.
J.S. "And they shall make me a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them", and He is seen to move now as to it.
J.T. I think that is it. Then what follows is to bring out the movableness of this; it contemplates movement, "When the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle the children of Israel journeyed in all their journeys. And if the cloud were not taken up, then they did not journey until the day that it was taken up. For the cloud of Jehovah was on the tabernacle by day, and fire was in it by night, before the eyes of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys" (chapter 40. 36 - 38). So that we are under protection of the divine residence there, and then moving entirely in accord with the mind of heaven. There is no room at all for man's will.
{135}
J.S. Heaven is seen now controlling the movements; they can only move as the cloud was taken up.
A.H. I was wondering whether you implied that the fire stands over against the exercise of man's will; whereas the cloud stands for the divine presence in a favourable way.
J.T. I think it is protection, a symbol of the divine presence, protected by day and by night. At the same time the thought of the residence, the glory filling the tabernacle.
A.J.D. Are these features to be understood by us locally and worked out by us locally?
J.T. Yes; the administrative side must be local, but we never forget that there it is one tabernacle. It is one; Peter mentioned three. It is to maintain the unity. What is done in one locality should be done everywhere; but it must be right; it must be a tabernacle matter.
C.H.H. What is involved in the moving of the cloud for us?
J.T. God is moving; God has a free hand. It is a symbol of God's presence. We have the cloud before the tabernacle. We have it in Egypt even, and how it moved behind the Israelites to protect them from the Egyptians; but now it is moving in relation to the structure. God would indicate His mind, in ministry it may be. The great principle here is subjection, anointing, each in his place, and then the glory and movement in relation to that.
C.H.H. Would movement be in connection with any fresh ministry that God may give us?
J.T. I think so. We have it in the Acts; Acts is the best tabernacle book in this sense. We see how the positions were altered.
C.H.H. So that in that connection it is essential that we move together.
{136}
J.T. Quite so, "Keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace", @Ephesians 4: 3.
A.R. In @Numbers 10, where you get the first idea of movement, you get all the tribes moving and then the tribe of Dan moving last. There is no such thing as one tribe moving and not another, is there?
J.T. All moving, quite so. Each is his own place.
A.B.P. Do you have a concrete example of what we have been speaking of in Antioch? Barnabas has the sense of measure, he fits in with Saul, makes room for him, and then the cloud rests over the whole situation. The disciples were first called christians at Antioch. Then the service follows; there were prophets, those ministering to the Lord, and then the Spirit speaks.
J.T. Quite so. The Spirit is then free, and the Spirit spoke then, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul", @Acts 13: 2. You can understand how the whole position focuses on this new movement. That was the thing.
Rem. @Psalm 122 would give us a delightful setting of the position, "Jerusalem, which art built as a city that is compact together, whither the tribes go up, the tribes of Jah, a testimony to Israel, to give thanks unto the name of Jehovah!" (verses 3, 4). Is that the setting now as maintained in the power of the Spirit of God?
J.T. Quite so. A song of degrees; it is an upward movement.
S.P. Is there any connection with this and @2 Chronicles 6: 3, "And the king turned his face and blessed the whole congregation of Israel"?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord's countenance being upon us, I suppose.
{137}
DIVINE COUNSEL
@Revelation 3: 18; @Psalm 16: 7; @Nehemiah 5: 6, 7; @Proverbs 11: 14
What is in view in this service is counsel, as the Scriptures read would indicate, not counsel in the sense of the eternal counsel of God that is spoken of, the counsel of His will, but counsel in detail as specifically rendered. Without it, as the passage in Proverbs shows, the people fall; and so it is divinely provided first of all in Christ. He leads in everything for us, in every feature of administrative service. He learned as a Man here in lowly grace how to obtain counsel, according to what I read in @Psalm 16 and in keeping with what is said in the prophet Isaiah: "The Lord Jehovah hath given me the tongue of the instructed, that I should know how to succour by a word him that is weary. He wakeneth morning by morning, He wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed". These scriptures, dear brethren, are in no sense derogatory to the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ. On the contrary, they afford a feature of His glory that He could take up such a lowly attitude, an attitude suitable to the state into which He had come, becoming incarnate. It is part of His glory that He could speak in such a lowly way, saying even in this psalm, "Jehovah, Thou art the Lord: my goodness extendeth not to thee". The worshipper of God marvels, and yet accepts with intelligence the suitability of these utterances of Christ by the Spirit; that is, uttered before He became incarnate. The Spirit of Christ uttered them anticipatively in the power of compression that belonged alone to Him as being infinitely great as the scripture attests. God Himself become Man here. He could reduce Himself, so to speak, within such a compass. So this would
{138}
teach us humility and dependence, so that He understands as Man on high now, God over all, too, as He is said to be, and as blessed for ever; but as on high He has gone through these experiences on earth and actually received counsel. He would bless Jehovah who gave Him counsel. His reins also, He tells us in the scripture, instruct Him in the night seasons.
What food, dear brethren, is furnished for our souls, as in the Spirit of Christ we are lowly, as He speaks of Himself, offering Himself as a bondman for us: "Take my yoke upon you and learn from me; for I am meek and lowly in heart". What food is furnished for us in His words, receiving counsel from God as a Man here and saying, "My reins also instruct me in the night seasons". What seasons they were of wakefulness! We are told that as in Jerusalem for the last time, entering in with tears, for as it came to His view He wept over it, not for Himself for the sorrow He was about to endure: indeed He told the daughters of Jerusalem to weep not for Him, but He wept over Jerusalem. We are told that He, as having come in for the last time, for He was making His exit from Jerusalem through death, that He taught daily in the temple and in the nights He went to the mount of Olives. What nights He spent there, dear brethren! They are only, as it were, for our contemplation; they are not recorded save indeed as we get hints in the Psalms. "In the nights my reins instruct me", means the inward movements, the holy movements of Christ. As the different offerings were offered up, they are all typical of this, inwardly perfect, inwardly delightful to God; all went up as a sweet savour, those inward organs moving instructed Him. The suggestion for us is in our night seasons. No time in the life of faith is ever supposed to be wasted. The rest of our time is always precious. We are provided with opportunities. We are to learn that the nights are to be spent in this way. I speak
{139}
of it now as turning to the psalm; I speak of it now in regard of the Lord's own experience, as on high tonight, that He understands our circumstances; He understands perfectly. He has reached the place He is in through sufferings. He was tempted in all points such as we are, sin apart, so that He is able to succour those that are tempted. He knows the counsel we need and He will give it to us.
The liberality of His counsel is seen in the first scripture I read, the wide bearing it has. The letter is addressed to Laodicea, the last of the seven assemblies written to by our Lord. He immediately says to her, "Thou art neither cold nor hot". He knew exactly the state of things. It refers to christendom, not in its Babylonish, gross Babylonish character, but in that phase of it that would still own the lordship of Christ. It may be what would be called formalists, persons who hold to the Bible; for all of whom we give thanks, for all who love our Lord Jesus. He is speaking to such. He is not speaking to Philadelphia, which represents the living feature of the public body. That is a feature we can appreciate. Thank God there is such a feature, not only that there has been or will be, but there is. There is nothing I am more certain of than that, that a Philadelphia exists today. But Laodicea exists; a parallel is still seen, not scepticism, not moralism, not Rome, but that feature that would recognise the Bible and the authority of Christ formally, really, too, with some of them. He says, "I am about to spue thee out of my mouth" not because she was utterly cold or utterly hot, but lukewarm. It may be there is some lukewarm Christian here in this audience: this is a solemn word for you. The Lord does not like lukewarmness; He does not like modernism, higher criticism, as it is called; nor does He like Babylon the great with all her ramifications. He does not like lukewarm christians with the Bible
{140}
under their arm, and all that goes with the public profession of Christ. There is lukewarmness of heart. He does not like that; it is very tasteless to the Lord, and if there were nothing more than that on the earth for Him He would soon spue it out. But there is more; thank God there is more than that. There are christians whose hearts burn within them when they hear of Jesus, when they hear expositions of Scripture. That is not distasteful to the Lord. He is pleased to dwell with them. The Lord is more in this meeting that anyone here, or all of us together. He is pleased with us; I humbly say it is so. Through grace it is so, that we have sufficient interest in Him and His things, to turn aside to listen to something about Christ. But He is speaking now to the general profession in that particular assembly of Laodicea, and He gives counsel.
It may be that there is an unconverted person here tonight. The Lord is ready to give you counsel. You may have many a time spurned it from the brethren, turned away your shoulder from your parents when they would give you counsel; but now you are here tonight and the Lord would say, 'I would give you counsel; you are in great need: come, to Me'. There is no other hope; there is no other resource. The Lord says, "I counsel thee to buy of me gold purified by fire". You have not got anything now. The whole profession as viewed in its Laodicean phase is without gold, that is, what is of God. There is plenty of what is of man. 'See this fine building', says one; 'See this wonderful architecture', says another; 'See the number of communicants', says another; 'See the missionaries abroad', says another. That is all what man is doing and can do, not what God can do. It is what man is and what he can do. Oh, beloved, it is what God is and what is of God that is needed! What is said of christians is, "Of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus, who
{141}
has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption". Now that is objective, as we say. It is an objective presentation of fact, this great fact; but think of it, of God are we in Christ Jesus! We are christians. Whoever is holding that is a real christian from that point of view, "Of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus". We are not of man; as many as accept Christ, we are told, to him God gives title to take the place of His children, those that believe on His name, "Who have been born, not of blood nor of flesh's will nor of man's will, but of God". Man is entirely shut out in that sense. We are of God. Let us begin with that; it is an objective thought. However young the christian is, he is a babe in Christ. A babe in Christ gives him status before God, and before the brethren, too; he is of God and Christ is made unto him wisdom and righteousness and holiness and redemption. All is reckoned on Christ; it has to be understood and appropriated, and that is what the Lord is saying here; He is counselling you. He is God's wisdom, but now He is counselling you. You need what is of God in a characteristic way. I see you walk down the street, if I follow your history week in week out, and (although you are a christian, as we speak), your whole outlook and walk and ways are like man's ways. The Lord says that you need something that you have not got, and He counsels you to get it; and if you say, 'I have not got sufficient means to get it', the Lord says, 'I am ready to sell it to you'. There is a state of soul like that, and the Lord says in His grace, 'I am ready to sell what you need; come to Me and buy, and I counsel you to do it'. It is His last word to Laodicea. It is that phase of christendom I am speaking of.
Presently He is going to consider all as Babylon in regard of judgment; the whole system will go under one head, and the Lord is saying to some
{142}
christian here tonight, 'Do not you be judged with the world; your walk and ways are very like it now, and you are in grave and dire need of certain things, and I counsel you to come and buy of Me'. He has gold purified in the fire. That would be that what is needed for the christian is already tried. There is not a thing that any of us need that has not been well tried, well tested. It is not a question of trying now in Christianity; that has been well tried in the fire. It is all a question of what is of God, and the Lord says, 'I have got that very commodity that you need', tried in the fire, in His own precious death. How it was tested out and all made perfectly sure as He came out victoriously from the dead, for He was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father! Then there are other things that I cannot dwell upon for want of time, raiment and eye-salve. We need these three things: "Gold purified by fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white garments, that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness may not be made manifest; and eye-salve to anoint thine eyes, that thou mayest see". Now these are the proposals of Christ and they are most affecting to those of us who understand chapters 2 and 3 of this book. The last phase is addressed to you, and the Lord is saying to you, to all of us that need these things, I will sell these things to you. The point is they are available. We who understand the gospel know they have been given to us, that God furnishes in Christ everything to us; but He is now addressing a certain state; it may be here, I do not know; but the Lord says, Have these three things, anyway; you are in dire need of them, otherwise spuing will take place. He says that He is about to do it.
Well now, in the passage in the psalm, as I said, the believer has a pattern in Christ, for He is our Leader, our Pattern and our Model, as I was saying already. What a blessed thing it is, dear brethren,
{143}
to stand alongside of the Lord Jesus as He has been pleased to come down so low, to come down to where we are, infinitely perfect in Himself, tempted in everything as we are, having to do with a contrary scene as no one else had to do with it! How He speaks of Jehovah who gave Him counsel! How He received it! It would only be in a priestly way that one would touch the blessed Saviour of all in such a lowly compass as we see in the psalm, but the priest may do it. The oblation, the meat-offering, is particularly for the priest: it is in a sense the food of the priest. The psalm is full of it, as we stand beside our Saviour and Lord as He was here below, looking up and saying, "I will bless Jehovah who giveth me counsel; even in the nights my reins instruct me". It is an isolated view of Christ; He is not in company with any here. His heart is towards "the saints that are on the earth, and to the excellent thou hast said, In them is all my delight".
No one who stands alongside Jesus will fail to value the brethren, to clothe them with the very best clothes available in heaven, as the father said to the bondmen, "Bring out the best robe and clothe him in it". That would be the attitude of the Lord. The saints were the excellent of the earth to Him. Think of Him finding His joy amongst them! He came in and went out amongst them. He said, "The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places". Where were those pleasant places? Not in Solomon's porch, for it was winter! Not in Simon's house! No, not in any such places as these where He was met with severe opposition, but in Bethany, where love was! He went out to Bethany, we are told, at one time, and spent the night there. He came to Bethany six days before the passover, where Lazarus was, where Martha was, where Mary was. He is a Model for us here as to receiving counsel. Let no one assume that he does not need this; let no one be sufficiently legal
{144}
to deprive himself of such food as this, of such an object for contemplation, so that we might learn with humility of mind and with the saints in view, with the inheritance of God in view, that He has furnished us even now. Let us be simple enough to turn to God for counsel, to turn to the Lord who knows exactly what we need, and He gives it and in the night seasons, in the wakeful hours my reins instruct me, the blessed Spirit operating in these automatic organs with which God has furnished us, as the Lord said to the woman of Sychar, "A fountain of water, springing up into eternal life". We shall find instruction inwardly.
Well now, over against this, yet in keeping with it, I want to show from Nehemiah how difficulties amongst the brethren are met, and there are many. They are constant, one after another like waves on a troubled sea, nor may we expect to have it anything different if we are to be here in loyalty to Christ. How are we to meet them? Well, you say, There is the care meeting. We are not at that at the moment, that is Proverbs; but I am coming first to each of us who has these cares on our hearts, for a care meeting is nothing if those who attend it are not burdened. Now Nehemiah is one of the best examples of a brother occupied in the government of the house of God in type. He is a man as we have no doubt often noticed, who speaks a good deal about himself; we have to leave that. So it is with Paul, the Spirit of God makes Paul speak of himself, and Nehemiah speaks of himself, too, I do not compare him with Paul exactly, but anyway, he says here in the presence of a very great difficulty, "I consulted with myself", you will all remember the verse I read in @Nehemiah 5. He says, "I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words". God did not question his anger, it was right; we ought to be, the Lord Himself was, we ought to be angry and
{145}
sin not. Nehemiah was angry, and why was he angry? It was because one set of brethren was oppressing the other set of brethren. He loved the brethren; he had no predilections at all; he was for God in these matters. He stood alone according to this chapter, first of all. One set of brethren was oppressing another set of brethren; it often happens. It is not physical pressure, but in one sense this often happens.
Meetings are often divided into sets, and we have to watch that, that we do not cease to be brethren. One is our Master in heaven and we are all brethren. Let the brother of high degree, the wealthy brother, glory in his humiliation; let the poor brother glory in his elevation. The humiliation is spiritual; the elevation is spiritual. The humiliation brings me on to the spiritual platform of mutual feeling among the brethren; the elevation brings me out of my littleness, for my very poverty may be considered a virtue in my mind. Poverty is never a virtue, it has become a virtue in the world: now the poor are becoming the masters of the world and appear more cruel than those of high degree; they are ruthless in their cruelty. What is developing is apostasy in that sense. Mere poverty or low social degree is no virtue. Not indeed that God has exalted the rich, as the apostle says, "Consider your calling, brethren", but he goes on to show that God is no respecter of persons; whether it be a royal personage, or a military personage, or a jailor, or a poor person who is nothing in this world, the gospel is for all, God is no respecter of persons.
So that the position here in Nehemiah is that he is angered on one occasion by the rich oppressing the poor, such oppression as was robbing the poor of their liberty. What a serious condition, one set of brethren oppressing another to the deprivation of their liberty, and, of course, robbing themselves of these very
{146}
brethren, making them slaves! If our brethren are rendered slaves they have little or no power in the assembly; we are really destroying the assembly in that sense, and we are robbing God; we are depriving our brethren of their liberty. We have to stand fast, every one of us, in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. Anyone who deprives his brother of liberty is damaging the brother and robbing God. We have to contend with these things, and what I want to point out is that Nehemiah had no party friends. He had no party friends to turn to. The chief difficulty in meeting these exigencies that arise is in partisan appeal: persons who have some link in common take counsel with each other, secret counsel it may be, and party counsels, beloved brethren, in the very essence of them will crucify Christ. They never work God's righteousness. The politics of the world are divided into partisanships, but what poverty that leads to! What moral poverty there is! There is nothing spiritual in it whatever. There is no such thing in the millennium as the king's opposition; it is destructive of government according to God. The very idea of it is destructive of government according to God. But then, we have party government now, and God overrules it, but it is not God's idea, nor should it be amongst the brethren; that is what I am speaking about.
Well, you say, if we do not come together, some of us, we shall be overwhelmed. Will we be? shall we be overwhelmed? The Lord says, "I will bless Jehovah who giveth me counsel". Nehemiah says, "I consulted with myself". Now, you say, What good is that? Well, this really alludes to the reins of the man. It alludes to his inward spiritual power, the power of thought that he had, the power of weighing things. That is what is meant. If we have difficulties let us try this instead of taking counsel with some brother or brothers who think as we do.
{147}
It is destructive of the assembly; the very idea is destructive of the assembly. In fact, anything that takes you out of the ground of the assembly is destructive of it. So we may reach the desired end, but if we do it will not stand. Nehemiah says, "I consulted with myself", as much as to say, 'I have no partisans; I have no party in Jerusalem -- like many of the modern rulers'. God had one man to seek the welfare of the children of Israel. If you get a man like that you have something. Something will come about for God whatever numbers you have against him. God will work through him, and that is what happened here. So he says, as you will observe, "I consulted with myself; and I remonstrated with the nobles and the rulers, and said to them, Ye exact usury, every one of his brother! And I set a great assembly against them". That is what he did. What power he must have had -- moral power! Where did it come from? It came from God. He does not tell us that here. He shows the effect of that. He says, 'I will renounce all party feeling; I abominate it': "I consulted with myself". The point is, he took counsel with himself and the result of it. The Lord says to the apostles, "Go, therefore, and make disciples of all nations". Think of the order He gave twelve men; there were eleven there actually, for they were already decimated. The breach is healed in resurrection, as we learn in the Acts, but He said to these eleven men, "Go, therefore, and make disciples of all the nations". What did He mean by that? He meant that every one of these men had moral power derived from the counsel of God -- eleven men! What will they not do? The Lord says that they are to make disciples of all nations. It is a question of moral power springing from a man that takes counsel with himself, his inwards are right, as in @Romans 7; otherwise any inward counsel is confused, mixed up with all sorts of
{148}
motives and thoughts; that is, it is difficult to disentangle the right motives unless we go through @Romans 7: "I myself with the mind serve God's law". Anyone that does that is clear of all inward darkening influence and he can take counsel with himself. Thank God, we can take counsel with the Lord, too; we can pray. The effect here is seen; he says, "I set a great assembly against them". He did that. What power he had! Is it not an incentive to avoid all party counsel? Even if it must be met, let it be met on the ground of the assembly; it may be two of you, or two of us, or twenty of us, or fifty of us; the Lord will be with us, but the Lord will never support a party.
So I come to Proverbs: "Where no advice is, the people fall". You will understand that I am aiming at counsel, counsel as it is divinely furnished for the people of God. You will see in @Proverbs 11 which I read, "Where no advice is the people fall; but in the multitude of counsellors there is safety". It is not final. In regard of our meetings for care, it is representative; we cannot be sure, until we reach the assembly, of finality according to God in these matters. The solution of all matters that arise in the history of the assembly is in the assembly itself. The Lord has the greatest concern that we should never give up the thought of the assembly. He says, "My assembly". If two of you pray, much will happen. "If two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them"; that is, two of the assembly. See what happened in Nehemiah's day! The result was reached; finality was reached. The nobles submitted and the brethren were delivered from bondage, a great result!
So here, if there is no counsel the people fall. We do not want the people to fall. Many have, and why have they fallen? Party counsel! Every sorrowful
{149}
deviation that has happened has been the outcome of party movement, certain ones together against others, and against the truth, too. The people fall where there is no counsel, and the passage means counsel according to God: "But in the multitude of counsellors there is safety", as when we come together in our care meetings. The Lord loves those meetings. It is a pleasure to be in them; one has privileges in that way. It is a real pleasure to be in them, and the chief pleasure is that we are in the sense that the Lord has pleasure in them and He loves them. But it is a question of safety. Safety is a great matter. In the assembly it is one of the greatest matters. That is, there is no move or action taken that might endanger the liberty of the saints lest they should fall. Even a weak brother has to be considered: "Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ has died". The greatest delicacy and care have to be employed, and it is in the multitude of counsellors, that is, counsellors according to God, men of wisdom. Surely we are to be children of wisdom. Wisdom is justified of all her children, and I believe the meeting for care in any locality is just that, that wisdom is justified of all her children. Every bit of advice given, every proposal made, is wisely made, not made to serve any party interest or selfish motive, but for the good of all, so that the people should not fall.
Well, that was all I had to say, and I commend especially this matter: "In the multitude of counsellors there is safety", and that the brethren might know, might have wisdom, each in his measure, for we are told that the very least esteemed in the assembly is supposed to be able to judge in secular matters. So everyone in the assembly is to be a child of wisdom. May God grant that it may be so.
{150}
HINDRANCES
@2 Thessalonians 2: 5 - 8; @1 Thessalonians 2: 17, 18; @Genesis 24: 54 - 56; @Acts 8: 36 - 38
I have in mind to speak of hindrances -- hindrances by God, hindrances by Satan, hindrances by the brethren, and hindrances, as each of us may say, by oneself. Hindrances by God are negative, that is as might be expected; they are in view of dealing with what would interfere with His operations. Satan is bent on hindering God's work, and God operates to hinder him, to prevent satanic obstacles being effective against God's work. The word 'withholdeth' and the word 'let' in the verses read in 2 Thessalonians should be rendered 'restrains'. God could easily destroy anyone who interferes with His work at any time, but the word is not destruction, but restraint. God allows evil, whilst restraining it. This is often used by sceptical minds to malign God. Why allow these things? Why does God not interfere? Why does He not only restrain, but destroy? Scepticism plays a part on these lines, and we are to be on our guard for, though believers, we may be sceptical, and on account of this we should seek to know God better. If there is any tendency to scepticism, the antidote is to know God. He says, "Let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me". As we know Him we shall understand that what He permits, He permits wisely. He has permitted the very existence of sin in His universe. Scepticism says, Why? and maligns Him, questioning even the existence of God; but faith believes that God is, "He that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him". He rewards His people, and the greatest reward is the increased knowledge of Himself. As the knowledge of Himself increases, so scepticism is displaced, for
{151}
faith says, as the father of all believers said, "Shall not the judge of all the earth do right?" That question cannot be answered in the negative; it is uttered by a man who is the father of all believers, Abraham.
Hence, if we know evil is in the world -- and who that is reasonable can deny it? -- we do not charge God with the responsibility of it, nor assume lack of wisdom on His part in the allowance of it. We say, We know God has power to remove it and will do so, but it is in His ways and wisdom to allow it for the present. So as early as Abraham we have the utterance from the divine lips, "The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full". We might say, Why allow it to become full? What are armies and navies for? What are our gaols and magisterial courts for? What is the law for, save the prevention of evil, to prevent its continuance? And yet God, in speaking to the father of believers says, "The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full", giving that as His reason for the inheritance not yet coming into his possession -- a very remarkable fact. God has His own reasons according to principle, in allowing evil to develop in man, in Satan too, for it is clear from Scripture that Satan was once an unfallen being. He was in the garden of God; every precious stone was his covering; he was the anointed cherub that covers, but iniquity was found in him and he was rejected from his office, cast out though not destroyed; he could exist on. These are the facts made known to us. There are many others like them in the revelation of God in Scripture, which account for what exists.
So in our times iniquity is ripening, and allowed to ripen. God ordained governments, four great monarchies, and they were ordained not to annihilate evil, for to put away sin from the world is reserved for Christ. The monarchies were ordained for the restraint of evil, nothing more. There is such a thing as divine
{152}
restraint of evil, and evil worse than that of the Amorites. The apostle says to these young believers that he had told them about these matters. The Thessalonian christians are designated as the "assembly of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ". They were instructed as to this matter of antichrist. The way they are addressed indicates saints viewed in life, as loved by God, and correspondingly loved peculiarly by Paul. Such believers, as I said, are instructed as to these antichristian matters, and this extends to all, as what was given to them is given to us. "When I was yet with you, I told you these things". Paul says, Someone else came in and said the day of the Lord was present, which was a lie, but it was intended to distress the saints. They were distressed also as to departed ones, those fallen asleep, so the apostle gives a special message to such to allay their fears; and now this second letter dealing with the deception that came in, by some saying that the day of the Lord was present. Young believers are apt to take on novelties. The emissary of the devil suggested the day of the Lord was present, as tribulations were being experienced by the saints, and the apostle Paul says no one was to be listened to on that point, for that day would not come unless apostasy had first come. It has not yet come, but the mystery of lawlessness is already working. Leaven is increasing in virulence and taking form. The mystery of iniquity found its home in a religious setting, but now it is taking a political as well as a religious form, and when completed and both are fully combined we shall have antichrist in his time, but that is not yet. He has his allotted time, and that time implies that iniquity is come to a head, that it is fully ripe. We read of the winepress of wrath, meaning it is ripe. God waits for that, and we wonder why. Meantime saints are suffering, but it is not the day of the Lord. We do not want to listen
{153}
to the devil on that head, or we shall be deceived. It will not come, the apostle says, "Except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed". He tells the Thessalonians he had already spoken of this, but his time was coming, and meanwhile there is definite restraint. The apostle speaks of *that* which restrains, and *He* who restrains. I mention this, so that brethren may be helped and balanced as to current matters, that it is not yet the time of *the* antichrist. There is only one spoken of under that head; he is a subordinate, but one who is definitely against Christ, openly seeking to take on His character by imitation and satanic power and in all deceivableness of unrighteousness coming after the manner of Satan.
But there is what restrains and that is the basis of prayer at the present time. We should search for bases for our prayers. Scripture affords them. There are no circumstances in which we cannot find a basis in them for prayer. If prayer for the authorities, we have an example in Abraham, "He ... will pray for thee". That is for mercy for Abimelech, and he obtained it. So we are enjoined by Paul to pray for kings and those in authority, for they bear not the sword in vain. So that government is not to be prayed against, but prayed for, as today. Our prayers form part of the restraint that God speaks of. Antichristian elements in government as appearing, are against the truth, but persons in government positions represent the government, and in the abstract it is right and essential to our salvation. We cannot pray for the apostasy, but for the persons who may be exercising government. Who of the Caesars was a Christian? It is very doubtful if any, yet they are to be prayed for; we are to pray for all in authority. And again, we are told to be subject to all such, not in their exercise of apostate principles, but in their position in government. God is against apostasy, whether in them or in others. So here we have that
{154}
which restrains, and then again, "He who now letteth will let until he be taken out of the way. And then shall that Wicked be revealed" -- not before.
Whilst restraint is here we can pray, and can include being saved from this awful thing. Antichristian characteristics, whether political or religious, are Satan's work. We are comforted in the very prayers we offer; we take refuge in God and in the sense that He hears we have comfort. He may cause us to wait; it is a very important matter to learn to wait and not to be restive or complaining. The knowledge of Himself in the soul preserves us. He has His own point of view, and it is for us to wait and see what He is doing. In all likelihood He has His people in mind to make more out of them. Jacob says in faith in a time of apostasy, when he comes to Dan, an apostate tribe who at one time set up idolatry, "I have waited for thy salvation, O Jehovah". It is the first great lesson to learn in time of pressure, to wait in prayer; it is a trait of faith. "I have waited for thy salvation". So we are not trusting in the arm of the nations; we are waiting for God's salvation, and every moment of waiting is gain.
The apostle says, "Ye know that which restrains". Let us know it! The Thessalonians, according to this passage, knew, for the apostle says, "And now ye know that which restrains". They were not ignorant of it. God would have us to be instructed as to it, and special writers furnish instruction. We can rest in that same power and influence which is withholding and restraining, so that we might get through. There is a terrible flood of evil arising, but the Lord Jesus said to Philadelphia, "I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth". That is, things are working here, but there is restraint, and our prayers are based on that fact, and there is immense comfort in the fact that God is hindering
{155}
the thing we dread. Restraint still functions as powerfully as ever, and as believers we take refuge in that, though we feel things. We are told, "The mystery of lawlessness already works; only there is he who restrains now until he be gone". Then the flood will come. The period is fixed, and God will finally remove barriers that stand against this thing.
Secondly, Satan hinders. This is another side. The Scripture we read in 1 Thessalonians describes the working of love in brothers who are serving the Lord's people in a special way. In this connection the apostle refers to himself, "We would have come unto you, even I Paul, once and again; but Satan hindered us". God has His servants in different parts. The gifts from God all come down from Christ, they are universal. We have a very beautiful word in @1 Corinthians 12: 28 -- God has set for himself in the assembly certain gifts. That seems to be the force of the word; God is in the matter, and it is described so feelingly. He has set certain in the assembly, first apostles, secondly prophets, and so on. He has set them there for Himself. The assembly is wonderful in a variety of ways, but it is marvellous that God has set gifts there for Himself. He needs them for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. He has set them there for His use, and Satan knows it, and would damage them. Paul refers to being hindered from coming to these converted Thessalonians. He had been caused to leave quickly, and had in mind to go back, "We ... endeavoured the more abundantly to see your face with great desire". Gift is of very little value without love. We may have all faith and so on, but if we have not love we are nothing; that is a very sweeping statement, showing that we must not rest all on the ability of a brother.
One desires not only to go to a place to minister, but to see the brethren. So in verse 17 Paul speaks of his desire to see their faces. What a thought that
{156}
is! The great apostle by whom they were converted saying that he endeavoured to see their faces with great desire. In moving among the dear brethren, in meeting them in large numbers (though not too large for God), how small one is, how little able to express love to each one, to read the beauty of Christ in each countenance. One desires more than anything the ability to love the saints, to value their countenances. Satan says, 'I will hinder that'; hence the importance of praying for those ministering. The apostle's main thought was to see the countenances of the brethren, but Satan hindered it. God is love, and that is expressed in His people. Satan will not let the apostle see their faces. What lovely faces they would have, beloved of God as they were! What a place they had in the Father's heart! They are called "The assembly of Thessalonians in God the Father". What a victory for God if He has such lovable persons in a town like this, or in a city like Rome, or Thessalonica, or Corinth. Satan says, 'I hate that', and prevents Paul from seeing their faces. The kings of Midian said to Gideon regarding the men they slew, "As thou art so were they; each one resembled the children of a king". Satan says, 'I know God's heart is set on these people, and if Paul desires to see them I shall prevent it if I can', and he did. I mention this to bring out the idea of the working of love, the personal affection of those who serve towards those who are to be served. Paul speaks of himself as 'I Paul' in this connection. It is a personal matter. Satan is against this personal affection among the brethren, and especially against those God has fitted to serve them.
Thirdly, we have Laban's hindrance. This is another love matter, a marital matter, and Satan is against it peculiarly, against what is for the heart of Christ. The apostle says, "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ".
{157}
The enemy knew how the Lord's heart was set on the saints, hence the apostle goes on, "I fear lest by any means, as the serpent deceived Eve by his craft, so your thoughts should be corrupted from simplicity as to the Christ". The apostle would have the saints kept in simplicity as to the Christ, not marked by high thoughts, vain thoughts, legal thoughts. Christ is to be in our hearts as He is Himself, just as He is, described by affection in all His parts; as it is said of those on the mount of transfiguration, "Jesus only with themselves". Are we restful in that, or is Jesus clothed with an ecclesiastical garb in our minds? It is Himself, Jesus only with themselves. Looking around, that was what the disciples saw. It is what enters into the moment of His rejection. We do not want any other Jesus, not one clothed with ecclesiastical garments; so the apostle was concerned lest the saints should be corrupted. He understood the love of Christ for the saints: Christ loved the assembly and gave Himself for it. Paul could also say, He "loved me, and gave himself for me". So he understood the love of Christ.
It conveys great power when the thing mentioned is understood by the person who speaks of it. Paul knew what that love meant, and would sacrifice all to secure the assembly. The end of all ministry is the perfecting of the saints. Anyone interfering with that has to watch himself. In our passage in Genesis Laban represents that side. It is a word for any brother or sister endeavouring, by personal influence, to prevent any movement forward to Christ by the saints in assembly character. The Lord is bent on that peculiarly; it is the idea of the bride. Satan just hates it, thus there were those in Corinth who, like Laban, would hinder the saints; Paul was afraid of that. This has to be watched in our localities.
Laban is more active than Bethuel in this case. He received Abraham's servant and camels; he acted
{158}
magnanimously; he did the right thing. Now it is a question of Rebecca going to Isaac. We read that "they did eat and drink ... and they rose up in the morning", and the servant said, "Send me away unto my master". And again (verse 56), "Do not hinder me, seeing Jehovah has prospered my way: send me away, and I will go to my master". What a fine plea that was. It was not Rebecca's, but the plea of the servant of Abraham. He stands out as a model servant, always referring to his master, bringing him into everything. It is the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of God, too, operating so as to secure saints for Christ, that they might move with Christ in bridal affection, move with the heart and resolution of the bride, who says, "Even so, come, Lord Jesus". The Spirit and the bride say, "Come", she is so secured by ministry, her identity so marked, her characteristics so apparent that she says, "Come". It is just one word, but how much we may put into one word. She loves His appearing.
Laban would hinder Rebecca's moving. Influential brothers and sisters are apt to arise and exert a wrong influence. They like to have a hand in matters beyond what is due; they would influence a gathering, and so keep that young soul back, "Hinder me not", the servant says. There was every evidence in this case that God was leading the person on; why interfere now that everything is so clear? A little bit of feeling asserts itself; one's influence in the place is made to be felt, and a manifest work of God in some soul is hindered. Rebecca settles the matter. Thank God, the work of God is always true to itself, "I will go". She is not afraid of her brother's judgment, or her mother's. It is a question of assembly affection, and the sequence is definiteness, she is going to Christ. May no one here interfere with the peculiar work of the Spirit of God at the present time!
{159}
Finally, "What doth hinder me to be baptised", the eunuch says. Rebecca is not saying that; she had no need to say it in regard to Laban unless he had persisted. She was not to be daunted, and God stands by such. The eunuch saw the water. God had made that provision for him, involving severance from the world. Let every young person who is not in the fellowship of God's son raise that question -- What hinders me? The eunuch commanded the chariot to stand still.
It is for every young person to command himself, "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law". That is urgent on the believer; it is to be characteristic of every true believer, to call a halt and rule his mind. The eunuch went down into the water. Verse 37 is not in Scripture, it savours of the hindrance of Laban, put in by some religious person. The next verse links on with the eunuch's enquiry, "They went down both into the water", and when they came up, the Spirit catches away Philip and the eunuch is left alone with his chariot, and goes on his way rejoicing. Why not? He was answered immediately, and every young person should take it to heart, and see to it, calling a halt and dealing with the matter, so that he in result goes on his way rejoicing.
{160}
THE SUPERIORITY OF CHRISTIANITY (1)
@Matthew 11: 7 - 19, 25 - 30
The superiority of christianity is before us in these scriptures, viewed in contrast to general conditions and worked out in relative values. Scripture abounds with comparisons, and all is to bring out the greatness of christianity. With this in view we may consider the Lord's remarks about John the baptist, who, though not equal to those who form the assembly, serves to illustrate what is in mind.
At this time John was rather under a cloud, but the Lord would not allow this to discredit him, and took occasion of it to bring out his worth. So he says, as John's disciples left, "What went ye out into the wilderness to see? ... Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the baptist: notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he". John's greatness only serves to enlarge the greatness of christianity, and the Lord calls attention to it.
The end of the chapter shows how the superiority of christianity shines out in the Lord Jesus, though He is incomparable in His own Person. In the greatest pressure He is able to answer and say, "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes", and so He becomes a refuge for all of us who are under pressure as we learn the truth set forth in Him.
John represents a great dispensation. He was called in relation to natural birth, according to God's provisional ways until the coming in of Christ, and there was no one greater than he among those "born
{161}
of women". What characterises christianity is that we are "born of God", but truth is cumulative from the beginning and all is carried down to our own time, so it is important to see what the old dispensation was at its best. John was a young man about to die and the Lord would have his true worth be known. He was really the finish of the old dispensation according to God. So from *his* time the kingdom suffered violence; persons coming into it must do violence to all their own preconceived ideas.
The kingdom of the heavens is peculiar to Matthew, the assembly being in mind. Now all things are vested in the son and He rules from above. The kingdom of God is the moral side of the matter and is connected with the Holy Spirit down here. The kingdom of heaven is the rule of God on earth; the kingdom of God is the moral sway of the Spirit, a divine Person, below. When Christ was here the kingdom of God was in their midst; now the Holy Spirit is here. We need to be born anew to see the kingdom of God. Matthew deals generally with the kingdom of heaven (though he refers also to the kingdom of God) and stresses that Jerusalem is set aside. Hence in the Acts we have the sound from heaven (chapter 2), the voice from heaven to Saul and the sheet from heaven to Peter, to bring in the influence of heaven, whereas judaism has brought christendom down to the level of earth and made it an earthly thing.
The question raised by the Lord, "What went ye out into the wilderness to see?", is a practical one, because it relates to our baptism, which, if rightly understood, makes the earth a wilderness to us. Has the thing that we went out to see when we accepted baptism maintained its greatness in our eyes, or has it deteriorated? It is important to have the true idea of greatness in our minds. Of the Lord it could be said, "He shall be great", but here the thought is
{162}
extended to others, in order to emphasise the greatness of our dispensation.
John the baptist could say, "There standeth one among you, whom ye know not" (@John 1: 26), and, later, "He must increase, but I must decrease" (chapter 3: 30). John the evangelist carries all this forward into christianity, because in @John 3 one can hardly determine where the baptist's remarks finish and the evangelist's commence. They merge in christian language, showing what a sense John the baptist had of the greatness of Christ.
John was not a "reed shaken with the wind", a person shaken by every wind of doctrine, for he stood his ground. Nor was he "a man clothed in soft raiment", such as marks certain ecclesiastical systems. Such things belong to "kings houses", not to christianity. John was a prophet, involving something substantial, one who represents God, and, can bring Him into the souls of those whom he serves. So in @John 4 the woman recognised Christ as a prophet when He exposed her history, bringing God into her soul. Matthew makes much of a prophet (see chapter 10: 41, 42), but none was greater than John, who was "more than a prophet", as the Lord said. John's personality lay behind his office, and this is developed by John the evangelist in his gospel. He was brought up in the deserts and wore suitable clothes, outside of and apart from the world and its fashions. In all this he is a model for us. Thus he was able to discern the glory of Christ as the Baptiser with the Holy Spirit, the Son of God and the Lamb of God, His personal attractiveness; @John 1. The result of his testimony was that his two disciples left him and followed Jesus.
In @Acts 18 and 19 we see in Apollos and the twelve at Ephesus persons prepared to move on from John's ministry into the full light of christianity. They were ready for the greatness of Paul's ministry. So
{163}
the epistle to the Hebrews was to lead Jewish christians out by presenting something better, a better covenant, a better hope, and so on. We are not to antagonise persons by belittling what they are in, but to suggest to them something *better*. Then the word is: "Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach", @Hebrews 13: 13.
At the end of @Matthew 11 we see the Lord in full superiority to the conditions of rejection and pressure. "At that time. Jesus answering said, I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes. Yea, Father, for thus has it been well-pleasing in thy sight". God is working and the Lord would keep us on the line of God's work, not depressed by what is happening around us. These babes are doubtless the children of wisdom, but the latter are more than babes, they are developed. In @Proverbs 8 wisdom is seen in relation to creation, but now she has children and she is justified in those whom she begets. Wisdom is justified in Christ, but also in the assembly, as @Matthew 18 shows. The assembly, as having wisdom, is the administrative vessel now, and this should enter into all our meetings and discussions. Proverbs is peculiarly an assembly book and is intended to augment us in our assembly service. It relates to "the kingdom of the son of his love", the true Solomon. Chapters 30 and 31 bring out what a brother should be in his attitude of mind. Agur is humble and does not pretend to know everything; no one does. The more you *do* know, the more you depend on the Lord and on the brethren. Agur says, "Truly *I* am more stupid than any one; and I have not a man's intelligence, I have neither learned wisdom, nor have I the knowledge of the Holy", @Proverbs 30: 2, 3. He is like Paul, who could speak of himself as less than the least of all saints. Such a
{164}
one can compress himself, and recognises his dependence on others; for it is only among the brethren and as dependent on the Spirit that one can bring things out. Agur is asking questions, but what great things these questions bring out! "What is his name?" Deity is before him, bringing us to infinitude and making us feel how small we are. This is a right attitude of mind.
Here in @Matthew 11 we have the Father and the Son and what They are doing, and we are to be learners. The Son is revealing the Father to persons, and this makes them very distinguished. Do we know anything of this, the revelation of the Father by the Son? This is special and brings out the personnel of the assembly. The Son has pleasure in making you what you are. For example, in the case of the man in @John 9, the Lord heard that they had cast him out and He finds him; he becomes distinguished as cast out by the religious world. The Lord says, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God". He is seeking to give him more than he already had, "He answered and said, And who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him? And Jesus said to him, Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he. And he said, I believe, Lord: and he did him homage". That illustrates what is here, the Lord's pleasure in revealing the Father. Each one is taken up individually in view of the personnel of the assembly. The Lord would say, 'I want to make you more than what you are, I want you to know the Father'. Not only are babes taken up sovereignly, but as sons we come individually under the influence of the Son and each receives a distinct impression of the Father. Divine pleasure enters into the new economy, because it is stable and final. It may break down outwardly, but not really or vitally, because the assembly is in view and, as we are told, "Hades gates shall not prevail against it".
{165}
THE SUPERIORITY OF CHRISTIANITY (2)
@Matthew 12: 6 - 21, 38 - 50
This chapter develops the subject of the superiority of the new economy introduced by Christ, based upon the sovereignty of God and the delightful relationships set forth at the close of chapter 11. Christ is before us objectively and we are to learn from Him, seeing what He does and says. So here in chapter 12 He went through the cornfields and the disciples went further; they "were hungry, and began to pluck the ears and to eat". He is showing that the old economy is broken, but He is introducing a new one, in which there is liberty.
The thought before us of relative values is seen throughout the chapter: "there is here what is greater than the temple" (verse 6). Then "the son of man is Lord of the sabbath" (verse 8), not only greater than it, but *Lord* of it. Then a man is said to be better than a sheep (verse 12), and finally we have what is "greater than Jonas" (verse 41), and "greater than Solomon" (verse 42). These representative values are for our consideration and instruction. The superior character of the christian economy and the relationships established in it give character to the present moment, as we see at the end of the gospel: "Baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". This exceeds all other dispensations, and chapter 11 shows how the Lord deals with us individually to bring us into the liberty of it.
The sabbath may be viewed as a type of Christ, and in Exodus it is first formally mentioned in relation to the manna (chapter 16). The manna represents Christ here in our circumstances; the sabbath would mean that He becomes rest to us. Then in chapter 31,
{166}
following the directions as to the pattern of the tabernacle, the sabbath again comes into view; it was to be kept, and it is stated that God rested on the seventh day "and was refreshed", a beautiful thought not mentioned in Genesis. It seems to be connected with the operations of the tabernacle, all pointing to Christ and drawing out divine affection so that God could be refreshed as the result of the willing-hearted response of the people as bringing the material for His dwelling-place. The Sabbath was again introduced as if to impress us with the necessity of lying fallow in the presence of the divine revelation so as to absorb the force of it into our constitutions. We ourselves become material for the tabernacle as we take on this thought of Christ, as John says in his gospel: "the Word became flesh, and dwelt [literally, *tabernacled*] among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a Father), full of grace and truth". The glory of Christ is among us. I think the Sabbath is a type to bring about conditions for the divine dwelling, but here what spoke so beautifully of Christ had become a great legal sign and had lost all its spiritual value. The Lord does not recognise it, for He went through the cornfields on the sabbath, indicating that He is introducing a new order of things.
Similarly the temple had lost its value and it is not here used as a type. It is here "what is greater than the temple", not exactly Christ Himself, but what He is bringing in and we have part in. Solomon had anticipated something greater in his prayer at the dedication of the temple; Christ Himself is the true temple of God and is displacing all that is here, involving christianity, what we have by the Spirit.
The Lord's quotation, "I will have mercy, and not sacrifice", brought out the ignorance of His opposers. The law demanded, whereas He inaugurated a system in which mercy is prevalent, as John says of Him,
{167}
"full of grace and truth". This chapter is to deliver us from legalists and to introduce us to *greater* things. Romans brings out that we are "vessels of mercy ... prepared for glory", so that mercy introduces us into the best and greatest thoughts of God. The instructions here are especially meant to deliver us from legal systems, and in this connection Christ is spoken of as God's Servant: "Behold my servant, whom I have chosen, my beloved, in whom my soul has found its delight. I will put my Spirit upon him ...". He is effectuating all this for the pleasure of God and the first thing is that He is Lord of the sabbath and, having brought it in, He can dispose of it.
As Lord of the sabbath Christ has authority over all that is legal. People may assume that they can go on in their legal ways, but the Lord is supreme in that: "Are we stronger than he?". We have withdrawn from what is iniquitous, following the injunction: "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity". The Lord has still to say to these legal systems around, though we have to leave them. We judge them morally, but they are to be judged actually and the Lord has authority to deal with it all. The religious systems of christendom have largely taken on judaism and the Lord will deal with it finally, but here He is going on in grace.
In keeping with the thought of relative values, in verse 12 a man is compared with a sheep. Human life is of very little account nowadays, but the Lord is here calling attention to the value of a man, not a Jew, but a *man*. Presently the Jew will come into his place and we read that ten men will take hold of a Jew, but now it is a question of men. "There is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus", @1 Timothy 2: 5. The salvation and blessing of men are in view.
Here is a man with a withered hand. "And they asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath
{168}
days? that they might accuse him" (verse 10). They were legalists, and were bringing up the question, not to settle it, but in order to have something against the Lord. He says, "What man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay hold on it, and lift it out? How much then is a man better than a sheep? Wherefore it is lawful to do well on the sabbath days". He established the law on moral grounds, not exactly as a matter of commandment.
There is a great deal of judaism among us and it cuts across that which is obviously right. There are things so obviously right that you do not need to go to Scripture for authority for them. The obvious rightness of a thing should settle a great many of our problems; things that are trifles are often made difficulties. The Lord goes on to say to the man: "Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it forth; and it was restored whole, like as the other". How beautiful that is! The Lord had established the rightness of the thing, and if you are not persistently a legalist you will see it. Often one hears it said that a thing cannot be right because a man is not right, but a right thing is right no matter who does it. It is important that we follow what is right. You do not necessarily follow *with* a man if he is not right, because he is not worthy of being followed, but you follow with those that call on the name of the Lord out of a pure heart. The truth, even the Bible, has come down to us through hands that are questionable; we cannot say that all those who brought it down to us were christians, but the things are right.
As the chapter proceeds, sectarianism develops and this culminates in their attributing the Lord's works to Satan. There is no forgiveness for a man that sins against the Holy Spirit, so it is a crucial matter. There is complete exposure of the evil, but the end of the chapter brings out the brethren and stabilises
{169}
what is of God. The *crowds* are unstable; left to themselves they are harmless, but they are amenable to bad influences, in contrast to those at the end of the chapter whom the Lord can speak of as His brethren. The greatness of the new dispensation is developed as the Holy Spirit comes into view, whereas the old dispensation has become bad, not only as legal, but because Satan has obtained control of it. The wicked spirit comes back and brings seven others worse than himself (verses 43 - 45).
The sin against the Holy Spirit is a dispensational matter, and there is no forgiveness for it. The greatness of the new dispensation is seen in the place the Holy Spirit has in it, hence there is no hope for one who speaks against Him, as we see here and in @Hebrews 10: 29: "Who hath trodden under foot the Son of God ... and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace". One often wonders about things that are happening in christendom today; virtually the Son of God is trodden under foot and there is the sin against the Holy Spirit. It is said of Babylon in @Revelation 11: "Where also our Lord was crucified"; in principle He is crucified afresh.
The old economy is not only judged, but it is shown to be inferior, even at its very best, to what we have in christianity. So here the Lord alludes to what is "greater than Jonas", and "greater than Solomon" (verses 41, 42). It alludes to the personnel of the assembly: if a man, as such, is greater than a sheep, how much greater he is as coming to Christ! Here man as in Christ is in view according to the new order of things, for all other men are valueless. In @Exodus 4 Moses cast his rod on the ground and it became a serpent, showing how man came under the power of Satan. But Jehovah said: "Put forth thine hand, and take it by the tail. And he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a rod in his hand", indicating that man should become usable
{170}
for what was primarily in the mind of God as recovered in Christ. Then Moses put his hand into his bosom and it became leprous; that is man's state as away from God; but, when at God's word he put his hand into his bosom again and drew it out, "Behold, it was turned again as his other flesh", healed and usable again, showing the value of man as taken up in Christ, I must be sure that I am like that, for I am of no value otherwise.
There has been a danger of trying to take up the truth of the assembly as in chapters 16 and 18 without the underlying moral state, involving the question of good and evil. Adam was told not to take of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, but he did, and raised the whole moral question. God would not reinstate him as he was before, but only on moral lines. Adam understood this in some measure; hence he called his wife Eve. He had named her Ishshah before, indicating that she was taken out of him as God made him; now she is Eve, "the mother of all living", for the seed of the woman was to bruise Satan's head. She could only be that on the ground of sacrifice.
That which is "greater than the temple", "greater than Jonas", and "greater than Solomon" is what is secured in Christ morally. The Jews wanted a sign, though Christ Himself was a sign before their eyes, raising the dead, healing the sick and so on. So the only sign for them now is the sign of Jonas; the Lord Jesus was to die, involving that man, with all attaching to him, is condemned. The Spirit of God has been opening up that sign ever since -- the meaning of the death of Christ. The whole race of man after the flesh has gone down, and a new generation come to light on moral lines: "Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother" (verse 50).
{171}
Jonah's preaching in Nineveh shows the importance of the testimony in a city. A city represents the concentration of worldliness, and God sets up His testimony there. The men of Nineveh had this wonderful testimony and they repented at the preaching of Jonah. God may give repentance to some in our city, hence the importance of seeing that the testimony is rightly regulated and all support given to it. The assembly is here with this in view; as in Corinth there were a Jewish synagogue, Greek temples and the assembly of God, so in chapter 14 a man coming to the assembly would find God there and be convicted. We must keep before us the idea of the temple: where God dwells. Jonah went right through Nineveh to the other side of the city; the whole city is in mind and we should not be limited in our thoughts. The sign of Jonas involves the death of Christ, but the assembly is the positive thing answering to it. So the Lord told His disciples to tarry in the city where He was crucified, and where He lay in death, until they were endued with power from on high, this bringing the assembly into view. At Nineveh one man brought about repentance; why could not one hundred and twenty men and women in a city effect something? Jonah was a man of faith; he was a changed man, disciplined by God, and had learned what it was to repent himself. This spirit should mark us today.
"More than Jonas" and "more than Solomon" suggest development and growth. It is not so much Christ personally, but the superiority of the new dispensation, and the assembly is in view. Jesus said to Saul, "Why persecutest thou me?"; that is the saints; again, he was to go into the city and "it shall be told thee what thou must do", @Acts 9: 6. The Lord had something there in testimony representative of Himself.
{172}
THE SUPERIORITY OF CHRISTIANITY (3)
@2 Kings 6: 24, 25; @2 Kings 7: 1, 2; @2 Chronicles 1: 13 - 17
The Lord would impress us with the superiority of our position as in Christianity. We are in the midst of better things, and better ourselves as belonging to the new order of things. Indeed, carrying the thought further, christians are the greatest family, greater than angels as being associated with Christ. For we shall judge angels; they are ministering spirits sent forth to serve us. All this comes in at the present time so that we may not be unduly disturbed by circumstances. Conflict is not only outward, but there is that in which the Spirit of God is concerned amongst the saints. "We wrestle not", the apostle says, "against flesh and blood", @Ephesians 6: 12. This present conflict is subservient to the great conflict in which we are all involved all the time among the people of God, a conflict for the truth. In the spiritual warfare Christ is said to be the Captain of Jehovah's host, and He gives us support which is needed so that we are not overcome by what is outward. The great Priest over the house of God is for us. He is greater than Aaron, being set forth in Melchisedec, who was greater than Aaron. He is even greater than Melchisedec.
We may look at the first scripture in order to see how our subject works out in regard of food, the relative value of food. Then in 2 Chronicles under Solomon, what was not great became great; while that which was really valuable in God's sight became of no value. In @2 Kings 6 we read that an ass's head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a cab of dove's dung for five pieces of silver. Then in chapter 7 we have normal prices for the very best food, fine flour and barley, "a measure of fine
{173}
flour ... for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel". These are normal prices. Why should we give an enormous price for food of relatively no value at all, and hardly fit for use? These enormous prices were the outcome of conditions of war, the king of Syria having besieged Samaria. What is needed is the prophetic word, bringing about the supply of good food at normal prices. People live on poor food, but there is abundance of what is far superior, if we only knew it. The Lord could say: "My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work" (@John 4: 34), indicating the true spiritual food, while the disciples were merely concerned with what was natural. Food is to sustain life, to build up a constitution capable of receiving spiritual impressions. The Lord's supper comes in thus as divinely given food, to prepare us for more spiritual things.
Food, in its spiritual application, is what occupies and forms our minds. Reading matter abounds today and the printing industry is one of the greatest agencies at work in the world. What is its effect? What kind of constitution does it produce? Men pay high prices for it and it may be semi-religious, openly infidel or modernistic. If christians buy and use such things, it is because of the siege. Here it is the Syrians, relatives of Israel and linked with their fathers by natural descent -- "A Syrian ready to perish was my father", @Deuteronomy 26: 5. Now they attack Israel frequently, and they cut off the food supply, so that what speaks of Christ, the fine flour and the barley, is replaced by the ass's head, food of no value, but very costly.
The ass's head would represent some kind of humanity, but unredeemed. According to the law it should have been redeemed or its neck was to be broken. As redeemed it would be valuable, like the ass which the Lord claimed and used in the New
{174}
Testament. But this ass's head is like the skull at the cross of Jesus. Obviously it was unredeemed, for if it belonged to Christ He would never sell it.
The king passes by and he is responsible. "There cried a woman ... Help, my lord, O king". Now the king is hearing about the conditions. He rent his clothes, "and, behold, he had sackcloth within upon his flesh". How humble he appears! But is he really humble? "God do so ... to me, if the head of Elisha ... shall stand on him this day". That is the man in responsibility, pretending to be religious and humble, but a murderer and the son of a murderer. So in verse 32 the truth comes out. He is a murderer. Elisha says, "Hold him fast at the door". That is, this thing is to be kept out, the door shut. Do not affiliate with him. Elisha shuts the messenger out. "Is not the sound of his master's feet behind him?". The king says, "Why should I wait for the Lord any longer?". How unlike Jacob, who said, "I wait for thy salvation, O Jehovah". My only hope is in God. This king, a murderer, is, in effect, shut out of the assembly by the prophet and that brings out the mind of God in chapter 7. The king is not waiting; the true saints are waiting. We must separate from the evil and keep it out, otherwise we shall not have good food. As we are in the assembly of God and the door shut, we have good food at normal prices. Why do we not come to the place where there is good food at normal prices? The king, although seemingly humble, has no patience, is not waiting for God, and then the prophet comes in and rescues the position, putting things on right lines. The point is to shut the door on the real trouble, to exclude the responsible man.
The prophet represents God. We need to learn to listen to prophetic ministry from God, a great augmenting principle. With the door shut against evil it brings the conscience into action. God is drawing
{175}
attention to the prophetic word. Elijah and Elisha both come into this; Elijah the heavenly man gone up, and Elisha the heavenly position maintained here in the spirit of Christ. The prophetic ministry was the saving element amongst the brethren in Corinth. We have to do with divine things in christianity, that is, a right view of things, and the prophetic word would regulate us. There are three things in @1 Corinthians 13, faith, hope and love, but the greater of these is love; note it is not said to be the *greatest*, it is the *greater*. Love is the greater as over against the other two. That is the way of surpassing excellence. The apostle had in mind chapter 14, but brings in chapter 13 as the way of support, necessary for the ministry of chapter 14. So that we are regulated by the prophetic ministry coming in by the way of love. By love the prophet was to serve.
Chapter 7 shows us how the prophetic word of Elisha came to pass. The four lepers accept their position. They are outside and they use their judgment. They do what is obviously the best thing to do under the circumstances, "If we ... enter into the city ... we shall die ... if they put us to death, we shall but die". That is the obvious thing to do. In the local meeting, do what is obviously the right thing. There are three things set out in this chapter, and in the last one they say, We may die or we may *not*. That is the way to take and they took that way, "And they came to the extremity of the camp ... and ... there was no man there". Something has happened. These men represent the work of God. They were lepers, and they knew it. The king was morally a leper, but he did not know it. No one can have right judgment, unless he has accepted his place before God. God had made the Syrians to hear the noise of chariots. Elisha apparently knew nothing of this. As the conscience is
{176}
touched we begin to do what is right, for the lepers say to each other, "We do not well, this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace" (verse 9). We must forget ourselves and remember other people; we are not doing what is right, we must tell the king's household. That is the more excellent way, the way of love. This is how the prophetic word comes about, how it is worked out. A brother gets up to give a word. He has been in exercise about the conditions, and God gives him something relative to those conditions. He gives it out and someone is taking it to heart, is saying, I have not been just right, I am the one to blame. These lepers say, We are not doing right. Things are not right in the meeting. What about me, am I doing just right? Why am I hiding this food? What about other people? You have to think unselfishly, think of others, not yourself. "This day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace". They are doing what is right, not merely quoting Scripture, but moving righteously. The Spirit of God is stressing the fact of the work of God in relation to what is right. The work of God will always agree with Scripture. The lepers outside do not enter the city, but take the way of instinct; divine instinct is seen in them. Do what is right yourself; God's work will show itself.
God uses the lepers to carry out the prophetic word. He comes in in relation to the prophetic word. The exact details come to pass. They tell it to the king's household. They do not hold their peace, and so in verse 16 the prophetic word is established, even to the destruction of the scorner. The word of God abides, and through the prophetic word we reach normal food; that is, spiritual food at normal prices in the assembly.
In 2 Chronicles it is a question of values. Divine values had depreciated under certain conditions and human values were more appreciated. The horses
{177}
which the king multiplied refer to what is human or natural becoming more than it is worth, whereas what is really valuable has depreciated. Silver (the price of redemption) and gold (representing what is of God) are not kept at their normal value. The cedars are made as the sycamores of the lowland. The cedars were used in the temple, and are a type of greatness according to God. These should be maintained at their proper value, but here they become less to Solomon. We are apt, in our houses, in our outlook, to make more of things that are natural; that is, we allow them to become first with us. Spiritual values, in that way, depreciate, and the natural is unduly appreciated. We want to see in our houses that the things of God come first, that they are maintained at the proper level always. John desired that Gaius might prosper in all things, "Even as thy soul prospers". If your soul prospers, you will have a right estimation of the mercies of God, but will value spiritual things.
Paul says he did not remember whom he had baptised at Corinth. His commission was not to baptise, but then he remembers that he did baptise the household of Stephanas, as if to say, *That* was a household worth baptising. In this book, as Solomon comes from Gibeon to Jerusalem, he omits to stand before the ark. The ark represents the latest thought of God. David brought it back and in this chapter Solomon omits to recognise that. The tabernacle at Gibeon was right, of course; but according to @1 Kings 3: 15 he recognises the last and most precious ministry of David, the setting up of the ark in its own place, in so far as it could be. Solomon stood before that; he does not do so here in Chronicles. In Kings the next portion is the two women coming for judgment, and he judges right; he discerns the mother of the child. In Chronicles there is no mention of the two women, and he multiplies chariots
{178}
and horses -- that which was forbidden for kings to do. What is natural is worth more, and what is of God depreciates. The same thing will happen to us if we do not recognise the ark, the glory and power of God. The ark is Christ in humiliation, but in power.
Solomon was a wonderful man, but he fails where one expects him to shine most, and that is a warning to us; we may have reputation and yet fail where needed most. The tabernacle was right enough, but what is arrived at in Kings was far greater and represented the present mind of God. Solomon had no eyes for the ark here, yet it typified the Lord Jesus, infinite greatness in small compression. He who was rich became poor, that we through His poverty might be enriched, that the things of God might be spiritually valuable and not become depreciated in our minds and in our houses.
{179}
THE SUPERIORITY OF CHRISTIANITY (4)
@Genesis 46: 31 - 34; @Genesis 47: 10; @Genesis 48: 1 - 5
We have now to consider the superiority of our position as in the family of God, including the principle of selection -- some being viewed as more excellent than others. Here five of Joseph's brethren are selected out of the whole number as suitable for presentation to Pharaoh, who here represents God in the sense of supremacy. He is also viewed personally as in the king's place, Jacob being superior to him as blessing him. Then in chapter 48 the grandchildren, Joseph's sons, are elevated to the position of children by Jacob, who is typical of the Father with the family. Later he promotes one above the other. So in the divine family the superiority of some to others is recognised. In one sense we are all called to be sons, by faith, but there is practical worth to be developed and honoured. It is open to us all, though behind it is the work of God, who works in us "both the willing and the working according to his good pleasure", @Philippians 2: 13.
The selection of the five brethren chosen to appear before Pharaoh would be based on what would be acceptable to him. Pharaoh wished them to be overseers of his cattle. He is thus different from the Egyptians, who naturally abominated shepherds, "If thou knowest men of activity among them, then set them ... over what I have". He raises the question as to their worth, involving this principle of selection, which runs throughout the ways of God and extends back to before the foundation of the world, when we were chosen in Christ. Then Joseph tells them what to say, for he is concerned about his brethren as they are about to be introduced into what is a new realm to them. Are they equal to it? The people of God are to be superior to the very best in this world.
{180}
The idea of selection on account of moral worth is seen in Timothy and Titus, and also in @Acts 6, as the diaconal work comes into view. It is said, "Look out ... from among yourselves seven men, well reported of, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom". Then, in 1 Timothy, Paul says that if one desires to exercise oversight he must possess certain qualifications. The Holy Spirit takes account of these practical conditions, and such persons would have the confidence of their brethren. So in matters of need we can leave much to a brother selected to do the work of a deacon. There is no necessity to call all the brothers together for every such matter; the less cumbersome we are the better. The qualification is not determined by age, though experience enters into it; we shall not grow at all unless found in the way of righteousness. Paul says to Timothy, "Let no man despise thy youth", and the application would be to the older: Let no one despise your age.
We should have a sober judgment of each one, not in a critical sense, but as to moral worth. The idea of selecting a certain one in view of special work to be done is plainly seen in the Scriptures. In @Romans 16 the commendation of Phoebe by the apostle linked her on with others in Rome. As she presented the letter and heard it read, she would understand clearly the value in his eyes of others in Rome and would find her place amongst those of moral worth in that city. What is really of worth in us draws it out in others. A brother's social position challenges us. Do we allow it to enter into assembly service? Onesimus was a slave, and we might despise such a brother because of his social inferiority; but Paul describes him as a beloved brother, and Philemon is tested whether he can make enough of the work of God.
We are not told who the five were that were presented to Pharaoh by Joseph. We might look
{181}
back over their previous history and suggest the likely ones. Judging from Jacob's blessing in Genesis, we might think that Dan would not be amongst them, but, after considering Moses blessing in Deuteronomy, we might change our mind. Probably Judah would be one, for he shone in chapter 44. When one comes under the eye of heaven and of the Lord, and is promoted in a moral way, that abides. We may give much for promotion, but it is only on the ground of moral qualifications. Moses says of Benjamin, "The beloved of Jehovah -- he shall dwell in safety by him" (@Deuteronomy 33: 12), representing a man set in a locality to look after the house of God. So that God can dwell there. The way we conduct our own houses enters into this, especially in regard of eldership and deaconship (see @1 Timothy 3: 5).
@Psalm 45 presents moral qualifications in perfection as seen in Christ. The writer had a great thought of Christ, as he said, "My heart is welling forth with a good matter: I say what I have composed touching the king". We should all have an estimate of Christ, as is seen also beautifully in Canticles. In @Psalm 45 the writer cannot say enough of Christ. It is a lovely psalm, the song of the Beloved, and if he speaks of Christ he must speak also of the queen, that is, of the work of God in the saints, those for whom Christ died. Christ is the standard of value, and if I have a right estimate of Christ I shall know how to look at His brethren. Joseph was the standard of value in the house of Jacob. In @Genesis 30, when Joseph comes into view there is none like him in the eyes of his father. Jacob moves out as Joseph is born. In chapter 33 he places Joseph before his mother in the presence of Esau. Then from chapter 37 to chapter 47 Joseph is lost to his father, but in chapter 47 he is still the standard of value. If we have a right estimate of Christ, we shall rightly esteem the
{182}
brethren. We must look at Him who is Firstborn amongst us, Firstborn of many brethren. The mount of transfiguration brings out His pre-eminence, and Peter in his reference to it in his second epistle shows the value that God found in Christ and how he had been affected by it.
Joseph had a true judgment about his brethren and could value each one. The Lord Jesus said, "Thou art Peter"; that was His estimate of him. In other words, he was material for the structure. In @John 1, Jesus, looking on him, calls him Cephas, the same word in another language. It is a question there of life and personality; we see many others coming and the Lord passing judgment on them. He saw Nathanael sitting under the fig tree. Philip says to him, "We have found him of whom Moses wrote ... Jesus, the son of Joseph, who is from Nazareth". What is his response to this testimony? He says, "Can anything good come out of Nazareth?" a poor response to a wonderful presentation of Christ. There appeared no evidence whatever of the work of God. We find many with whom there is no response to the truth. Philip says, "Come and see". You do not respond to the truth, but you may to the Person. Jesus sees him coming and says, "Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile", a rare kind of man. So we must not be in a hurry to turn anyone down. We are to say to such, "Come and see"; it is not, *Go* and see. It is where we are ourselves that counts. The woman in @John 4 says the same thing, and it is to be characteristic with us. Only a satisfied person can say, "Come and see". The Lord's eye is upon us and He passes judgment on persons. It is a solemn matter. Does He look upon us in rebuke or is He pleased with us? In Canticles He speaks of the bride with pleasure, and refers to the beauty He finds in her, "Thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes".
{183}
These sons of Jacob ask Pharaoh to let them dwell in the land of Goshen, a place of pasture. As true shepherds they consider for the sheep. We should bring souls to where the best pasture is, like the Lord Jesus, the Shepherd of our souls, who is ever concerned that His saints are fed (see @Ephesians 4: 10 - 12). So He said to Peter, "Feed my lambs ... Shepherd my Sheep ... Feed my sheep".
Divine selection is proved by what is done well. Let us see that the Lord and the brethren support us. We should not be slow in asking the brethren what they think, for it is well to have the judgment of others. Paul had great confidence in Timothy and was concerned that this might be maintained. Trustworthiness is a great point in this matter.
In chapter 48 Jacob is in view. Joseph does not tell Jacob what to say. He had told his brethren; he had primed them to say what was right. So we can adjust one another as to our behaviour in the assembly. Endless repetitions are very painful, such as the constant use of the Lord's title in prayer; this is not pleasing to Him, and it is well to tell one another of such things. But Joseph does not so instruct Jacob, for he is the father, the supreme thought of excellence in the family. Joseph sets Jacob before Pharaoh, and Jacob blessed him. Think of the power of this man! Jacob is superior to Pharaoh, the greatest monarch of the time, for "the less is blessed of the better", and Pharaoh does not resent it. Jacob can give an account of the days of the years of his life: "Few and evil", he says, not hiding anything. He is morally great and Pharaoh recognises it. Jacob blessed Pharaoh and went out. We see dignity to the full as he goes in and comes out from the presence of the king.
@Psalm 105 helps us to see God's estimate of His saints in patriarchal days. They were "few men in number, of small account, and strangers ... He
{184}
suffered no man to oppress them, and reproved kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed ones, and do my prophets no harm". So here Jacob was superior to Pharaoh, as Abraham was in his day. God said to the king at that time, "He is a prophet"; greater than that, he was a priest -- "He will pray for thee". He did, and God heard him. That is the position. We are outwardly of no account, strangers in the land, and yet God's chosen ones, prophets, priests and kings. The challenge comes to us to be true to our calling, superior in our manners and ways to all around, so that men may see.
Now in chapter 48 Jacob is seen as father with the family, not now in the presence of Pharaoh. He brings his grandchildren up to the same status as his sons. The Father does as He wills, elevating us from one status to another; it is His prerogative. Every family is named of the Father, and some are inferior to others. The assembly is superior to all other families according to the Father's election. The Jews have their place, but Paul introduces the idea of sonship as applied to the gentiles. "Because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father", @Galatians 4: 6. So the Lord says to His disciples, "Rejoice that your names are written in heaven". In the assembly everyone is a firstborn one, "the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven". Each has a peculiar place of preciousness in love. In this scripture the grandchildren are raised to the status of Reuben and Simeon, the two elder brethren.
Ephraim and Manasseh were born to Joseph before Jacob came to Egypt; they typify those who have come to Christ in the period of His rejection by Israel. It is the Father's prerogative to bring us into sonship according to His eternal counsel. This is calculated to enrich the service of God. We cannot serve at all unless we are sons, but here we are sons *by the Father's*
{185}
*appointment*. By the Spirit of adoption we cry, "Abba, Father", so that we can be in power in the assembly. The cry suggests the urgency of it. In the rich cry of "Abba, Father", the sons recognise the Father. As prepared to be with Christ in rejection we are raised to the status of sonship. It is to bring out the prerogative of the Father in the divine family, "For of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be glory for ever. Amen".
Joseph's two sons are brought in, and so Joseph has two portions in the family. In Ezekiel, where the inheritance is divided. Joseph has two portions, for Christ is pre-eminent amongst His brethren.
{186}
FATHERHOOD IN GOD AND IN MAN
@John 14: 6 - 11; @1 Corinthians 4: 15 - 17; @Genesis 4: 16 - 22; @1 Chronicles 2: 50, 51
These scriptures speak of fatherhood, a subject of particular importance in the Scriptures and of particular importance where there are those who love God. For amongst them fatherhood is a great necessity. You will observe that I began with the supreme thought of fatherhood in God as having come out in Christ, for aside from the incarnation we could not have any true knowledge of the fatherhood of God. Then I moved on to a man like ourselves, Paul, who appropriates the idea of fatherhood to himself over against ten thousand instructors in Christ. There were not many fathers; they might have that many instructors for it is much easier to multiply instructors in Christ than it is to multiply fathers.
Then I moved on to Genesis to show how the thought is seen in the world. The world has always imitated. Even Satan is largely imitative in his operations. It can be seen that even in Cain's family there were persons named fathers of certain industrial lines. In 1 Chronicles we shall see the same thing, only there they are said to be fathers of towns, the great need at the present time! I hope to keep in mind in all this the idea of fatherhood in towns or districts. The thought is spiritual in 1 Chronicles. That is, it is pointing to the time in which the testimony of God should be developed in assemblies and these assemblies are necessarily in towns, or cities, or villages, or sometimes in country districts.
The working out of the divine economy requires fatherhood and I might add motherhood in a spiritual sense. The term 'father' is very much used in the Scriptures and is also held to by the leaders of the
{187}
world. In fact the first son mentioned by the term 'son' is Cain's. Of course, Cain was the first son, too, but he is not called son. His son is the first to have that designation.
Now to come to the New Testament thought of all this, I just wish to speak a little about the Lord Jesus. John the apostle was chosen by the Spirit of God to enlarge on this great subject in the New Testament, obviously because he was the brother who knew love. Then he knew what it was to be the object of it himself. He designates himself under that heading, "The disciple whom Jesus loved". He was amongst those whom the Lord designated as 'children'. For instance, He says, "Children, have ye any meat?". John knew love so well in the Lord and that is where it is fully and rightly known, "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us", @1 John 3: 16. It is there that we know love. John gives us not only the great fact of the Lord's laying down His life for him, but what he experienced in lying in the Lord's bosom. One marvels at the liberty he had with the Lord. It was because love was in the Lord. Not only friendly love, the love of brethren, but parental. The love Christ bore for John was parental. John lay in His bosom in that love, parental love.
This is a special gift, John's being used to bring out these family relationships. It was because he knew love. He says himself, "Hereby we have known love". One who does not know love is in a very poor way. I am speaking of love as in God, coming out in Christ parentally and shared in a family way by the saints. So shared that it introduces liberty, such liberty, to be, as it were, familiar with the Lord Jesus. So that John can go on to say "That which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life", @1 John 1: 1. He refers to the Word and the holy liberty which love vouchsafes to us: 'handled' the
{188}
Lord Jesus; so as to place his hand on the Lord and lay his head in the bosom of Jesus.
Well now, I would speak of these words of Jesus which I have read in @John 14. The Lord answers Thomas and Philip and says in replying to Thomas, "No one comes to the Father unless by me". Did Thomas ever know that way? Did he ever lay his head on the bosom of Jesus? That is a question to come home to each of us.
"No one comes to the Father unless by me". What a statement that was! The Lord goes on to say, "If ye had known me, ye would have known also my Father, and henceforth ye know him and have seen him"; that is how the disciples come into it. It is very interesting to see how the disciples are to be brought into this, and you are to be one of them. I believe heaven is still grouping. One has been in many a group. Not the photographic groups so popular today, but how much more blessed to be seen in heaven's grouping. The Spirit of God groups people and this disciple whom Jesus loved is particularly placed, in relation to another, the Lord's mother. It was when the Lord Jesus was on the cross, that He grouped these two persons together. He looks on Mary His mother, of whom Simeon had said, "A sword shall pierce through thine own soul". How it entered her soul as she stood by the cross of Jesus. Standing by the cross of Jesus, He looked on her and called her, "Woman": "Woman, behold thy son". Some of you may have in your minds that He meant His mother to look on Him, but He was directing her attention to John, "Behold thy son". How beautiful! The Lord is grouping these two persons in a holy bond of love as mother and son. That was one of the most precious acts of Jesus on the cross, placing these two together in love, in the relation of mother and son. He said to John, "Behold thy mother". That is Mary the mother of Jesus is now John's
{189}
mother. How thoroughly John understood it. He took her to his own home from that moment. She was not to be without a son. She is never again to have Jesus as a son; He has taken up a new condition to which that relationship is not attached. But she is not to be without a son. The Lord on the cross rises above all the sorrow and the pain to bring these two together in the bond of holy love. He is doing that all the time. He even comes to natural relations and affections. If the Lord does not bring two together it would never be done. If the bonds are to be in Him, He must do it. That is all I have time to say as to grouping.
Now John the apostle was qualified to deal with this great matter of family relationships. So he speaks to us about Jesus, "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father), full of grace and truth", @John 1: 14. There is very little contemplation, dear brethren, of what is divine. But John says "We have contemplated". There it was in the midst. We contemplated His glory, and as well there are these words I have read to you, these words of Jesus; He goes on to say, "Am I so long a time with you, and thou hast not known me, Philip? He that has seen me has seen the Father". Was John here? Very likely. But the Lord speaks to Philip, and He is speaking to me and everyone here tonight, too. Have I been so long a time with you and you do not know Me? Where are we? Christianity is a question of Persons. Principles and doctrines, of course, but Persons. But if we are to know right principles we must be in company with Jesus. The Lord groups us. Local assemblies must be grouped by the Lord. We know who they are and we know the Lord. The Lord says, 'Have I been so long a time with you and you do not know Me, Philip?' You say, but the Lord was in the midst of the disciples. Of
{190}
course He was. In a certain sense the Lord's home was amongst them. He came in and out amongst them. He would say, as it were, 'Were you there, Philip, on that day when heaven opened upon Me and proclaimed, Thou art My beloved Son? Were you there then?' Yes, Philip was probably there, 'Have you known Me and not gained anything?' It is a direct question. 'Didst *thou* not know Me, Philip?' 'You' may mean any number but it is '*thou*'. Let each answer for himself. How have you been getting along since you began? What have you learned?
Well, the Lord goes on to say, "He that has seen me has seen the Father; and how sayest thou, show us the Father? Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and that the Father is in me? The words which I speak to you I do not speak from myself; but the Father who abides in me, he does the works. Believe *me* that I am in the Father and the Father in me; but if not, believe me for the works sake themselves", @John 14: 9 - 11. He is dealing with Philip, dealing with you or me. He wants to go to the finish in this matter. You began, but how are you getting on? What headway are you making in the truth?
Then the Lord specifies. He does not say 'My Father and Myself are one Person'. Anyone saying that is wrong. They are not speaking truth but falsehood. There are two Persons. The Lord is dealing with a mediatorial system. So anyone who has seen Him has seen the Father. You say, Well, They are the same Person. But that is not so. There are three Persons in the Deity; the Father, the Son and the Spirit. "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father)". What divine wisdom! so that we can be sons, in the place of nearness prepared and provided so beautifully by Himself. So the Lord says, "He that has seen me has seen the
{191}
Father": so perfect was His representation of the Father. That is, you see the Father in that way characteristically, the Fatherly qualities, the parental qualities are seen in that way as He calls them children. The Father's affections are to be poured into our souls by the son, who has drawn so near that we might be in His bosom -- a most delicate, holy and excellent subject. I hope the brethren are beginning to see the idea of fatherhood. "His name is called Wonderful, Counsellor, Mighty God, Father of eternity, Prince of Peace", @Isaiah 9: 6. That is, Father of the age. That is fatherhood in Christ. The disciples, especially John, saw all this as they came into the understanding of the Father. Parental qualities were inherent in Christ Himself, but not simply the representation of the Father's parental qualities: He had them Himself. He was the Father of the age. So fatherhood is brought very near to each of us.
First we have the contemplation of His glory as of an only-begotten son with a father, the relation of Father and Son. What affections were seen there! How it must have impressed them! One has often thought of the conversations which would take place with Mary the mother of Jesus and John who was now her son. One might well picture that home of love, the holy love instituted by the Lord Himself in His dying moments, "Woman, behold thy son", and, "Behold thy mother". That disciple did not hesitate a moment but took her to his own home. What scenes of enjoyment they must have had together as Mary conversed with her son, John no doubt calling her, Mother. She was to know no other home while here below. The working out of that bond must have been wonderful. The thought of both fatherhood and motherhood comes out there.
The idea of fatherhood brings us so close to the Lord that we can be lovers. Wonderful love, that one can lay his head in His bosom. So that is another
{192}
thing to be seen, there is no distance to be covered there. Fatherhood was there representatively, mediatorially and also inherent in Himself: He was the Father of the age.
Then this is worked out in us, dear brethren. That is where Paul comes in. He shows the gain of fatherhood amongst the saints. He uses the word, 'children', the most distinct family name. Paul takes the ground of fatherhood in 1 Corinthians with the most difficult of children. I know how parents feel bringing up their children. The family at Corinth were the most unruly children. He says, You may have ten thousand instructors (I do not suppose they actually had ten thousand instructors, but it would be a prophetic utterance, pointing to the many instructors turned out by the seminaries of today), but he says, You have not many fathers. In Christ I have begotten you through the gospel. That was a heavy piece of work, one of the heaviest pieces of work Paul did. The Lord said to him, "I have much people in this city". He did not say, many children for you. But I have much people, potential children. Paul went into that city to get these people. All that was common in Corinth was participated in by these people until Paul went there. Then the Lord appeared to him by night: 'No one will hurt you, Paul, I will be with you'. Paul set to work to get these people. As Paul walked down the street, he would see a man and say, Is that one of them? That would be the current of his mind. He and two others started there and preached the Son of God. Why did he preach the Son of God? Because he had the family side of the truth in view for them. The Son of God is Son over the house.
So Paul, Silvanus and Timotheus preached the Son of God. As preaching the Son he would bring in the Holy Spirit, too, and so he says in @1 Corinthians 8, "To us there is one God, the Father", 'To us' --
{193}
that is, christians. And then "one Lord. Jesus Christ". He would keep that before them and he would bring out the affections that existed between the Father and Son. The Lord says, "Thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world", @John 17: 24. Oh, you say, then He was Son then. That is saying more than Scripture says. "Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar", @Proverbs 30: 6. That Person was there before the foundation of the world. Love was there then, love between the Persons. Sonship is, however, a matter of time. The Lord Jesus entered into it to bring the Father to us. "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him", @John 1: 18. So that fatherhood may be really known, and sonship known, too.
So that Paul preaches the Son of God at Corinth. He, Silvanus and Timotheus all preached the Son of God. Paul would delight to listen to the other two. But there was a threefold testimony to the great truth of the Son of God, to the family idea. So these three preachers stress the thought of the Father, Son and Spirit. So that in setting down worship for us, it is one God and Father. Think of Paul, Silvanus, and Timotheus sitting down with the disciples at the Lord's Supper on the first day of the week. One would have loved to have heard what they said. We have indeed heard what they said, the Holy Spirit has carried it down, what they said, how they worshipped by the Spirit of God. You can see, dear brethren, how Paul brought this, the thought of the Father and Son, in at Corinth amongst such an unruly group of christians. He does not include the ten thousand instructors, not even Silvanus and Timotheus, but he says, as taking the matter up in fatherhood, "*I* have begotten you". He does not say that Timotheus has begotten you. No, he brings out real fatherhood. We might say that he was the father of
{194}
Corinth. It is wonderful how the Holy Spirit has handed all this down, to bring out the wonderful qualities of this father. Paul says, 'There is my son Timothy, he will come among you. He is a child of mine, I have been a true father to him'. Paul and Timotheus together, what a relationship! 'You have seen this', Paul says, 'Now I have sent him back to you as *my* child. You know by my child what a father he has'.
That is in measure what is seen in Christ. You see the Father in Christ in that way, only that the Lord Jesus is never called a child of God. In Matthew He is called the little Child; but never a child of God. It was the *Son* who revealed the Father. He is in the bosom of the Father. All those affections come from the Father to the Son and from the Son to His own. That is the real thought of fatherhood and sonship. Paul says, 'That is what I want amongst you at Corinth. You want fatherhood there'. Timotheus is not called a father but a child, 'I have sent my child Timotheus, to bring all that back, that he may train you and that you may see my fatherly ways in him'.
Now to come to this matter of fatherhood in the world, we do not want it to come in amongst us. Cain had a son and he called his name Enoch. As we drew attention to it before, this is the first mention of the word 'son'. This Enoch is Enoch the third from Adam, on the natural side. We get Enoch the seventh from Adam on the spiritual side. This Enoch's name is plastered all over the town. I do not want my name to be down in this world. A spiritual man would not want to be mayor of the town. I am not saying a word against mayors; I thank God for them. I am speaking of christianity. The world places their sons in front of the city, as doctors, lawyers, politicians. Make them something, that is line of Cain, the first son mentioned. There
{195}
is the natural again; it is always first. Then we get Lemech, he introduces polygamy. He has two wives, Adah and Zillah. The firstborn is Jabal, father of a certain line, of a certain class, the industrial or farmers. Then his brother, Jubal, the father of music, the father of concerts; that was to occupy the farmers. Farmers are liable to be depressed; we usually find it so. Well, give them some music, you see, keep them going and leave God out. Leave out the Lord but keep these farmers up, they provide the food. We must keep them going. Well, you see, he is the father of all that. Then we have another one, Tubal-Cain. Cain's name is carried on. He was an instructor in brass and iron, a mechanic, the forger of every tool. The word 'tool' is being used much lately. If you can make tools, you can find employment. But then you must have the wheat. We must have food. The prominent thought of the world is food. This country has a wonderful place in that way. God has been pleased to use it for humanity, as the storehouse of the food supply. So it comes to this, that you must have food to keep the people alive. Then plenty of music, and so on, but never a thought of God; let it take the place of God. I am speaking of fatherhood in the world.
A forger of every tool: think of that, the product of the man who introduced polygamy, the satisfying of his own unbridled lusts. That is Cain's world and it has all come back again under the guise of Christianity. You will never get the family thought there. If you shut God out you will never get the idea of father and son properly.
So I come to Chronicles to show how you get the spiritual genealogy of persons who are fathers. "These are the sons of Caleb, ... Shobal, the father of Kirjath-jearim". This is the divine genealogy. We all want to be in that. You will discern in all this the wonderful exodus from the natural to the spiritual.
{196}
In the first chapter we get the sons of Japheth and Ham, before the sons of Shem. The spiritual is last. That which is first is natural. Then when you get to Abraham's line, you get Ishmael's generations before Isaac's. When you come to Isaac, his sons are Esau and Jacob, Esau first. That is the natural is first. It is always that way, but God can afford to be last. The devil comes in first, but God says, 'I have Mine, too'. So we come to the second chapter here, to the sons of Israel. The name is changed. It is a spiritual world. God called him Israel instead of Jacob. Among all this you get fathers, fathers of towns. Now that is the point of greatest importance in all I have to say. You need fathers in this town, fathers of the place on the spiritual line as seen in this chapter. We have the sons of Caleb, not Caleb the son of Jephunneh but Caleb the son of Hezron. He has sons who were fathers of towns. The great need of the moment is fatherhood, the experience of fatherhood affections. I have had experience with children; I have brought them up, the father is saying, I can say, still, "His life is in him". I have such experience as to be able to say his life is in him; he is still living, that is the idea -- to nurture the youth.
God bore with their manners forty years in the wilderness and what manners they were! What manners Paul bore with at Corinth. What manners were there. What manners are here in this city. Think of Eutychus getting careless while the most wonderful ministry was being given. He was sitting in the window and fell from the third floor, and it says that "he was taken up dead". But Paul says, Not so. Not where you have love in the brethren. Paul embracing him, says, "His life is in him". Do not let the boy go. His life is in him. Give him to his mother, the motherly care of the brethren.
Think of that Shunammite. The prophet says, 'Call her'. He says, 'There is the boy, take your son
{197}
away, a living boy'. That is what is needed. When Elisha met the Shunammite (she had come herself, and he could see there was something very wrong), he says to Gehazi, 'Take my staff and lay it upon the child'. The mother of the child says, 'That will not do this time, you cannot deal with this matter from a distance, you must *see* the boy, and have to say to the boy; you must come with me', says the woman, 'I will not leave you'. Elisha was too great a servant of the Lord not to heed this cry. So Gehazi returned, saying the lad is not awake. You must go. You must go to that boy, talk to that boy; have to do with that boy, if you are to have him. He went with the mother of the child.
When he comes to the door he goes in alone, shuts himself in with the boy, puts his mouth on his mouth, his eyes on his eyes, and his hands upon his hands, and the boy began to be warm. Began to be warm, that was all. This matter requires great exercise. The prophet walks through the house. What have you in this house? something perhaps in the way of reading, poisonous literature, which has brought about this death. Then he went back and bent over the boy; the boy sneezed seven times; it is a long matter, but it is a living matter. We get the thought in Adam, he became a living soul through the breath of God. So the boy sneezed seven times. Elisha calls the mother, saying, "Take up thy son".
It is the same today if we are to do anything in these cases, to present to the mother a living boy. She takes him; there has been a complete victory over death, through personal contact.
May God bless these words that there may be fatherhood with us in a true sense.
{198}
A GOOD CONSCIENCE
@1 Peter 2: 19, 20
We have examples of prophetic ministry in the Old Testament where it appears in relation to what is immediately current to correct some evil, as in the case of Rehoboam. The king of Egypt came up with a mighty army to attack him, and the prophet appeared to point out the cause of the attack; it was corrective. The king and his princes humbled themselves, and there was a certain relief granted, a measure of it. And then in the case of Asa, there was an attack with a great number, a million men from Ethiopia, and no prophet appeared to point out an evil; it was an attack to bring out what was of God. God may allow the enemy to attack us to correct an evil, and to point out the evil so that we might judge it. Then again, He may allow the enemy to attack us, as evident today in certain parts, to bring out what is of Himself, for He loves to bring it out to show how it stands. It is fragrant to Him, the work of God in His people standing up against an attack, maintaining what is of God in the presence of it. In the case of Asa, there was no prophetic word before the attack, but there was after, after a great victory granted over the attack of a million men. Asa knew what to say to God. He spoke to God of Himself, and God helped and gave a wonderful victory. And then the prophet appeared to him in view of another attack, to prepare, to buttress the position against it. So it is clear that prophetic ministry may have these two features.
We have to be guarded against the future, if God is pleased to leave us here, as well as in regard to the present, and I was thinking of *conscience*, a word that has come into great prominence; governments
{199}
are taking account of it, taking account of it not only as they would have it in themselves, because I suppose so-called christian governments would profess to have a national conscience, more or less; but only in the saints can you get a *good* conscience; you cannot get it in an unconverted man, although men have a conscience to some extent of right and wrong. A good conscience, a conscience according to God, can only be found in a christian, in a converted man, and consciences of christians and their prayers, have far more to do with national matters then even the statesmen, men that are handling them. We can pray for them, but the ones who have consciences according to God are the deciding influence.
It is therefore a matter of thanksgiving that governments themselves are coming to recognise conscience in persons converted to God. Peter uses the word 'Christian' alluding to persons suffering as such. Conscience does not appear with Adam's creation, but as Adam sinned. It was a great mercy of God that conscience came in with sin. The position would be hopeless without that, and it has come into prominence now in an international way: governments are recognising a conscience in christians; perhaps they do not understand it, but anyway they admit that it is there, and it is for christians to show what a *good* conscience is.
The apostle Paul said, "Herein do I exercise myself". That word is a very good one, "Herein do I exercise myself". So that it is a prime element in the testimony, because the leader, the great apostle Paul, had exercise as to it. He did it deliberately, he *exercised* himself, that he might have a conscience void of offence towards God and man. Peter takes it up and says, "For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully". It is a very striking way to put the truth. Such a man does not compromise to avoid the suffering,
{200}
or to modify it, he actually endures grief because of it, as suffering wrongfully. He knows that he is suffering what is wrongly imposed. The present situation offers a very fine opportunity for christians to enhance before men the idea of a conscience that is of God; it is a divinely given thing; it was given as evil came into the world in order that there should be that in man that God could employ, could use to combat evil, to expose the evil causing suffering, and yet the sufferer is not retaliating, he is suffering, and what our dear brother has been saying is very good as dealing with current matters. We are born of God, and so this is a heart matter, and this matter of a dead body may be extended to a society. It says, "Wheresoever the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered together". The latter days are marked by association in a very striking way, that is, bodies being brought together, but only for the eagles to attack them, and we do not want to be in that which the eagles attack, dead bodies. We read, too, of tares being gathered together in a bundle; 'tares', as many of us know, is a word denoting an imitation. They are composed of the sons of the devil. A terrible word, and Matthew deals with that, sons of the devil. The devil sows the tares, so there is a direct action against Christ. The Lord says, let it grow. We cannot reform the world, christians are not here for that. The Lord says, leave them growing until harvest, and then they will be gathered up to be burned, and the burning involves eternal punishment, the weeping and gnashing of teeth. So that the idea of the carcase extends to a constituted body of men where there is no life at all, actuated by death, actuated by lawlessness. Thus where the carcase is, there the eagles shall be gathered together. So any association with them must be unclean, and there is no fellowship between righteousness and unrighteousness. I have said all that in order to bring out the
{201}
bearing of prophecy, that it bears on current matters, and also on future matters. It is no question of history, save to bring history in as exemplifying what is current.
So Paul, writing to Timotheus, says, "Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned". The end of the position regulated by divine injunction is love out of a pure heart. We may love each other because of a certain affinity, certain traits that are appealing to us, but here it is a question of love out of a pure heart. The word 'pure' is very extensive in this sense. There are those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart. The apostle insisted on the full thing -- love out of a pure heart, a good conscience and faith unfeigned. That is the point in this epistle to Timothy; that is the end of the matter, to bring in and maintain here amongst the brethren, love out of a pure heart, a good conscience and faith unfeigned.
Peter in confirming this, in asserting this truth says, "This is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief". God has ordered it governmentally that conscience in christians is being observed and recognised by governments; some do not, but we thank God for those who do; they do it because it has been forced upon them, and they have come to observe it. If we do not force it upon them, how will they ever know it? The thing is so important that we should bring it before them in such a forcible way that they are bound to recognise it; and God is in that. How does this come into public evidence? It is not hard to tell when a man is suffering grief, when he comes into his business in the morning; from the point of view before us it is a testimony. Nehemiah came in before the king, and his face was sad; there was a good cause for it, and the king noticed it. Nehemiah says, I was afraid.
{202}
It is right to have fear in that way, but then the fear of God is the first thing. But he was afraid that something might come up against him because of the sad countenance. The king said, There is something wrong, and Nehemiah gives a reason for his sadness. That is the idea, that my conscience is brought before persons by my sadness. I say to an employer, I am suffering grief; you are discharging me because of my conscience, because I cannot join a trades union. I wish to serve God, observe His commandments, and to do this I cannot join a union. He *may* be affected by what I say. That is how the matter comes before the public. So Peter says, "For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief". If a man has any right feeling he will say, That man has the fear of God in his heart, why should I ill-treat him? I am not saying definitely that he will say this, but he may and I give him the opportunity of saying it, and God may use it to bring out a testimony that may help thousands, even if I have to suffer. That is the idea of martyrdom, not simply that one man suffers, but that in doing so he establishes a principle before God and man, that men cannot but see. It may lead to a great change in public affairs. So Peter says, "For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? But if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God". Carrying on this way before my employers or my fellow-workers, or before the tribunals for military service. I am suffering thus and God is honoured. Some of the men sitting in the tribunal may have a conscience themselves, maybe something hidden in their hearts that respects God and it may be drawn out. So that it is worth our while to maintain a good conscience: to get up in the morning and exercise myself, take exercise deliberately for a purpose -- to have a conscience void of
{203}
offence before God and men. Peter says, "What glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? But if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were ye called; because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps", @1 Peter 2: 20, 21.
I could say a great deal more, but what I have said is enough to show that martyrdom for the truth, however small, brings certain things to the public, and God uses it. If a man ignores it, God will have to say to him, either here or hereafter. You know how the apostle Paul referred to Stephen, "I also was ... consenting unto his death". He remembered that, and so it is that God sees everything, and He is bringing out what christianity really is, and it is a great opportunity opened up to us now to be true christians. God is bringing out the real thing, and as having part in it we have this testimony, that we please God. This matter of suffering for conscience is pleasing to God, and He gives us that testimony, and what could be more precious than the sense that I am pleasing to God, even if I am suffering?
{204}
THE SUPPORT OF GOD IN RECOVERY
@Genesis 30: 25; @Genesis 31: 11 - 16; @Genesis 32: 1, 2; @Genesis 33: 1 - 11
J.T. There are several other incidents in the history of Jacob that will be alluded to, but it was thought that it would suffice to read these. What is in mind is to show how, where declension sets in in believers, or earthly-mindedness, or even worldliness, and recovery begins, God comes in at once to help when our faces are in the right direction. We, perhaps, have noticed that persons, whilst professedly seeking to be right, fail to reach their professed desire, because there seems to be no help, no support from God, and it becomes a question as to whether there are secret conditions that should be exposed and confessed. As soon as we are transparent, and our faces are set in the right direction, we get divine help. It is said, "Had I regarded iniquity in my heart, the Lord would not hear", @Psalm 66: 18. And it is thought that these passages would help us to see how God comes in as honesty and purpose, as in the first verses read, begin the matter. "And it came to pass when Rachel had borne Joseph, that Jacob said to Laban, Send me away, that I may go to my place and to my country", @Genesis 30: 25. Evidently it was of Jacob's own volition that he said this.
Then in the next chapter we have in verse 3: "And Jehovah said to Jacob, Return into the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred; and I will be with thee" (chapter 31: 3). Then in view of the large family he had, and the holdings or belongings, we have in verses 11 - 16 how God helped to bring his family into accord with him in their movements. So that the angel of God says to Jacob, "Jacob! And I said, Here am I" (verse 11). And he tells how God blessed him in cattle; and then it says Rachel
{205}
and Leah answered and said to him, "Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's house? Are we not reckoned of him strangers? For he has sold us, and has even constantly devoured our money. For all the wealth that God has taken from our father is ours and our children's; and now whatever God has said to thee do" (verses 14 - 16). That is, they are with their husband against their father. Then passing over other scriptures that might be read, this one in chapter 32 shows God Himself is with Jacob in power. "And Jacob went on his way; and the angels of God met him. And when Jacob saw them he said, This is the camp of God. And he called the name of that place Mahanaim", which means, two camps.
Well, I thought just to indicate what is in mind in calling attention to these scriptures, because our families, especially where there has been retrogression or departure, are sure to pick up what we are in, and very often retard our recovery, and I thought it was well to see that God brings even the families around here. Rachel and Leah and, as we shall see in chapter 33, an offended brother, is recovered, too. At least, he is influenced by what is from God. Jacob sets his family in order, putting Joseph foremost before his mother. So that it is not only a right spirit in Jacob, but a spiritual understanding, spiritual testimony. So that Esau is affected.
R.W.S. To set Jacob's face in the right direction would God use His government? Jacob says in chapter 31: 7, "And your father has mocked me, and has changed my wages ten times". Is there God's government? Then when that is responded to God comes in and gives Joseph, because it says when Joseph was born, he said, "Send me away", chapter 30: 25.
J.T. I think we should see that Joseph is a sort of token of spiritual understanding in Jacob. In chapter 33 he is set before his mother. As the family in its subdivisions passes before Esau, Joseph is set
{206}
before his mother. He comes in last, but he is before his mother. This would represent spiritual intelligence in the testimony in the family. The family is secured, as we see in chapter 31, but it is this spiritual touch which would point to Christ. Christ has a full place in the family, and it is a very important matter, if we are to have our families with us, that it is not only by influence in the way of headship, or authority in the husband, but that there is spirituality in it.
A.N.W. In that connection, is it your suggestion that the first verse read in chapter 30 suggests that what makes the turn is some fresh living view of Christ?
J.T. That is what I thought. It is said, Rachel had said, "God has taken away my reproach. And she called his name Joseph; and said, Jehovah will add to me another son" (chapter 30: 23, 24). Joseph means 'addition'. So that Rachel clearly has prophetic power here, and calls him Joseph, which means 'He will add' and then she definitely says here, "Jehovah will add to me another son". And then, after Rachel had borne Joseph, Jacob says to Laban, Send me away, as if the light of another spiritual world was in his soul in the light of what Rachel said, and the name she gave her son, and the prophetic word as to Benjamin. I was thinking that is how the thing stands.
W.B-w. "Give me my wives for whom I have served thee, and my children" (verse 26). Rachel and Leah were in the thing. It is a good thing to have the wives with us in the movement, the sisters.
J.T. Yes; the wives and the children. I thought that was a very important item in the history, and God evidently helped in the matter, because it was Jacob's dream that seemed to affect him. In chapter 31 it would seem that the dream that Jacob records helped the matter, and then when his father-in-law
{207}
would have done him harm, God helped him again, showing how God is with a man when he is in the right direction.
F.S.C. Would the word in @Deuteronomy 26 fit into what we are saying, where they came before the Lord with the first-fruits in their baskets?
J.T. I think that is right. It is the feeling you have when drawing near to God. What you were, and what you are now, having your inheritance in Canaan and a basket with first-fruits in it. It is this help that we get from God that I was thinking of. When a brother has turned away, or at least retrograded to some extent, and the thought comes into his heart to return to God, to God's house, God is immediately with him and helps him in his family, because that would be pretty sure to retard him otherwise, with so many cattle and other things; and when his father-in-law takes issue with him, God comes to Laban and says, Do not do any harm to Jacob, so that we are well protected as we turn around to God.
T.H. Rachel gets a word from God.
J.T. She has clearly a prophetic place. We are told in the gospel of Matthew that she wept for her children. She is a real mother and evidently she has a prophetic mind here in naming Joseph and saying she will have another son.
C.A.M. Speaking of having his face in the right direction, he never seems to have forgotten his bearings in a way. I mean he refers to 'my country' and so on. I was thinking about this matter of his turning. It is emphasised that where there is a turning, it needs reinforcing. It is always a kind of critical part of the course that we take. I was wondering whether God in this way did not reinforce it as to time and as to his feelings, too.
J.T. What has struck me about it here is that it was his own decision. God had not said anything to him yet about going back, "Send me away" (that
{208}
is after Joseph is born) "that I may go to my place and to my country". That is what you look for if God is working in a moral way with persons who have turned away. You want to be right with those with whom you have to do. He did not want to go away clandestinely. He did afterwards. But here he wants Laban to send him. He wants things to be orderly and seemly, and he would not take his wives and children by force. He says, "Give me my wives for whom I have served thee, and my children; that I may go away, for thou knowest my service which I have served thee". It is a very sober, righteous, seemly way to begin. It seems as if, if a man is with God at all, this is what will mark him.
W.B-w. Was twenty years not a long time to be away? Twenty years out of fellowship is a long time.
J.T. Well, he had not forgotten his country, "Send me away, that I may go to my place and to my country". So that, although it was a long time, he had not forgotten his place. @1 Corinthians 1: 2 says, "With all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours": he had a country, but he had a place.
W.B-w. Would God allow that in His wisdom and in His ways in discipline those twenty years would help him?
J.T. I think that is what comes out. The finishing touches are seen in what has been read, but they are not completed until he reaches Bethel in chapter 35. But the thing begins with yourself, although in an unseen way God must work with a man before he will move, but there is nothing said about a vision here. It is the light that was evidently in Jacob. Apparently Jacob never lost the sense of the light shown at the birth of Joseph and what his mother said, for the mother and Joseph here are identified.
R.W.S. What would be the root of Jacob's deflection in the truth?
{209}
J.T. Well, I think mercantile instincts. He began to talk about buying a wife, serving for a wife. I think it is a sort of instinct that enlarged in the history of Jacob's family, the mercantile instinct. He had to stay fourteen years. Isaac and Rebecca had no thought of his going and spending all that time to get a wife. They had in mind that it should be on ordinary principles; that affection should spring up; that he should not have to buy a wife by serving for one. That meant almost fourteen years. And now you will notice that Laban says to him in verse 27, "I pray thee, if I have found favour in thine eyes -- I have discovered that Jehovah has blessed me for thy sake. And he said, Appoint to me thy wages, and I will give it. And he said to him, Thou knowest how I have served thee, and what thy cattle has become with me. For it was little that thou hadst before me, and it is increased to a multitude, and Jehovah has blessed thee from the time I came; and now, when shall I also provide for my house? And he said, What shall I give thee? And Jacob said, Thou shalt not give me anything. If thou doest this for me, I will again feed and keep thy flock: I will pass through all thy flock today, to remove thence all the speckled and spotted sheep, and all the brown lambs, and the spotted and speckled among the goats; and that shall be my hire" (verses 27 - 32). That was a defect. The light had come into his soul that he expressed, to be let go to his place and his country. Well, why does he stop? It is just for hire.
J.S. Would that be a trait of the Jew today?
J.T. It is clear enough. We know what they are in New York City. But it is a question of what each of us is. We may sacrifice divine advantage or privilege for the sake of gain. The Lord speaks about that, and Paul to Timothy speaks about the love of money. It is a root of all evil. It is not the
{210}
root, but it is a root, one of the roots of all evil, and I believe that is what held him back here, whereas he should have answered to the light at once. It was of his own accord Jacob said he wanted to go. Why did he not go?
C.A.M. Laban being the kind of man he was, Jacob might have said, Well, if I had not run into such a man as this, I would not have been in such difficulty. I suppose God ordered all that, and what Jacob had to do was to learn in his own soul and not blame anybody else.
J.T. Quite so. And if light came into his soul, why not go in it? What hindered him? Evidently to get more cattle.
Rem. Laban would represent the Protestant system. The commercial spirit is there and may creep into us as coming out of it. I was thinking Laban must represent the general position in christianity, whereas Jacob comes out of it, but may carry the commercial spirit with him.
J.T. Yes; he carried that with him. It is remarkable as the history goes on how slow he is to learn. In chapter 33 he goes to Succoth to build a house. He had not got to the end of his journey yet, and it shows how easily a man may be turned aside. It is to show the tendency with us to vacillate and allow second thoughts to govern us instead of first ones. The first one was the right one. Succoth was not his place. Bethel was the idea.
J.S. Is that seen in the prodigal: "I will rise up and go to my father", @Luke 15: 18?
J.T. Just so; and he does go.
Rem. Laban says, "I have discovered that Jehovah has blessed me for thy sake" (chapter 30: 27). God was working with Laban also.
J.T. Laban recognised God, but it was just because He had given him more cattle. I mean that is the thing that governs the position here. And when you
{211}
come to chapter 33: 17 it says, "Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built himself a house, and for his cattle he made booths". Clearly the cattle had a great place with him. He stopped short of the house of God. I think the chapter brings out the tendency with us, however sincere. As we get light from God we go in it, and then we are stopped by some natural consideration, and then we go again and are stopped by another natural consideration, to build a house and booths for the cattle.
A.R. It says, "And there he set up an altar, and called it El-Elohe-Israel" (verse 20). Would you say the cattle were in his mind, and himself? The next altar is in relation to God Himself (chapter 35: 7).
J.T. That is right. He connected God with himself and his cattle. The great thought is the God of Bethel.
A.B.P. Oftentimes thoughts come to us as we sit under the ministry which are right thoughts, and as we consider them we take more conservative steps.
J.T. These are all most important suggestions. The way to get the good of it is to put oneself in the position of Jacob, inclusive of one's family. You have a right thought, and you resolve to move in it, and then someone comes and makes a proposal to you of some kind. He holds out this opportunity for increased wealth, and Jacob stays there to get the cattle. It brought him into considerable difficulty, because Laban had it in his mind to do him harm. We are really playing with fire when we do these things. We may get into serious difficulties unless we move in the light.
Rem. Rachel and Leah seem to move together in the chapter you suggested. When it is a matter of going with Jacob, they were not moving independently, but together. In chapter 31: 14 they seem to be of one mind in the matter.
{212}
J.T. I thought the dream was to help them. It is mentioned to show that they were helped by it. God intended that dream to help them, and it is a question, therefore, if the wives are slothful in what is right, if you are able to bring in the dream; if you have not got anything corresponding with the dream you have not got much power. It is a communication from God that gives you power.
J.S. Is Rachel Israel after the flesh?
J.T. Well, she is the first-love, but last really. She is a prophetess, really, in relation to Joseph when she says, "Jehovah will add to me another son", but she died as he was born, and yet her voice comes down into Matthew, showing God gives her a great place in the testimony.
J.S. How do you regard Leah?
J.T. Leah is the assembly. She is not so good-looking. The gentiles were not so appealing to the Lord as the Jews were. Paul himself was held by the Jews to much sorrow, but the Lord was not. He cut the connection with the Jews altogether.
Ques. Do you have in mind that the husband should have a prophetic word for the wife? The dream of Jacob would be a prophetic word.
J.T. If you have any dream, spiritual impulses from God, they are intended to give you power with your family. There is nothing more important than to be able to sway your family, not by mere willpower or authority, but by influence, by spiritual impressions. If they are not swayed by that they will become sinful.
J.S. The dreams were to be in relation to the house of God.
J.T. The dream in relation to the house of God was in chapter 28. This is a dream in Padan evidently meant to affect his wife and children. "And the Angel of God said to me in a dream, Jacob! And I
{213}
said, Here am I. And he said, Lift up now thine eyes, and see: all the rams that leap upon the flock are ringstraked, speckled, and spotted; for I have seen all that Laban does to thee. I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, where thou vowedst a vow to me. Now arise, depart out of this land, and return to the land of thy kindred" (chapter 31: 11 - 13). This is what he told Rachel and Leah. It was at the time when the wages he had bargained for with Laban were coming to him. Apparently that affected the two women, and it says, "And Rachel and Leah answered and said to him, ... Whatever God has said to thee do".
C.A.M. I suppose you would say there is nothing stronger in a household crisis than to be able to say you have had some dealings with God. Sometimes it needs something to carry the position.
J.T. That is the point. They would value the cattle, you may be sure. Wives like the cattle, I mean, the money; although that is not all he said, but it was the incident where the cattle were increased. They were with God in this thing.
A.B.P. Would not this dream primarily adjust Jacob? It is God that was doing it. It was not his contriving.
J.T. God is working in spite of difficulties. God is able to overcome difficulties, and Jacob himself had them, because he was not really fair in laying these rods before the cattle. But God says to him, "For I have seen all that Laban does to thee". That is very touching. Although what Jacob was doing was not altogether commendable, yet God is taking account of Laban. What an unfair man he was! He was unfair from the start with all this bargaining with Jacob, and God is very fair in these things, even in ordinary things, even as regards Rachel. God listened to her. "God remembered Rachel, and God listened to her" (chapter 30: 22). He had consideration
{214}
for Leah because She was ill-favoured. God is fair and gives us to understand He is fair anyway.
J.S. Would you regard the present day as one of recovery?
J.T. Well, I suppose you do. We are all subjects of the grace of God, taken out of such associations as Jacob was in.
A.R. In regard to this appearing, God says, "I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, where thou vowedst a vow to me" (chapter 31: 13). God could have said to him, I am God; but He links Himself on with His house and links Jacob on with His house, too. That is to remind us that all our houses are to be held in relation to God's house.
J.T. Clearly. The cattle, the fairness of God in helping Jacob in the bargain he made with Laban is very remarkable. God enters into that, the unfairness of Laban. That same point comes up in verse 22: "It was told Laban on the third day that Jacob had fled. And he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven days journey, and overtook him on mount Gilead. And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said to him, Take care thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad". That is God again. Laban has a dream. Whether he ever had one before, we do not know; but he had a dream in connection with Jacob.
Ques. Does the covenant go back to chapter 28? He had a covenant with God that God would care for him. Would not that be the original contract?
J.T. That is the basis of it. These chapters are full of that sort of thing, communications of God with His children; He enters into their little matters, their family matters and so on, and brings in His fairness.
R.W.S. Laban says in chapter 31: 29: "It would be in the power of my hand to do you hurt;
{215}
but the God of your father spoke to me last night, saying, Take care that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad".
J.T. That is very beautiful. God is bettering the whole position. He is helping Laban.
R.W.S. Laban is not getting help, is he?
J.T. He is appeased to some extent. He was intending to do him hurt. It was in his power to do him hurt, and God saw that and prevented it in a dream, and one is greatly impressed; if one is returning to God, God is helping him. This is written down to show that a man that is at all sincere will get help from God.
C.A.M. It is remarkable how a christian affects everybody around him for good or otherwise. If he is with God even the worst kind of person will benefit by it.
J.T. Yes. We may safely say Laban got some gain out of this, but what use he made of it we have to leave; but he is entering into contract with Jacob according to verse 50. He says to Jacob, "This heap is a witness between me and thee this day. Therefore was the name of it called Galeed -- and Mizpah; for he said, Let Jehovah watch between me and thee, when we shall be hidden one from another" (verses 48, 49). There was a heap of stones which is a poor affair, but nevertheless, there was a sort of covenant. There would be no war; that is something, anyway.
W.B-w. In verse 24 God came to Laban in a dream, and put things right in verse 29, "Take care that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad". He gets the right impression from God.
J.T. I think the whole scene is bettered. There is an element of betterment all around in these dreams, but you can see God is helping Jacob. He has His eye on this erring child, and He is going to see him through. And in chapter 32 it is said, "And
{216}
Jacob went on his way; and the angels of God met him. And when Jacob saw them he said, This is the camp of God. And he called the name of that place Mahanaim" (verses 1, 2). So we have a landmark, which is always remarkable in these cases. If we get a landmark, there is some point reached. If he names it, it means there is light in his soul. The angels of God met him.
W.B-w. Another thing comes to light on mount Gilead. He explored and found idolatry there. God in His government was causing that to come to light.
J.T. Quite so. That would be a help to Rachel, no doubt.
A.R. Why does he call it Mahanaim, two camps?
J.T. It is double witness. "And Jacob went on his way; and the angels of God met him". "And when Jacob saw them he said, This is the camp of God. And he called the name of that place Mahanaim". It was greater than he thought it was. When you decide on giving it a name, you are fair about it; you give it a proper name. Two is more than one, you know; it is witness.
J.S. Mizpah.
J.T. That means 'watch-tower', but Mahanaim is much greater, the two camps of God, but there is such a thing as that to be counted on.
C.A.M. That would be a sort of confirmation that the thing was going right. That is, angels intervening would confirm it.
J.T. You can understand how favourable angels are if you are an erring one, and you are getting back, you are getting right in your household; how comforting it is, because angels know how to make you feel right. They are very considerate. Take the angels that fed Elijah. He was on the wrong line, but an angel made two breakfasts for him. "The journey is too great for thee". It is one of the worst wildernesses in the world down there by Sinai, and the angel
{217}
took sympathetic account of the traveller. There was a man called Barzillai, who was a great man, a great friend of David's, and he did him a great service at Mahanaim. There is a strong link in the landmark. These landmarks are very interesting in Scripture. Jacob says, "This is the camp of God". That is one idea, but when he decides to name it he uses the plural, two camps. The Song of Songs speaks about "the dance of two camps", spiritual liveliness, buoyancy, and no doubt Jacob felt that he was surrounded by friends when he saw those angels there.
Ques. Did he need this stabilising in regard to Esau?
J.T. God anticipated that, quite so. Now the next difficulty is not Laban, but Esau, an offended brother, and a brother who had murder in his heart, too. How are you going to overcome him? I am sure God had that in mind. He is going to support him. 'Depend on Me; there is plenty of support for you'; but instead of that he drops down to the level of what he had. It says in verse 3, "And Jacob sent messengers before his face to Esau his brother, into the land of Seir, the fields of Edom". (Notice these remarks about Edom.) "And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye speak to my lord, to Esau: Thy servant Jacob speaks thus" (it is a very formal word), "With Laban have I sojourned and tarried until now"; that would remind Esau that when Jacob left he was intending to murder him. This is not a spiritual speech at all. He says, "and I have oxen, and asses, sheep, and bondmen, and bondwomen"; he tells Esau what he had acquired, which in no way would draw Esau to him or placate him at all. That would rather produce a spirit of rivalry. It is the inclination or disposition in us. We are all conscious that in spite of favours, in spite of advantages, in spite of ministry, there is the tendency to drop to the natural man, even after we are favoured with impressions from the Lord. He drops down to
{218}
the level of a man like Esau himself. When I left, you, were about to kill me; but now this is what I am.
F.H.L. Would it be too much to say that in the reference in Hebrews he is much greater than the cattle or the sheep or Esau or any of these things? Finally Jacob reaches that point.
J.T. That is the thing to keep before us. And when we come to chapter 37 it says, "These are the generations of Jacob, Joseph ..." (verse 2), and that is all you get. Joseph is now filling the scene. And then you get Joseph's dream. He is filling the whole scene, and the touch is in the verse read from chapter 30: "And it came to pass when Rachel had borne Joseph" (verse 25), and then the second touch is in chapter 33: 7, when the wives and children were brought before Esau; it says, "And lastly Joseph drew near, and Rachel". Joseph is put before his mother. There is nothing like that in any of the other families. So that it is like the young man coming into view.
A.R. We will never get to that point until we have a wrestling. In chapters 31 and 32 there are angels appearing, but later on what we get is an angel wrestling with him.
J.T. The whole of chapter 32 should be commented on if we had time, but as to this message he sends to Esau, the messengers come back; that is a sorrowful thing. So that there is nothing gained there. And then we have the principle which begins in verse 7: "Then Jacob was greatly afraid, and was distressed; and he divided the people that were with him, and the sheep and the cattle and the camels, into two troops. And he said, If Esau come to the one troop and smite it, then the other troop which is left shall escape. And Jacob said, God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, Jehovah, who saidst unto me, Return into thy country and to thy kindred, and I will do thee good, I am too small for all the
{219}
loving-kindness and all the faithfulness that thou hast shewn unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two troops. Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau; for I fear him, lest he come and smite me, and the mother with the children". Well, he lodged there that night, and there is the well-known story of the wrestling. Instead of his meeting Esau, he meets God. God is saying virtually, 'You have Me to do with; I am more important than your brother'. And God helped him to overcome. That is a great thing, when God gives you to feel you are overcoming spiritually.
Ques. Is there some moral suggestion in the separation of the great gift he sends on and his great wealth, whether what you remarked about God coming in is a great point in my recovery, as to whether I have power with God or whether a gift I might bring. He intended his worldly possessions to have power with Esau?
J.T. Quite so. And instead of telling Esau what he had in the first message, now he is going to give him something. That is another story altogether, and Esau finally takes it: "Two hundred she-goats, and twenty he-goats; two hundred ewes, and twenty rams; thirty milch camels with their colts; forty kine, and ten bulls; twenty she-asses, and ten young asses" (verses 14, 15). That is a big present for a man like Jacob: hard-earned, you might say. He is sacrificing now. He did not say a word about giving him anything in his first message. Now he is softened; his heart is softened and he is going to make a sacrifice.
Rem. Gift is not sufficient; the prayer would have to be there, too.
J.T. Prayer first and wrestling, then the gift. It says in verse 24, "And Jacob remained alone; and a man wrestled with him until the rising of the
{220}
dawn". It is a crucial matter. Instead of being afraid of Esau, is he afraid of God? A man wrestled with him until the rising of the dawn, and he allowed him to prevail. It is very touching, it seems to me, that God gives you to understand that you are making headway with Him. It is much better to make headway with God, 'If you are to present a testimony to Esau at all, you must have to do with Me first, and that is what happened'. And so when the wrestling with God is over, he is evidently crippled, but greatly empowered inwardly. And that is how he meets his brother. So that chapter 33 says, "And Jacob lifted up his eyes and looked, and behold, Esau was coming, and with him four hundred men". Sure enough, there they were. And he distributed the wives and children, and, it says, "bowed to the earth seven times, until he came near to his brother". That is remarkable. What Esau saw in that brother, bowing himself seven times! How did it affect his lameness? Did his lame leg interfere? It is remarkable. That would be a touch. He had to do with God. How can I influence the brethren, especially if they are to be reconciled, except I am humble? It is only as I am alone with God that I get this power with a brother. That was what was needed, although that is mentioned afterwards, the order of his family, the order of his house.
J.H. Do you think he instinctively puts Joseph hindmost at first?
J.T. It does not mean he is the least; it means he is the greatest.
J.H. I wondered if he was really guarding the Person of Christ.
J.T. Undoubtedly he was concerned about Joseph. It says Joseph was after the others in verse 7: "And lastly Joseph drew near".
A.B.P. When Jacob sent the message to Esau he made no reference to the children at all. The
{221}
children seemed to impress Esau most. And Jacob answers, "The children that God has graciously given thy servant". Is there some point in that?
J.T. I think so. The children are really the inheritance of God. Cattle, of course, are important for sacrifice, but the children are suggestive of the family, and God has graciously given them, as the Lord Jesus says through the Spirit in the prophets, "Behold, I and the children that Jehovah hath given me", @Isaiah 8: 18. What a well-ordered family! It is how the Spirit of God puts the matter. "He distributed the children to Leah, and to Rachel, and to the two maidservants: and he put the maidservants and their children foremost, and Leah and her children after, and Rachel and Joseph hindmost. And he passed on before them, and bowed to the earth seven times, until he came near to his brother". That is a good way to come near, not keep at arms length, but come near in bowing down to the earth. I suppose the number seven would mean there is real humility. He had just come from the presence of God. You might say he had been in the arms of God; it was a wrestling matter.
So that Jacob is clearly the greater of the two, and he is humbling himself, which you can always afford to do if you are greater, and I think that is how he secured his brother. He came near to his brother and Esau ran to meet him. "And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him; and they wept".
W.B-w. Would there be some correspondence between Naaman the Syrian and Jacob? Naaman plunged himself seven times in Jordan.
J.T. That is a token of humility, plunging into Jordan seven times.
W.B-w. Once was not enough. It is quite a test to do it seven times.
J.T. It was God's doing. God had crippled him.
{222}
Rem. It is the complete opposite of what we have in the previous chapter. Jacob was making much of the natural side, now he is making much of what he has acquired from God.
J.T. I am sure Esau never saw a man like him.
F.H.L. Often a brother is so concerned with his relations with the brethren and how he can make things right with them, but if he reaches this point all is settled.
J.T. God settled the matter by meeting him Himself, and in a very powerful way, and yet He allowed him to prevail, 'You have prevailed against Me; now prevail against your brother'. He did it by humiliation, bowing seven times, and he came nearer and nearer each time he did it.
Ques. You mentioned transparency at the outset of the meeting in regard to recovery. Is that involved in this seven times?
J.T. The thing is completed. It is the thing fully, what should be done in a full way. Do not go half-measure; go the whole way. So that he came nearer and nearer as he bowed.
A.R. The new man, we might think, is strictly a formation, but the features must display themselves.
J.T. They do. That is the idea. It is the humility that brought him near to his brother.
F.S.C. Did he wrong his brother? Did Jacob wrong Esau at the outset?
J.T. Well, did he wrong him? Esau said he did, but did he wrong him? He made a bargain with Esau. Esau proposed it. He bought the birthright from him. But he deceived his father. I suppose Esau was particularly angry because he put on clothes to deceive his father, and get away the blessing from his father, but the basis of all that was that Esau sold his birthright, so that he had really no claim at all. He had no right to any blessing especially. He had already sold his birthright.
{223}
R.W.S. Do Laban and Esau seem to be agencies, not particularly helped in themselves, but designed by God to help Jacob?
J.T. I would say God gave him a victory over Laban, too, for, after all, they did part in a brotherly sort of way, and now he appeases Esau, so that brotherly relations are established. Jacob had made a covenant with Laban; he had reached that point with him, and left him in victory. He did not leave him an enemy. And now he appeases Esau. So that the whole position is bettered. God is helping a man that is seeking to be right. If I am seeking to be right, I will not only help others, but get help myself.
J.S. Would the matter of wrestling allude in some sense to Gethsemane?
J.T. The Lord agonised there; in the sense of agonising, of course.
Rem. Wrestling is at close quarters with God Himself; it required handling. He comes from that to Esau. Esau was his great threat. God is setting him up now to meet Esau and he does it well.
W.B-w. Perhaps you would tell us something more about the Esau element and the Laban element. Esau was a longer-standing element to be met. The Laban element comes in more by the way, God's government.
J.T. It is a question of what each man may be. Laban has a history. He had a history in regard of Rebecca. He was a man that would take things into his own hands; like a brother, sometimes, in a meeting taking things into his own hands. He had more power in the house than his father, according to chapter 24. Esau, on the other hand, is a profane man that sold his birthright for a mess of pottage. He is likened to a man that never gets a blessing at all. He sold his birthright and found no place for repentance
{224}
though he sought for it with tears; a very sorrowful thing.
W.B-w. And Jacob has to be reconciled to it?
J.T. Well, he is. That is another testimony to Esau. Is he going to help him during his life? God intended to give him an opportunity. Here is a real brother. He has his family set out in an orderly way, and the younger son was put before his mother. He was tested by the spirituality presented by Jacob and his family.
Rem. A further testimony seems to be in Deuteronomy; they were to go again by way of mount Seir, as going towards Kadesh-barnea. The tribes were all to pass by way of mount Seir.
J.T. Grace was shown to Esau there, and this is grace shown, too.
T.H. Wrestling would help him to be a testimony to his brother.
J.T. That is how the matter stands.
W.B-w. Does this all lead on to the service of God? Jacob ends as a worshipper.
J.T. Clearly. It runs right through to the last chapter of the book.
R.W.S. I just want to read of the pleasure God has; it says in Hosea, "He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and in his strength he wrestled with God. Yea, he wrestled with the Angel, and prevailed; he wept, and made supplication unto him; he found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us -- even Jehovah, the God of hosts -- Jehovah is his memorial", @Hosea 12: 3 - 5.
J.T. It shows how the history of Jacob runs on to the history of the assembly, to us.
{225}
SONS OF GOD
@Luke 20: 34 - 36; @Matthew 5: 9; @Romans 8: 14
I have in mind to speak on a familiar theme, namely that of sons of God, wishing to treat it from the practical or tangible features in the Scriptures, especially those that I read, that mark it. The Lord has by His Spirit called attention for some years back in a special way to this great theme, particularly as the thought is seen in Christ. And it is a divine way to present everything that we are to know or that we are to be, in Christ first. So that as presented thus and apprehended by us we may safely examine ourselves as to whether what particular thing may be presented is taking form in us in such wise as to be observable. The Father, we are told, prepared for sonship long before it actually took form. It was to take form at a certain time in the divine calendar, when the fulness of the time was come. Earlier, faith and those who had it were under governors, tutors, in the nursery of God, a very wholesome place to be under such circumstances, before full manhood came into being, but still in the nursery until the time appointed by the Father. In that time faith and those who had it were in limitations. They were minors, to use an ordinary term, not to be trusted without protection until the time appointed by the Father, but in that state of minority they were being tutored. They were being taught in so far as they could be. Some of them advanced further than others, as it says: "Prophets ... sought out and searched out; searching what, or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ which was in them pointed out, testifying before of the sufferings which belonged to Christ, and the glories after these", @1 Peter 1: 10, 11. They searched, advanced pupils, you might say, but still in their minority, kept under tutors and governors. So there
{226}
was particularly a foreshadowing by prophecy of sonship. One of the most striking passages is @2 Samuel 12, in which we are informed of Solomon's birth. David his father called him Solomon when he was born, meaning 'peaceful'. He was to be peaceful. But it is said that Jehovah loved him. It is a most remarkable thing; it is doubtful whether you can get another instance of the kind, where Jehovah is said to have loved a babe. David, who would appear to have understood the position exactly, recorded it as prophetic, not actual. That is to say, a babe in itself was hardly causative of love, "He sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet; and he called his name Jedidiah, for Jehovah's sake", @2 Samuel 12: 25. That is a prophetic matter. I do not deny that God could love him immediately and for good reasons, but it is for generally prophetic reasons which would develop later. A really lovable Babe was Jesus; a really lovable Boy was Jesus, answering all the necessities of divine affections. A lovable Man was Jesus, but still faith was being tutored beforehand, prepared for a great matter. Not a dying child; if Seth were to name him, he would call him Enosh. Not that his title is precluded by the circumstances, but Solomon was a dying man like Enosh. He lived a much shorter life so that he belonged to the dying, whereas the real thought of a child lovable to God is that he lived, not that he died. But faith was being prepared for sonship that it should appear in a Person extremely and infinitely lovely to the eyes of God. Beloved of Jehovah! Every time David would think of his son he would have in mind this word 'Jedidiah'; it is only mentioned once, but that is enough for faith, faith does not need repetitions; David would always think of Jedidiah. He would say, I prefer that name. It refers to Jehovah's love for that child, that boy, that young man. David, in this way, was being educated in sonship. And so with Solomon, his real name was Jedidiah, so to speak.
{227}
It should be written in large letters, *Jehovah loved him*. What a thought that is! -- looking forward to what is prophetic because it is sent by Nathan, the prophet. I only refer to that instance, but it covers a great deal of what I had in mind; how a definite education during the minority of His people prepared them for this great matter of sonship.
He was very lovable. And then later God says, "Thou art my son". Not a babe, not My babe, but "My son; this day have I begotten thee", @Psalm 2: 7. That was also prophetic. It was uttered long before sonship came into effect, so that in the fulness of the time, "God sent forth his Son", and then the informative word follows, "come of woman": "But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, come of woman, come under law", @Galatians 4: 4. He became, as it were, took actual form in that way; not that He actually 'began to be', as the word means, but that sonship began to be. The Person did not begin to be; no, He is God. The Person did not begin to be, but sonship, and it began to be through birth. And then it goes on to say, "That he might redeem those under law, that we might receive sonship", @Galatians 4: 5. That is to redeem those who were minors, and that we might receive this great matter, this great relation, namely sonship. It is a matter of reception. "But because ye are sons", that is, because you have received sonship (verse 6), "God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father". The thing is there. It is in actual existence. It is not a whimper, it is a cry. There is power of the lungs in it. It is not the cry of a babe. It is a cry such as the Lord Jesus uttered. He said, "Abba, Father", in the power of the Spirit of sonship; the Spirit of God's Son was there. The thing is really there when you have that cry. Well, now, that is prefatory to what I have to say and will help in what is to follow.
{228}
I want to show in @Luke 20 that this relationship, which is to be eternal, according to this passage is dependent upon resurrection. That is to say the passage does not teach that we are sons by faith; we are all that now, all sons of God by faith; Paul says that in @Galatians 3: 26, "For ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus", but in @Galatians 4, which I have already quoted, he says we received it. It is a matter that we receive from God as a gift, and in order to make it real and substantial He sent out the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, and that leads to the cry, Abba, Father. It is real sonship now. That is what applies now. We are not sons now because we are raised from the dead, because we are not raised from the dead yet. We are still in a mortal condition. We cannot help but admit that fact. That does not imply that some of us will not die because it is possible we shall. Some of us may not. We that are alive and remain shall be changed. So that, as the Lord Jesus says elsewhere, "Every one who lives and believes on me shall never die", @John 11: 26. That is happily true, perhaps, of us. But if God is to continue His testimony for another hundred years more, which I do not expect, then it is likely that we shall all fall asleep; we shall be in good company and in a great company, too, with an immense company as falling asleep through Jesus. There is no sting in that at all. Fifty years elapsed, and perhaps most of us will have fallen asleep, and we shall not regret it. The apostle Paul says, It is far better. He does not mean to say it is far better than resurrection, but far better than present conditions. But if the testimony is not to be continued, then we shall all be changed. As the Lord says to Martha, "Every one who lives and believes on me shall never die. Believest thou this?", @John 11: 26. It is a matter to be believed. Do you believe it? She says, I do: "Yea, Lord; I believe that
{229}
thou art the Christ, the Son of God, who should come into the world". She is getting on in her soul. That is what these meetings are for. Martha learned quickly and the Lord came to raise Lazarus. It was a resurrection time. The whole sphere was life and Martha learns in that time. Now the scripture I read in @Luke 20 is not referring to us on these lines at all. It is not present sonship because we are not yet risen. The Lord Jesus says here in answer to the Sadducees, "The sons of this world marry and are given in marriage, but they who are counted worthy to have part in that world, and the resurrection from among the dead ...". Notice that, it is not translation from living conditions here but resurrection from among the dead. That is what the Lord is speaking about. He is speaking about those who have gone through death and those who may go through death. We have part in death and resurrection. That is what He is speaking about. He is answering infidels, Sadducees, who are denying the resurrection and the existence of angels, too, and spirits as well, dark as night. The Lord is treating of the great fact of resurrection from among the dead. So He is not treating of sonship by faith, but treating of sonship by resurrection and so He says in verse 36, "For neither can they die any more, for they are equal to angels, and are sons of God". He is not referring to persons who never die. He is referring to persons who die and they will only die once. Wicked people who die in their wickedness die twice. They have a second death, but we do not. The Lord is speaking of people who die and are raised; they do not die any more, they only die once, and then He says they are equal to angels. Not that angels die and rise. That is not what He means. He says they are equal to the angels and are sons of God. He is not comparing them with the angels because angels are sons. He is saying we are in an undying condition when He compares us with
{230}
angels because angels never die. But He says more by the use of the conjunction when He says, "And are sons of God". That conjunction 'and' is important. But here the Lord is not stressing the idea of angels but persons who have part in death and have part in resurrection from among the dead; in addition to that, they are equal to the angels and they are sons of God because they are sons of the resurrection. It is a real thing. They have gone through death, have been raised from the dead which gives them a real palpable condition, sonship, according to the Lord's words here. We have part in that world and the resurrection. We are equal to the angels in that we do not die again, "And are sons of God". That is an additional thought. It is added that we are "sons of God, being sons of the resurrection". That is to say, an angel cannot be a son in that sense. He is a son in another sense. It is a specialty. We can say to Gabriel, You are not a son in the sense in which I am a son. You are not a son by faith. You are not a son because you died as I died. You are not a son because you have been raised from the dead as I have been. One likes to visualise things as they will be, how angels are different from us, how we resemble them in the sense that we do not die, but how they are different from us. We die, but they do not die. But we do not resemble them when we say, 'We died and rose'. We have the names of two angels now. The Spirit of God has only given the names of two angels; one is Michael and the other Gabriel. They got these names in relation to time, to the testimony down here, I could say, as it were, to either of them, 'You are not a son of God as I am'. Not that we would rival them. Michael would say, 'I know what a dead body is'. I can say, 'Yes, Michael, you do, because you contended with Satan in regard to the body of Moses'. But Michael can readily say, 'I never died like
{231}
Moses; I was never raised but still I recognise I am a son on a different basis'. I am saying all this so that we might be practical in this matter, so that we might understand sonship, not only as an objective matter that is entered into by faith but as a practical thing. God intends it to be a practical thing, that I can point to myself at any time and say, 'There is an evidence of my sonship'. And the great outstanding evidence eternally will be that I am a son of the resurrection. Not simply raised but I am a son of that, meaning I have acquired an understanding of that great fact. What do death and resurrection mean? Why should God go to all the pains of death and resurrection save that we should take in the idea, that we should be practical? Be practical in a thing, in this idea through education from God, like Enoch, walking with God for three hundred years. What he must have learnt from God! Amongst the things he would have learnt is the idea of death and resurrection. Enoch never died, you say; true enough, but he learnt from God nevertheless. He learnt accumulatively. He was the seventh from Adam. He came in, the seventh person in a line of educated believers. That is, whatever Adam learnt, he learnt. Whatever Abel learnt, he learnt, and Abel learnt about death. His blood was righteous blood, and his death was a righteous death, and so on down the line. Seth learnt about death, the frailty of man, dying creation, and he called his son's name Enosh, and so all the others. Enoch came in at the end of the school. He got the benefit of all that the others had acquired because learning is accumulative in every sense. We learn how much has been discovered in all courses of learning. How much has been acquired through research! It is all a question of accumulative instruction. Enoch was the seventh from Adam, and although he did not die he had learnt the lesson of death. And so it is with ourselves before we die, we learn death,
{232}
learning through baptism; we are learners of it all the time. Paul says, I have so learned it, "Daily I die", @1 Corinthians 15: 31. What a learning that was! I will tell you what I learnt last year, he would say. Three hundred and sixty-five days last year and I learnt death every day and so this year. We are not short, although we are translated without a literal death, of the knowledge of death and resurrection. Paul goes so far as to say we are raised through the faith of the operation of God who raised Christ from the dead. We learn it experimentally in that way. But the Lord is not referring to that; He is referring to the literal fact that those in that world to which the Sadducees were referring will have learnt death. They have so learnt it that they are sons of it, sons of the resurrection from among the dead. It characterises them. So they are differentiated in the most striking manner from the angels in that they have learnt death, sons of it through education.
And so we come to @Matthew 5: 9, "Blessed the peacemakers". We come now not to a resurrection condition, but a peace-making condition. We are learning war-making conditions. The world is full of them. But the Lord in Matthew is presented to us in the light of peace. Luke presents it peculiarly, too, in that way, but here it is sons of God because they are peacemakers. Now that is a word, dear brethren, for all of us, whether we are peacemakers. It is not hard to find trouble-makers. There is, alas, not one of us here without that element of trouble-making with us. There is plenty of opportunity for it. The Lord says, "Blessed the peace-makers". Solomon is called peaceful. The name indicates that he was a man of peace, and, of course, he would make peace. The first great test put to him was the two mothers with two babes. He solved the matter being a man of peace, being a peacemaker, but his wisdom was in it. He determined who the mother of the child was.
{233}
When the real truth of a matter like that comes to light it takes away the foundation of the troublemakers. It is a great point in these matters of trouble to get the truth, to investigate and find out the truth. This is a most difficult problem that Solomon is faced with. He solved it. What is the truth? That woman is the mother of that child. It is incontestable; there was not a question that it was so, and peace was established. One woman loved the child and the other did not. The latter is without a child and rightly and the former has one, and the peacemaker establishes that fact. She is the mother of the child.
The Lord says a person like that gets blessing. The word 'blessed' is found a good many times in this chapter and amongst these is this verse 9, "Blessed the peacemakers". They are very scarce. Our meetings, alas, are just full of trouble in a metaphorical way, there is not a meeting which is not. In a meeting like this one and the one in which I am at home, there are ten of them in New York and not one of them is without trouble. I am not making any complaints, but it is so, it is a time of trouble and the necessity for peacemakers is very, very great and very urgent and the Lord Jesus says, Blessed are they. What will they be called? The sons of God. "They shall be called sons of God". That is a fine title. You do not ask for it. You do not register yourself as sons of God, but others do. There is no question of putting it at the end of your name as a title. It is much better to let the saints call you it. As we had this afternoon, if you say you are a christian, that is a great deal to say. Look out abroad and you may find so many million christians, but I know that is not really true. That is very misleading, a large proportion are not christians at all. It is very significant, as we had this afternoon, that the title or designation is oracular, as if God
{234}
would say they are so. These disciples who have been educated for a whole year in the assembly are christians; God is saying it. It is a fine title. Peter says. If anyone suffers "as a christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God in this name", @1 Peter 4: 15, 16. He is worthy. So that the word 'called' here is not quite the same word. The Lord says, "They shall be called sons of God". Who called Jesus the Son of God? Gabriel says to Mary, "The holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God" (@Luke 1: 35), not 'the' Son of God, but Son of God, meaning sonship became a fact in Him and it was owned. He was called Son even then, and even the centurion at the cross says, "Truly this man was Son of God", @Matthew 27: 54. Others said it too. Why did he say it? He had reason to say it. There must have been something to show it. Paul was the first one to preach it, Jesus, Son of God. So the peacemaker is called a son of God. I want to be that, to be among the peacemakers. It is a very practical thing that I am a son because I am a peacemaker, that people say that of me that I am a son of God, because I am a peacemaker. Melchisedec was a type of Jesus as Son of God. That was a great point in Hebrews. Made like the Son of God he abides a priest continually. How is he like the Son of God? One thing is he has neither father nor mother nor genealogy. He is a type of a divine Person, but certain practical things marked Melchisedec. He met Abraham. He carried in his hands bread and wine. He was no prohibitionist; neither was Jesus. He came out to bless Abraham. He was priest of the Most High God and the Spirit of God says, He was "King of righteousness, and then also King of Salem, which is King of peace", @Hebrews 7: 2. He was not only a righteous man but he was king of it. The more righteous I am, the more kingly I am in righteousness. Being King of righteousness,
{235}
he would enforce it. He was King of Salem, too, that is King of peace. He is not only a man who would seek to promote peace, he would command it. It is imperative that he must have peace. He had moral power enough to enforce it. There will be no movement in our meetings unless we can have peace. It is the king of righteousness first and king of peace second. So we have a man who is assimilated to the Son of God. He is like Him, righteousness first, and then peace. He abides a priest continually. His office is sure.
And then finally we have @Romans 8, a familiar passage. It is a question of persons who are led by the Spirit of God. It is only a few days ago that I read a letter from a man who said he was a christian but who did not attend a certain meeting that he was invited to attend, that would have been helpful to him. He said the Spirit of God did not lead him to be there. But where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. I cannot blame the Holy Spirit if I do not go to a meeting. He would blame the Spirit. See how readily we get into mischief by forcing Scripture. The Spirit did not lead him to go. If there is good ground, go. If it is likely to be good for you I would ask you to go. If it is of God that you should go, then I say, Go. The truth is that if we pretend to be guided by the Spirit in these matters, we are forcing the truth; that is not so. We should be calculative. Faith measures, calculates; it puts two and two together and, as Paul says, "Assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us for to preach the gospel unto them", @Acts 16: 10. That is the idea; do the thing by careful calculation, by dependence upon God but do not put the Spirit in the position of hindering you to do what you should do. You are slandering the Spirit of God. If you should do it, then do it. Suppose you transgress against a brother, will you wait for the Spirit to lead you to go and confess your sins to that brother? No, go and do it. We are
{236}
told to do it. I am saying all this so as to bring out the truth of this Scripture, "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God". Not those who say they are sons of God. I am looking at the way they move. Verse 15 says, "For ye have not received a Spirit of bondage again for fear, but ye have received a spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father". We have something inwardly that is a real power in the soul, and we cry, we use it. I will admit the Spirit leads in that. The first thing He does, is to acknowledge the Father. I am just going to remark that we use the hymn book in a very restrained and restricted way, restricted because of our ignorance of the hymn book. Anyone can give out a well known hymn at an appropriate time in the assembly meeting, but there are many other hymns that would fit, and if the Holy Spirit had His way and intelligence were in us the hymn book would be better used and heaven would be better repaid from it than it is. So it is as many as are led by the Spirit of God, not led by what somebody else does. He is not a copyist. One who is led by the Spirit of God is not a copyist. The Spirit of God has some place in the hymns and the Spirit of God is original; I do not say we do not follow a lead, do what others do, but I do say that a Son of God is marked by the leading of the Spirit of God, and the leading of the Spirit of God is like the Spirit; that is to say, there is variety and freshness; that is what marks us off in the assembly services as sons of God. It is practical. My point is, sonship is evidenced practically in the believer. Not what I say, because I may say many things, and there is no evidence at all but what is to be observed, what can be observed by others. One even refers to the Lord's conversation with Peter in @John 21. Peter says to the Lord, "Thou knowest that I love thee". It is a platitude. Who would not say that? The Lord would not
{237}
accept that. It had no force with Him. Peter repeats it, "Thou knowest", he says, "that I love thee". Finally, the Lord says, 'Are you really attached to me, Peter?' Peter says, "Lord, thou knowest", changing the word. There are two words in that passage for that word 'know' in the English language. The first two replies are platitudes. Peter says the Lord knows everything. Of course, He knows everything. But He wants to know the basis of your remark. If Peter says, 'I love Thee', the Lord wants to know: 'How do I know that thou lovest Me?' Peter would say, 'You know it divinely'. That is not good enough for the Lord. That will not do. The Lord is looking for something that His eye can discern and Peter changes the word to fit that. We can never come into conversation with the Lord Jesus but we learn something. We learn in His presence. We change our words. We cease platitudes. The assembly service is flat because of these platitudes. We want facts, the why and wherefore. And Peter says to the Lord, 'You can look at me and see something in my eye, or a gesture perhaps, and You know that I love You because of what You see in me'. The Lord says, 'You have learnt your lesson. You know now to say, You know I love you by something You can see in me. Do not appeal to My divinity, My intuitive knowledge of everything. Tell Me what there is about you that shows Me you love Me'. The Scriptures do not say the Lord was satisfied, but the matter is finished and the sequence shows it was a finished matter with Peter for his services were so fresh and acceptable. I am speaking about being practical in this matter of sonship. There is something about him that we can see, and say he has the character of a son of God. May God bless the word.
{238}
THE PRESENTATION OF CHRIST
@John 19: 1 - 5; @Matthew 25: 6; @Song of Songs 3: 11
I wish to speak of Christ as presented in the threefold way indicated. He is, of course, presented in many other connections in the Scriptures besides these. He is indeed the theme of all Scripture; and, no doubt, the best exposition of that was by Himself when He walked along the highway to Emmaus with two erring disciples. He began, we are told, "from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself", @Luke 24: 27. The exposition thus made is not recorded, but the Spirit of God ever since has been engaged in unfolding Christ in the Scriptures to His people; and it is to the end that He should become attractive to, and loved by, His people.
A touching instance of His presentation of Himself to us is in @Acts 1, where, we are told, "He presented himself living, after he had suffered". The presentation would stress the idea of life as in a risen Man. Life has a great place in the Scriptures first as vegetable, then in fishes, birds, land animals, and also in man, but it is finally presented in Christ, who is risen from among the dead. Never was life seen before like that. Others had indeed been raised from the dead, but not into a new condition. He was risen into a new condition of life, a condition which is to prevail and continue, and into which we are as christians brought now by faith, as we shall be soon in actuality. For we are not only to be conformed to the image of Christ, but to the image of His body of glory -- not only a risen Christ, but a glorified Christ, the greatest thought of all.
Now I come back to our scriptures in the order in which I read them. First, Pilate's presentation of Christ; a very unworthy man to present Him, but
{239}
still he says, "Behold the man!" to the Jews. This affords an opportunity of speaking of Pilate as representing government. Matthew stresses that and calls him "governor". John mentions certain things about Pilate which are not in the other gospels. John tells us, too, that Pilate was minded to release Jesus. He represents government as seen in the four monarchies of Daniel. These four monarchies do not include all government, for it was first committed to Noah. Magisterial responsibility was put on him, and that enlarged with Nimrod into a kingdom; the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, the great Assyrian monarchy. Other monarchies, such as the Egyptian, existed before the appointment by God of what are called the four governments, kingdoms, extending from the time of Nebuchadnezzar down to the end of this dispensation, down to the introduction of the rule of Christ. These monarchies are seen in the book of Daniel as existing one after the other until a stone should be cut out without hands and should break them in pieces, fill the whole earth, and remain for ever; that is the rule of Christ, for which we are waiting.
It is not that "the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ", as the A.V. reads in @Revelation 11: 15, but rather that "the kingdom of the world of our Lord and of his Christ is come"; it is a kingdom of itself. It is a kingdom, unique, cut out without hands, that is, a *divine* kingdom, and it breaks in pieces the others, and then fills the whole earth itself and continues for ever. We love the thought of that: "The kingdom of the world of our Lord and of his Christ is come". That kingdom takes form; the whole creation awaits it and longs for it.
Now Pilate represented these four monarchies and the last of them, the one which still exists in a mysterious way, but will presently come up according
{240}
to the Scriptures in its last hideous form, and I was thinking of it now, because it had to do with Christ. These monarchies had to do with Christ before He became Man. They had to do with Him in His Spirit. The Spirit of Christ in man was retroactive; it was seen from the outset even before Christ became Man. It is seen in the book of Daniel, in Daniel himself. So that the monarchy under Nebuchadnezzar had to do with the Spirit of Christ, not Christ personally, but the Spirit of Christ in men of faith. Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego had to do directly with Nebuchadnezzar, the first great monarch, the head of the great image. He persecuted them, and thus the great matter of conscience came up in the people of God, and it still exists. These three Hebrews, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego refused to bow down to Nebuchadnezzar's image. They said, O king, we have nothing to say about the matter; we cannot and will not ever bow down to your gods! They had a conscience, and they stood by their conscience and suffered for their conscience. The furnace was heated seven times more than it was wont to be heated. The mightiest men in Nebuchadnezzar's army were used to cast them into the burning fiery furnace, and they were destroyed themselves. These three men fell down into the midst of the fire. It was the Spirit of Christ in these men, the unbending Spirit of Christ in the consciences of believers against idolatry, a good conscience. Conscience is nothing if it is not a good one. I need not follow these men's interesting story. These men were seen by the monarch in the fire, walking in it, and a fourth walking with them. Not only was the Spirit of Christ there in them, but Jesus Himself was walking with them; the fourth like the Son of God, walking in the midst of the burning fiery furnace.
God supports a good conscience as it has to say to government. Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego
{241}
serve the government in an ordinary sense; they were ministers of the government; they were appointed over the kingdom of one of the provinces in relation to Daniel. They were ready to serve the king in what was legitimate, but not to bow down to his gods; they were not ready to give way to the monarch in all he said. We must serve God rather than men. It is how some monarchs come in contact with Christ in His Spirit. The Spirit of Christ in these men was victorious; that is the point, to be victorious as having to do with governments, serving them legitimately, but not displeasing God to serve them. We must obey God rather than men, be ready to serve the governments with a good conscience, but not to bow down to their gods, nor to do other things that the Lord Jesus indicated should not be done.
Now I want to show how the Lord Himself came directly into relation with the fourth monarchy, the Roman, and how this idea that is set out in Pilate has come down to us, that the monarch presents Christ to his people. He presented Christ: "Behold the man! ... I find no fault in him", @John 19: 6. He was not against Christ; as a matter of fact Pilate was right abstractly. As a governor he had a right judgment of Christ, but he was just a governor and a politician. A mere politician has to give way to the popular wish, as we see in Herod, who wished to please the Jews and put John the baptist in prison. But then they may present Christ to us, too, for the governor of the world became a christian in Constantine. But what kind of a garment would he put on the Lord Jesus? Constantine presided at some of the christian councils, and became an honoured christian. You say, That is wonderful, the king is converted! But is he converted? It is an open question whether Constantine was converted, but then, if he presents Christ to us, what will be the Christ he presents?
{242}
What garment would he put on? Who put this garment on Christ? The soldiers, in derision. But Pilate accepted that garment. What had he done just immediately before? He had scourged Him, and yet he says, "I find no fault whatever in him".
The soldiers derisively crowned Him with a crown of thorns and put a purple robe on Him. Pilate accepted that. So with Constantine; at one time he accepted arianism, at one time he became an orthodox christian by profession; he might give you one idea or garb, he might give a unitarian garb; you cannot trust that. The Lord said to Pilate, Who told you about Me? such men are not often particular about christianity; they may be christians, but they are usually told, they do not go into the thing. In the previous chapter (verse 34) it says, "Jesus answered him, Dost thou say this of thyself, or have others said it to thee concerning me?". The Lord knew that Pilate did not look into this matter; it would be a mere sideline to him, if he did look into it at all.
The apostle Paul preached before Agrippa, "King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest". It was a matter of no consequence, "And Agrippa said to Paul, In a little thou persuadest me to become a Christian". But did he persuade him? There is no evidence of it at all, and yet he listened attentively to Paul and said, "This man might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed unto Caesar".
The Lord is very free to talk to Pilate. He says, "Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above". That is what should govern us now. The powers that be are ordained of God, be they pagan, Roman, or christian. The government is one thing, christianity is another, but the government is ordained of God and we are to obey it. We are to honour the king, but we must honour God first, I am only speaking
{243}
of what the ruler will do. Can I trust that presentation? I cannot trust it; there may be marks of scourging by that same hand. Not a moment ago he has just beaten Him, and yet he says, "I find in him no fault whatever". It is all confusing, yet the Lord Jesus comes to that man and informs him that he had power from above, otherwise he would have had no power against Him. That man put Him to death. Why? Because he submitted to the popular demand. He relinquished his responsibility because he wished to give way to the popular demand, and what is the popular demand? To put Jesus to death. Instead of carrying on his governmental responsibility and justifying the righteous, he condemned Him. That is what we have to face, dear brethren, in this matter, and yet in the most rigid and permanent way to honour the king, and to do all that he requires us to do with a good conscience; no more, we cannot go beyond a good conscience. If he asks me to do what is contrary, I would have to say to the king, I cannot do that because God is God. That is the position, but it is very interesting to see that this governor (representing the last, the Roman, monarchy) came into direct contact with Jesus, and Jesus conversed with him and he accounted Jesus a righteous Man and yet condemned Him, scourged Him, and put Him to death to please the populace. That is one thing, a matter well worth looking into, in view of our present relations with the governments.
I go on now to Matthew, to call attention to another presentation of Christ. Who does it? At midnight there was a cry, "Behold, the bridegroom". It is not now the Man, not now the purple robe, not now the crown of thorns put on by a derisive enemy. What deliverance! "Behold the bridegroom; go forth to meet him". It is an appeal, dear brethren, to us. It has long since sounded out, and since it has sounded
{244}
out the Spirit of God has been calling attention to Jesus, in His glorious heavenly habiliments, the habiliments of a bridegroom, alluding to affections, "He that has the bride is the bridegroom". We are not told who the bride is here in Matthew, whether it is the assembly as His bride, or the remnant of the Jewish nation presently. It is a question of the Bridegroom. I would take it the assembly is the bride of Christ as presented in @Matthew 25. Ever since that appearance there has been a wonderful unfolding of the glories of Christ, and it is going on yet.
There is no uncertainty here as there was with Pilate. The Spirit of God invariably keeps before us the Person of the Lord Jesus, always honouring Him: "He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine and shall announce it to you", @John 16: 14. Pilate did not glorify Jesus; he scourged Him, and yet he said, "I find no fault whatever in him", utter inconsistency. But there is no inconsistency with the Holy Spirit. The ministry consistently glorifies Christ. Ministry which does not glorify Christ is spurious. Think of the variety of the glories of the Lord Jesus that have been unfolded to us in the past hundred years. If we only had time to look into it and follow the history of ministry, we should see how invariably it keeps Christ's glory before our souls, particularly His glory as the Bridegroom, so that we might love Him and go out to meet Him, leaving the world behind with all its corruption. Scripture tells us of the virgins who went out to meet Him; but the Bridegroom tarries, as if to test us as it did them, so that they all fell asleep. Let us be on our guard as to not listening to the ministry, and not fall asleep. They all went to sleep, but the midnight hour struck, and the cry went forth, "Behold, the bridegroom". The word 'cometh' should not be there, it is simply the person; His coming is implied. That is, the idea is to attract our hearts, and the next thing is, "Go forth to meet him". Thank
{245}
God, many have done it. There may be some here who have not, that is the point of it. He is worthy of going forth to. He is presented as the Bridegroom with all that that means, evidences of affection for His people. He wishes to present Himself, to attract our attention, that we might admire and love Him, and leave the world behind. He comes half the way and more; "Go forth to meet him".
Paul says we shall go to meet Him in the air. We do not get that here, but the meeting is in the air. What a place to meet the Lord! What power is necessary! He will supply all that power, so that we shall be caught up, "For the Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then *we*, the living who remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air", @1 Thessalonians 4: 16, 17. What a meeting! But He is presented in testimony first. The midnight cry is testimony and it has continued ever since, the ministry of the Spirit calling attention to Christ in His varied attractiveness, so that the virgins (that is to say, the assembly) go forth to meet Him. The ministry should be followed by us if we are to have the varied glories of Christ before our souls. Paul says to Timothy, "*Thou* hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching", @2 Timothy 3: 10. It is really Paul's doctrine that presents Christ to us in His bridegroom habiliments and attractiveness. He says to the Corinthians, "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ". An espousal is a contract, it places us under obligation. It is the link between Christ and the assembly.
The Spirit of God in the ministry keeps Christ before us, and the more we see of His glories, the more we shall go out to Him: "Go forth to meet him". They who had oil in their lamps, those who
{246}
had the Spirit of God, the genuine christians, go forth. The others essayed to go, but they had no oil. The meaning of the parable is that a certain process has to be gone through as the testimony comes to us in ministry. The process is the oil. Have I got it? I may move to go out presently and find I have no power; I want to borrow from others, and the others say, We have only got what we need ourselves; go and buy. They went to buy, and while they went to do the transaction, the bridegroom came. Some went in with him; the others are left out, a solemn matter! I appeal to anyone here who has not the Spirit of God, to see about it. It is a transaction with Christ; He has the oil. There is the idea of life, take it. "He that will, let him take the water of life freely", @Revelation 22: 17. But then, it is a transaction; you have got to have part in that transaction. Those persons who do not have oil in their vessels do not have a transaction with Christ. The Lord says, "I do not know you". If you had a transaction with Christ, He would know you. He says here, "I do not know you". They are left outside for ever. I urge every one here to have a personal transaction with Christ. If you have a transaction with Christ, He will know you and open the door to you, but not to these. He says, "Depart from me", and they never find a place with Him in the marriage feast.
The final scripture is in the Canticles. This book has been greatly used of God in the ministry since the midnight cry; it is one of the most important books entering into the service of God and therefore ought to be read carefully by us if we are to go forth. The word is in the verse I read, "Go forth, daughters of Zion, and behold king Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart". What a sight that is! It is a prophetic word. It is a love book, "The song of songs, which is Solomon's".
{247}
Of one thousand and five this is the only one we have a record of, and it is intended to enrich the service of God, that is, to bring out and develop in His assembly affections for Christ. So in this chapter we have the bride, the Israel of the future or the assembly of today, coming up out of the wilderness. "Who is this, she that cometh up from the wilderness like pillars of smoke?" (verse 6). The feminine speaker is in mind, as in chapter 8: "Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved?". Here she is portrayed "like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant". Those are figures of what makes her attractive to Christ.
Then we have another allusion to the military men. Christ comes into it at once. Wherever we have the assembly or the Israelitish bride, it is always so. So we read in the next verse, "Behold, his couch, Solomon's own". That is another thing altogether. Solomon is soon having the means of rest. Then he has military men: "Threescore mighty men are about it, of the mighty of Israel". Typically, Christ is seen having the means of rest and having military protection. He must be guarded. The enemy is ready to attack us in the position of testimony, and we must be ready to protect the Lord Jesus. Then we have another thing in this chariot of the wood of Lebanon, a bed or palanquin. This ought to appeal to us as to whether He is the Object of our affections. He must be protected; He must be provided for in all that He needs, but He provides for Himself this palanquin, yet even so the daughters of Jerusalem have part in it. "Its pillars he made of silver, its support of gold, its seat of purple; the midst thereof was paved with love by the daughters of Jerusalem". The daughters of Jerusalem have part in this. I may be a military man supporting the chair, or I may be paving it with love. It is an appeal to me as to what
{248}
I am doing. Let us provide Him with all that He needs.
Finally, we have an appeal to the daughters, not here the daughters of Jerusalem, but the daughters of Zion. The daughters of Jerusalem pave the chair with love; that is an administrative idea. The saints viewed as daughters of Jerusalem are those who look after the interests of Christ. But the daughters of Zion refer to the eternal counsels. What a stimulus in that as it comes home to me! I was foreknown before the world began, I have my place in relation to Christ as a matter of counsel. "But whom he has predestinated, these also he has called; and whom he has called, these also he has justified; but whom he has justified, these also he has glorified". That is the basic position we are on, dear brethren, and the daughters of Zion imply that. So we are built up on the basis of counsel to go forth and behold Him. And how? As the Bridegroom, for it says, "Behold king Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart". I can understand God crowning Him when He comes out from heaven, crowned with many diadems, but I should like to see this one. He is presented in a peculiarly affectionate way. The mother is brought into it. Mary was His mother, of course, but she failed. She was at Cana of Galilee at the wedding, but He was not the Bridegroom then. She rather would use the Lord to do something. That will not do in a wedding feast where He is to shine. She failed there. He said, "Woman, what have I to do with thee?". His mother here is a spiritual thought, and prophetically it is Israel. She is seen as His mother bearing Him in @Revelation 12. Now she is seen crowning Him. If it be applied to us, viewed as the assembly, for Jerusalem above is our mother, then it would be the saints collectively putting a crown on the head of
{249}
Jesus. The daughters of Zion are to go forth and behold Him with that crown. It means, I apprehend, that we are versed in the idea of His marriage and His queen. @Psalm 45 is a love Psalm. "Upon thy right hand doth stand the queen in gold of Ophir". The Scriptures abound in regard to this marital thought. Here it is an appeal to those who are instructed to go forth "and behold king Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart". All is fresh and full; it is Christ seen in the most delightful surroundings.
Now, dear brethren, He says to His disciples, "Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see", @Luke 10: 23. If we are to have eyes for those glories of Christ, as we have, we shall see them. The Spirit of God presents them to us. It is a movement forward to see them, to behold king Solomon. The Lord in the ministry is appealing to our hearts, in relation to the eternal counsels of God, to go forth and behold Christ in this glorious way, crowned "with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart".
{250}
LIFE BEFORE THE FLOOD
@Genesis 3: 20, 21; @Genesis 4: 26; @Genesis 5: 21 - 24
J.T. I thought of these passages as connected with life in the antediluvian world. All will be aware that the Scriptures apply it to the three worlds; the world that then was (which is the one we are dealing with now), the world that now is, and the world to come. Distinct testimony was rendered to each; to this one, and the one we are now in, and the one to come. It is thought that we may get help at this time in looking at the subject of life as appearing in the first world; that is, life as having come in after sin. It was there before, both in man and animals, and fishes and birds, and in the earth, too, but it also came in afterwards, and, therefore, it is to be considered on moral grounds, not creative. Chapters 1 and 2 treat of creative conditions including life, but from chapter 3 it is moral conditions; how life is introduced, meeting the question of death. In creative conditions it is no question of meeting death, but the necessity of life in itself; but now it is meeting death. So the penalty of sin is inflicted and pronounced in chapter 3, before we get this word 'life' coming from Adam's calling his wife's name Eve, which means 'life': the mother of all living, he says.
Ques. She is the mother of all living, but the pronouncement was that death was the result of sin. What would you say about that?
J.T. Well, it will be known that this chapter includes three beings, Adam, Eve, and Satan. God addresses each one, and coming to Adam He says, "Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife, and eaten of the tree of which I commanded thee saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed be the
{251}
ground on thy account; with toil shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life; and thorns and thistles shall it yield thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, until thou return to the ground; for out of it wast thou taken. For dust thou art; and unto dust shalt thou return" (verses 17 - 19). That was what Jehovah said, what God said. And then it says, "And Man called his wife's name Eve; because she is the mother of all living" (verse 20). You have to enquire how it is that he said that; as to whether it does not imply light in his soul, and what the basis of that light is. It would be, I apprehend, the word to the serpent. God said to him, "Because thou hast done this, be thou cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field. On thy belly shalt thou go, and eat dust all the days of thy life. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; he shall crush thy head, and thou shalt crush his heel" (verses 14, 15). He must have paid attention to that word to Satan. It was implied that Eve was to be a mother and that her Seed should crush the head of the Serpent. It would seem as if Adam had light from that word. So that he uses the word 'life' instead of 'death'; instead of saying 'the mother of all dying', he says, "the mother of all living".
J.S. Would you connect this with @John 1: 4: "In him was life, and the life was the light of men"?
J.T. Quite so. What is alluded to here is His power, superior to that of the serpent so that He would crush his head.
A.B.P. Is God's word evangelical?
J.T. It certainly would be good news to Adam. In spite of the fact that he was appointed to die, his wife would have seed. The word is not to him nor about him; it is about Eve, about his wife; and that it would be very powerful seed that would overcome the serpent.
{252}
C.A.M. It was a wonderful example of a prophetic word. It shows the mighty power and potentiality of a prophetic word from God.
J.T. That is a good way to put it, I am sure; a prophetic word. You could hardly get a more pronounced prophetic word. God Himself says it.
C.A.M. Adam must have laid hold of something of the immense potentiality there was in the words God used.
J.T. That is what we might see. There was something in what God said, not to him, but to the devil.
A.N.W. Is that why you linked verse 21 with verse 20, regarding life? There is a good deal involved in verse 21.
J.T. I think verse 21 hinges on verse 20, and verse 20 hinges on verse 15. The light came out from God regarding the devil. Adam evidently took notice of it, and then in his taking notice of it and expressing his impression, he calls his wife's name Eve. The moral sequence is, God says, I must clothe them. They are going to die, but He is not clothing them for burial. It is not a burial garb He is making for them, but evidently they are there to live. And the coats are made out of skins, which would mean God is honouring Adam's naming of his wife; that he had light in his soul and he is to be clothed, as if that must be cared for, that light that he had.
J.S. Is this God's way of meeting the breakdown?
J.T. It is. I think it is very interesting as we see the sequential history here; the light beginning with God in the word to the serpent, and Adam evidently taking it on and applying it to his wife, because God spoke about his wife; He spoke to the serpent about Eve, and then God's coming in and doing something more, namely, clothing them. He must have slain
{253}
animals to do it, so that there is light there in the chapter.
C.A.M. There is rather a difference, in one sense, between this and life as previously, before the enemy came into the thing, in that life was now being developed in the midst of adverse things. Do you not think that we do not realise, perhaps for many a day, the wisdom of God in that? There must have been infinite wisdom in working it out like that.
J.T. That is what I thought. If we keep on like that, we shall get some help. Tell us more about it.
C.A.M. What you are saying strikes me as being so wonderful in that regard. At the outset you differentiated; you called attention to the difference between life before chapter 3 and this.
J.T. I was thinking, too, of the comparatively narrow limits within which God is speaking. He gives no hint as to any earlier activity of the devil; nor does He call him a devil. He does not call him an adversary or a diabolical being; he is just a Serpent; he is among the cattle. As He says to him, "Because thou hast done this, be thou cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field". He is not even compared with Adam, as if God is saying, I am not going beyond the limits of the present persons, their understanding. We have to wait for later allusions to determine that He is dealing with sin of earlier origin, nor is there any hint that he is going to be cast into the lake of fire, nor any hint of the lake of fire. It is just the radius of cattle on the earth, and the conflict between him and the woman's Seed. So that we are in comparatively narrow limits, and it is well to keep within the limits, whatever limits are prescribed by God in any consideration. Keep within the limits He indicates.
J.S. Is it God dealing with a creature?
J.T. Quite so. He is dealing with three, indeed. But the devil, or the serpent, we should say, is not
{254}
elevated to the level of man yet. He is just spoken of in relation to the cattle; that he had invaded something beyond him. He has started a conflict. He started it, and we are told what he is to eat, "On thy belly shalt thou go, and eat dust all the days of thy life". It does not go outside of what we call the physical creation. It is a serpent only. It is not a great spiritual being that is in mind. God is just keeping him within the limits of a certain circle.
C.A.M. It would seem that Adam felt God would have things in hand. Whatever this thing came to, it was all under the hand of God.
J.T. Adam and Eve would have no idea of the extensive divine outlook beyond all this and before all this; and of what had happened before the present creation. It is just the position he was in with the serpent and the cattle and the conflict. It would seem to me as if Adam (and what God would expect, too, from His creature is that we should use whatever wisdom we have got) -- it would seem as if Adam deduced from what God said that there was to be a mother, and his wife was to be the mother, and that her Seed was to be a powerful person, and that instead of dying He would live; because there is no allusion to the Seed going down into the ground. It is just Adam himself, as if the mother was there living. God did not say Eve was going down into the ground. At least, Adam, I suppose, would deduce, Well, there is something different between her and me, and he calls her by that name. He does not say anything about a title to live.
J.T.Jr. "For as in the Adam all die", @1 Corinthians 15: 22. It is not in Eve.
J.T. That is what I was thinking. He is the head and the penalty is on him. The penalty put on her is not that. She is to bear, but bear in sorrow. It is a question of deduction, which is a principle God would have us to follow, to learn to deduce from
{255}
certain things what is intended to be conveyed in them, and not to be too legal or literal in what we understand or say.
A.R. It says in @Revelation 12: 17, "And the dragon was angry with the woman". That is the woman that brought forth the male child. "And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed"; it goes right on to @Revelation 12. It is remarkable he was angry with her.
J.T. The woman was to be his undoing; her Seed.
A.B.P. What is the thought of seed in connection with the Serpent?
J.T. Oh, the sons of the devil. They started in right away. Cain was one of them. He was a son of the wicked one. His progeny began, too. It is his own. Of course, he was a son of Eve, also. She thought, I suppose, he was the one when he was born. She says, "I have acquired a man with Jehovah" (chapter 4: 1). That is how she regarded him. But instead of that he was the devil's man. So that she needed to be enlightened too. But it is remarkable that the undoing of the devil was the woman.
A.Pf. Would you mind explaining @Revelation 20? "And he laid hold of the dragon, the ancient serpent who is the devil and Satan" (verse 2), the different titles there to that person. He is only called a serpent in @Genesis 3.
J.T. That is to bring out his antiquity. He enters into all the worlds. The first is this one, and the one after Noah, and he will enter into the world to come, too. So that it is his antiquity and his exploits. God is allowing him to show himself and then names him. These other names, the devil and Satan, were subsequent developments. They allude to antagonism to God, wickedness. But the 'old serpent' is remarkable. That means that God is not going beyond, He is not going back to the creation as we
{256}
have it. That is where he became first manifest, but Ezekiel would show he had an earlier existence, and that he sinned from the beginning; but God is not bringing that into @Genesis 3. That remains for later.
A.N.W. Does not that very fact enforce the responsibility of the man, that he cannot blame it on a superior being but on a lower creature?
J.T. I would think so. Satan avoided attacking Adam as he stands. It would look as if he did not encounter him; he knew Adam would be superior.
Ques. Paul makes a statement in Romans: "But the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly" (chapter 16: 20). What time would that be?
J.T. The present time. The allusion to time there is very interesting, because he says in that section, "For now is our salvation nearer than when we believed" (chapter 13: 11). It is a question of time, and God will bruise Satan under your feet shortly. He is already bruised, by the Lord, by the Seed of the woman, but it is "under your feet", under the Romans feet; so that we do well to keep our feet clean, because these are the kind of feet God would use to bruise him.
F.H.L. How far do you think spiritual deductions in these two would go as to the clothing of the skins? God made them coats.
J.T. I would think it was for Adam to keep the light that was involved in Adam's naming Eve. God says, I will finish the thing on redemption ground. We could not be living save on the ground of redemption, because the question that develops afterwards is redemption and life. Not life and redemption, but redemption and life. I think the idea of redemption as just vaguely suggested, is to show there can be no life now without redemption. It is involved in the coats that the Lord made for them.
{257}
W.F.K. Why was the tree of life put in the garden?
J.T. It is a question of purpose. It is there yet. God prevented Adam from partaking of it, and Eve, too, because now we come down to the actual governmental conditions, "He set the Cherubim, and the flame of the flashing sword, toward the east of the garden of Eden, to guard the way to the tree of life" (verse 24). The clothing involves a new condition.
W.F.K. Do you mean God would have some other way to bring us into life?
J.T. Yes; that is it. The light is there; the ground of redemption is there, and then the following deduction or inference is that Abel brought a suitable offering to God. That is the way it goes; and God says to Cain, "Sin lieth at the door" (or, 'a sin-offering'). And then Seth says, My son is a dying man, but I can say that now, because redemption is here. There is light in that, too, and that is why I chose chapter 4, because there is light there. It says, "Then people began to call on the name of Jehovah" (verse 26). It shows that it was not simply persons, a few of a family, but people.
A.R. We often speak of Adam and Eve as a type of the assembly before sin came in. Would you look at it in that way in the verses we read? -- the mother of all living.
J.T. There is something there in the maternal thought, and Adam's having the light about it. There is a good deal in it. You would have to bring it into it, but still the basic thought is there. It is a conversation. Why did he say that to her? This is the first time you get this word 'Eve' at all. Why did Adam say that? Well, Adam is adding to the vocabulary. He is speaking to her; the mother of all living.
C.A.M. As to this matter of seed, God had placed Adam in a condition where he had every opportunity to study that thing. Do you not think it would
{258}
encourage us? If we were to take account of God's works in the simplest possible way in which He shows them to us, we would learn.
J.T. Yes; and keep within the limits He indicates. But it is most interesting to see a man and his wife talking. I am not saying it was a long conversation, but it was a conversation. I mean, the thing was there. How did he actually say it? Did he address her and say, Your name is henceforth Eve; your name is Life now? She would say, Well, why do you say that? Well, it is just as we have been saying, the sequential result of what they had been saying previously. They were beginning to work out things divinely. God confirms that in killing the animals. The skins speak plainly enough, because we have the idea of speaking already. In the next chapter the blood of Abel speaks; and so these skins speak.
C.A.M. I think that is very noticeable, because as soon as our souls enter on this idea of relationship and communion in relationship, there is really an immense advance in soul.
J.T. We have to bring in the idea of personality as soon as we have Adam and Eve, personality, and the family relationship and the conversation that belongs to that. That is what enters into these passages.
Rem. Adam really blamed it all on Eve. He says, "The woman, whom thou hast given to be with me" (verse 12).
J.T. That is the idea. God gave her to be with him.
W.M. In regard of Seth it says in verse 25, "And Adam knew his wife again, and she bore a son, and called his name Seth, ...". I was wondering if they both would have named him.
J.T. They are now doing the thing together. That is the way it should be. The wife should not name the son, anyway. It is not said she named Cain, but
{259}
it says, "She conceived, and bore Cain, and said, I have acquired a man with Jehovah". There is nothing said about naming him, but when Cain has a son, he names him, because he is going to put his own stamp on the world. He called the name of the city after the name of his son. But now both Adam and his wife, Eve, name Seth.
T.H. Is the Lord graciously keeping us within the scope of the agricultural setting, the seed, and the cattle, what belongs to the earth?
J.T. Cain got out of that immediately. He entered into the city, into business. But the primary thought was the agricultural thought.
F.H.L. 'Adam' and 'Man' are both linked up with that thought.
J.T. In Adam the primary thought is animate. Adam is animated earth, and Eve is made out of animated clay. She was not made of ordinary earth; she was made out of animated earth; that is, out of man.
A.R. Her seed as preserving the life-line on earth, has always been the object of attack. "And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed". The enmity has been going on ever since Pentecost.
J.T. It is very remarkable that instead of being the man and the serpent, it is the woman and the serpent: as if God would take the instrument he thought he had, and did have, out of his hand and turn it against him.
R.M. Is there the element of faith in Adam's reckonings? The first word in @Hebrews 11 is to Abel's faith. Does faith come into this?
J.T. God keeps it out verbally, but it is there, I think. You can see it is there in the use of the word 'life'. There is a lot of light in that. The life is the light, we are told. Well, the light sprang in his mind out of what Jehovah Elohim said to the serpent.
{260}
A.B.P. In that sense, would it be right to say that Adam's word in verse 20 formed a moral basis for God's action in verse 21?
J.T. I think that is right. God was following the thing up. He loves to hear us saying good things; and as a rule, if a good thing is said in a meeting, something else will be said better. The Spirit of God adds to what is going on.
A.N.W. In that connection, what further moral lack has to be settled before they are fit for Seth? It seems to suggest another matter that has to be faced.
J.T. The flood finishes that up. Noah came in there. Jehovah smelled a sweet savour, which you do not get in the first world. You get it in the second. Jehovah smelled a sweet savour, and said, I will not curse. And, therefore, you have a new thing altogether in the renewed earth under Noah.
A.Pf. The thought of life is going right on to the third world you mentioned?
J.T. The last world is the one in which it will be displayed. That world is called eternal life, "And these shall go away into ... life eternal", @Matthew 25: 46. All there will be, in principle, in that life. Any different from that would be exceptional.
Rem. Verse 20, "The mother of all living" would suggest a living state of things which would be suitable to God as seen here.
J.T. Quite so. It must have been very pleasing to God to hear Adam use the word 'life' when He had just spoken about death. He had just said to Adam, "For dust thou art; and unto dust shalt thou return". God must have been highly pleased with Adam using the word 'life' immediately. That is how God would suggest to us; that is how we learn to please Him in our ministry and remarks.
Ques. Do you have the thought here of life out of death?
{261}
J.T. I think when we come to Seth you get that suggestion. He called his son Enosh, which means mortal or dying. But inasmuch as men began to call on the name of Jehovah, then clearly there was light in that name, negatively, but still there, that there would be life. Although he was a dying man, he would live; and that runs throughout Scripture; "Though he have died, shall live", @John 11: 25.
J.T.Jr. Would it be right to say that verse 20 would show they had both been adjusted in regard to the previous sin? What he says to her would indicate he was right, and that he could say it of her would show she was right.
J.T. Verse 20 is victory. It is victory coming in somehow out of a man's soul. Where did he get this light? Well, it is deduced from what God has said, and that is what God is pleased with. If we deduce something from what He says, God will add to that. God adds to us as we go on.
J.S. Is Adam acting on the light that governs the position?
J.T. That is what I thought. It is how we carry on these meetings. It looks to us as if we can carry them on for any length of time, because if we view the temple, there is no limit with God. He is ready to say things if we are ready to listen to them and use them. So it says, As they listened, the Lord went on and spoke a parable. So that we do not run dry as we follow on those lines. The Holy Spirit is here to support what is said.
Ques. Do you see that carried out in @Matthew 13: 38, "And the good seed, these are the sons of the kingdom"?
J.T. Quite so; the tares are the sons of the wicked one.
Ques. Is there a link in Genesis with Paul's ministry in Romans? God speaks first in the gospel of redemption, and then response in us follows. God
{262}
helps us by His Spirit. In the gospel we get everything from God's side, and how He met the issue in Christ in redemption, and then there is a response from us. There is a response to God, and then the Holy Spirit comes in later on in the epistle.
J.T. Just so; it is the gospel of God concerning His Son. That is the general position; and then your point is that we go on to redemption in chapter 3, and in chapter 5 we get the Holy Spirit shedding forth the love of God in our hearts, and then things come out from us to God. Chapter 6 is to settle the question of our mortal condition; that is, like Enosh, because I think baptism comes in in @Genesis 4. It would fit in there. You would say to Seth, Why do you call him Enosh? Well, he would say, I have got the light of baptism. If he had the light we have, he would baptise Enosh, seeing the only hope for him was in the death of another, and the death of another is already there. That is what is governing the position. So that @Romans 6 is the death of another, so that we are reckoned in that way. "So also *ye*, reckon yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus" (verse 11). Chapter 6 brings in the fixed position of the believer in Christ Jesus. "For the wages of sin is death; but the act of favour of God, eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord" (verse 23). And following that, the fact of what is inside us in chapter 7; and in chapter 8 by the Spirit of God we say, "Abba, Father".
J.S. Where would you fit in the new Husband?
J.T. That is chapter 7. We are to Another; "To be to another, who has been raised up from among the dead, in order that we might bear fruit to God" (verse 4). That is Adam and Eve set up again.
A.B.P. Would you bring in @Romans 4: 7, "Blessed they ... whose sins have been covered"? I wondered whether Adam would come in in connection with David.
{263}
J.T. That is good. That is what David says.
A.B.P. @Psalm 32 is quoted there, I wondered if David got it from @Genesis 3.
A.R. Is the service of God carried on properly beyond death?
J.T. That is the service of God. You must have baptism there. Of course, you get it later in chapters 6 and 7 in fulness. God Himself applies it. But the principle with Seth would be, My babe is going to die. What are you going to do about it? Well, he is covered in the death of another. You can put that into it. And then the service of God goes on. Baptism precedes the service of God. So that chapter 7 of Romans involves the Spirit of God; that we might serve in newness of spirit.
C.A.M. In the emphasis on the name in Enosh's case, Jehovah's name is the great thought.
J.T. Exactly. They began to call on it. The note says, 'or to call themselves by', but I take it this is the way it should read: "Then people began to call on the name of Jehovah". That is what we do in baptism.
J.S. Is the moral setting of Scripture here in view of christianity?
J.T. Everything bears on christianity, those on whom the ends of the age have come, "For as many things as have been written before have been written for our instruction", @Romans 15: 4. That is the idea. But, of course, we could not speak like this if we were there then. We can only speak as we are speaking now because we have the Holy Spirit and know redemption.
W.M. In regard of the naming and this matter of David, it has been mentioned about the exercise he went through and that he confessed; it says in the naming of Solomon, he named him Solomon which means peaceful. And then it says the Lord sent Nathan the prophet to tell him he had another
{264}
name, and that he was beloved of Jehovah. Do you think that would confirm the sense that we have of what has come out of it all, like @Romans 8, that we are in Christ?
J.T. Jedidiah is the prophetic name. You never hear of it afterwards; but it is like a jewel set up there. David would honour Jehovah. His own idea was a man of peace, but Jehovah had other thoughts. He is the only babe that is said to be loved, and I suppose it is Jesus that is in mind.
A.R. Could you bring Colossians into chapter 4, and Ephesians into chapter 5?
J.T. That is good. Things seem to be opening up a little, as to how the truth stands.
Ques. It says in @2 Peter 3: 7, "But the present heavens and the earth by his word are laid up in store"; is that differentiating these from the heavens that are mentioned in verse 5 of the same chapter: "That heavens were of old, and an earth, having its subsistence out of water and in water, by the word of God, through which waters the then world, deluged with water, perished"?
J.T. There may have been a variation, but the latter refers to @Genesis 1, I think. The present heavens and earth refer to chapter 8; that is, after the deluge. There may have been a variation as to the state of things, but it is in general the same thing: "the present heavens" and "the then world". There evidently was some variation through the deluge, but we have a heavens and an earth pretty much as is described in chapter 1. What did you have in your mind about that?
Rem. I had no thought other than just to see how the heavens are linked with the earth. Peter seems to link the two.
J.T. That is what I thought at the beginning; that we might see a little of the testimony that was
{265}
rendered to the first world, and that is what we are occupied with now, which was finished in the deluge.
A.A.T. I notice in chapter 4: 26 it says, "Then people began to call on the name of Jehovah". Is that just a statement or was there a work going on?
J.T. It would mean there was light in Seth's naming his son as he did. We are told of Cain in the same chapter: "And Cain knew his wife, and she conceived and bore Enoch. And he built a city; and he called the name of the city after the name of his son Enoch" (verse 17). There is no idea in his mind that his son was going to die, but in Seth's mind there was that idea. He was not going to build on his son after the flesh. Something else must happen or he would go into oblivion, and therefore, there is light; because what preceded all that was that there had been the sacrifice and sin-offering, which, indeed, had already been alluded to by Jehovah to Cain; and Seth had that idea, that there was a remedy. He could well afford to say, My son is going to die, because life is now brought in. My mother's name is 'Life'. That was the deduction that developed in his mind and made him, what I would call, a believer, although Seth is not included in @Hebrews 11, but still you can see the mention here would indicate that, because the whole family is taken up in the next chapter, and we have the word 'book': "This is the book of Adam's generations. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him. Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created" (verses 1, 2). That is, they are all set up again; no more Cain; he is out of it. God is going on with His own family, and that is chapter 5, into which Enoch comes and indicates the full thought of what is before us now; the full thought of life -- that he goes up to heaven. God took him because He liked him.
{266}
A.N.W. Would it be right to say that Cain's world characteristically assumes self-sufficiency, whereas Seth's world needs and calls upon the name of the Lord?
J.T. Quite so. We must have God in our world. You can get along apparently in your world without God. This is the life-line, therefore, in chapter 5. We are on the life-line, and I believe it is Seth's naming of his son Enosh that governs this life-line. You find each lives a long time, but each one dies until we come to Enoch, showing Seth's thought was right, that God can take a man without dying. He did not see death, it says.
A.B.P. Is that the moral basis on which God can bring in life?
J.T. It is the idea of a cumulative knowledge and light running right through.
Rem. Baptism in that way is really an act of life. Putting a child in death is an indication of life in a public way.
J.T. Just so; putting him in to take him out. Moses was put in, but another took him out; 'drawn out' -- that is what his name means.
A.R. Did the truth of eternal life lay a firm foundation for the service of God, and now the service of God going on lays a good foundation for translation?
J.T. So that in Romans, instead of being changed and raised from the dead by the faith of the working of God as in Colossians, it is simply that we should walk in newness of life.
F.N.W. Would you develop a distinction between @Romans 6 and Colossians?
J.T. Colossians is we are raised by the faith of the working of God. Seth goes further. Seth is going a little further than his father. That is the way it stands; the cumulative principle in Seth is further on than Adam.
{267}
A.N.W. You observe there is a gap after the word 'Seth' in verse 25. Authoritatively there is a gap there, and I wondered if there was not more there than there is on the surface.
J.T. That is good and suggestive. The miss is there after the word 'Seth'. You notice the New Translation shows there is something left out that could be said. The note says Seth means 'Appointed', and then something is left out, and it goes on, "For God has appointed me another seed instead of Abel", as if more could be said than that.
J.T.Jr. That would confirm what we said about Colossians, because it is a secret matter, a hidden matter. There should be far more than what is able to be said about us.
J.T. Just so. Romans does not go as far as saying we are risen, but Colossians says, "Buried with him in baptism, in which ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead", @Colossians 2: 12. Well, the child baptised in the light of Romans and the child baptised in the light of Colossians -- there is no change publicly. It is a question of the state of the soul of the man that baptises, the person responsible. If he baptises in the light of Colossians it is only by faith that that child is going to be changed literally, raised from the dead. But Romans says, in the meantime he comes out and walks in newness of life.
F.N.W. As out of death, alive.
J.T. Just so.
F.S.C. Is circumcision added to the baptism in Colossians? Does that change it at all?
J.T. It comes in before the baptism. You can see Colossians is going deeper into the truth than Romans.
F.S.C. I was wondering whether there was a thought of Gilgal.
{268}
J.T. So there is. Circumcision comes in after Jordan. The Jordan is Colossian baptism.
A.N.W. Is that not the difference between the Red Sea baptism and Colossian baptism? One looks back, so to speak, to Egypt and out of it, and the other into the land.
J.T. Exactly. There are not two baptisms. The one is a counterpart of the other. The Red Sea coalesces with the Jordan. That is the finish, because we are raised literally in the antitype, but in the meantime it is faith; "By faith of the working of God"; that God is going to take us literally out of death.
J.S. Do you see that in the twelve men in Ephesus? They had been baptised to the baptism of John.
J.T. They did not have any more, and they did not have enough of that, because they did not hear there was any Holy Spirit. Therefore, Paul brings in the baptism that we have and lays his hands on them.
A.R. Walking in newness of life would be testimony, whereas here it says Enoch walked with God. That would be a secret matter.
J.T. Just so. It would be testimony, too. You may be sure he was a different man from all the others.
A.R. 'Walking with God' is a very strong statement. It is not walking with the brethren, or walking before men, but walking with God.
Ques. Do you have that developed in @1 Corinthians 15: 49: "And as we have borne the image of the one made of dust, we shall bear also the image of the heavenly one"? Enoch was in that way heavenly in character.
J.T. Quite so. He was taken up to heaven.
A.A.T. It says, "And Enoch walked with God; and he was not, for God took him", @Genesis 5: 24. That is Colossians; his life was hid.
{269}
J.T. That is it. You are not among the people of the world; you are not found in their clubs. You are unknown, like Lazarus; the dead Lazarus, but he was really the living Lazarus. But he was dead as regards these entertainments.
W.F.K. The Lord said, "I am come that they might have life, and might have it abundantly", @John 10: 10. Would that come in?
J.T. We are not dealing with the type, but the antitype, and therefore we have the whole truth, at least as far as we understand it; so that life abundantly is going beyond what others have. I suppose the Lord had christians in mind when He said that.
W.F.K. Would that be eternal life?
J.T. That is exactly what it is. The chapter deals with eternal life; but when He uses the word, 'abundantly' it is to say that there is plenty of it. It is the full divine thought of life.
A.B.P. Would the translation be a testimony of the power of that life; that there is no need for passing through the article of death?
J.T. That is the actual fact. We are quickened on account of the Spirit that dwells in us; not that the Spirit takes us to heaven, but still the change is connected with the Spirit. The Lord takes us to heaven actually.
C.A.M. It is a very wonderful thing that God gives in this first world these steps or stages to show that before He closes it. He really reaches eternal life in the exhibition of the thing in these persons.
J.T. That is the way it works out. Enoch is the seventh from Adam, which would mean there would be development. Seven would mean he had reached the full thought of what began with the name 'life' or 'Eve'. It is the seventh from Adam, not the seventh from Eve; the seventh from Adam, the head. He had light, and would work it out, undoubtedly. He worked it out in measure, and I would say
{270}
Enoch took up the cumulative idea and developed the thing, God confirming all that. Just as He confirmed Adam's remark by clothing him, He confirmed Enoch in taking him to heaven. God is saying, Well, that thing is perfect now; I have been Witness to this for three hundred years. Enoch pleased Him and He takes him up to heaven. All entering into that is this idea of cumulation. God says, I will go on with that and add to that, right to the finish. You see something that is of God; God says, I will add to that, and there it is. Enoch is the finish. He is the completion of that exercise.
T.H. Noah's finding favour with God is cumulative wealth added on to the rest. He is the closing man in the antediluvian world.
J.T. Yes; he is the finish of it, and, therefore, his father names him. It is usually, "And Methushelah ... begot Lemech". But when you get to a man being formally named, like Seth, and like Enoch, and like Noah, something special is going to come out of that. So that if you look at chapter 5 you will see that it says, "And Lemech lived a hundred and eighty-two years, and begot a son. And he called his name Noah", and he gives you a reason for it: "Saying, This one shall comfort us concerning our work and concerning the toil of our hands, because of the ground which Jehovah has cursed" (verses 28, 29). Now we have a distinguished man. Adam was a distinguished man; the Adam was a distinguished creature; he had dominion over the creatures. Now here is a man who is distinguished, and God takes him on, so that you get: "This is the history of Noah. Noah was a just man, perfect amongst his generations: Noah walked with God", @Genesis 6: 9. In verse 13 it says, "And God said to Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is full of violence through them; and behold, I will destroy them with the earth". He found favour in the eyes of Jehovah,
{271}
it says. God takes him on. And what is to be stated about him is that he has a good reputation everywhere. That is not even said of Enoch. It is what God found in him. But this man is remarkable in that he is perfect amongst his generations. And he walked with God besides. That is, everybody could see this man, that he was a distinguished man. The Lord says, "Which of you convinces me of sin?", @John 8: 46. That is the idea. He is perfect amongst His generations, and God has committed Himself to Him, so that He brings in another world.
A.R. That is the kind of man that goes through into another kind of world. Noah goes through.
J.T. He is not afraid. He might challenge anybody, any of these wicked men. What can you say against me? It is a man that is not stained with the world that can preach. You cannot do that if you are not clean. That is the position of Noah. He is a righteous man in all of this.
T.H. I was wondering if his feet would be capable of carrying the glad tidings of God, and also of treading under foot evil.
J.T. He was a man of great ability to do things, and that is important in our services in our localities, to have a good reputation before men and be able to do things.
Rem. So that God got the victory in the first world.
J.T. So He did. The man that came through is His man. You could not point a finger at him. He was perfect amongst his generations.
J.T.Jr. And the result of all that is that at the end you have a wonderful testimony. Noah would be the preacher. The testimony would be there in its greatest exhibition, a man that could preach as a righteous man.
J.T. How beautifully the Lord could speak about him: "Until the day on which Noe entered into the
{272}
ark", @Matthew 24: 38. And then the flood came and drowned them all.
A.B.P. Is the thought of Jehovah anticipated in this word of comfort, "This one shall comfort us concerning our work and concerning the toil of our hands, because of the ground which Jehovah has cursed"? Is the answer of that seen in the odour of rest that ascended to Jehovah from the cleansed earth?
J.T. He was a prophet. Of course, Enoch was too, but his father, which is remarkable, announces this word about Noah. He accepts the curse as right, but the comfort is there. He has light, prophetic light, and God takes it up to Himself in chapter 8. Noah offers the sweet-savour offering.
Ques. Would you say that Job was one who accepted the curse over against all that he was? Job was perfect and upright. God really used Satan's attack on Job in the way of recovery at the end.
J.T. I would think that. He came to the full thought of God.
A.Pf. Was the curse removed in Noah's time? He said, "I will no more henceforth curse the ground on account of Man", @Genesis 8: 21.
J.T. Quite so. Christ has brought in the blessing instead of a curse. He was made a curse for us; that is how the curse is removed really.
Rem. Three hundred years is rather interesting. One would desire to be like Enoch. He walked with God three hundred and sixty-five days out of every year for three hundred years.
J.T. Quite so; to walk in newness of life in Romans really fills this out.
F.H.L. Is there any link in what you have been saying as to the renewed earth and the way Shem, Ham and Japheth came to light in the formation of the assembly? As if God is triumphing in that way in making good His original thought.
J.T. Quite so.
{273}
A MAN, A HOUSEHOLDER
@Matthew 20: 1 - 16; @Matthew 21: 33 - 42; @Matthew 13: 51, 52
J.T. This word 'householder' appears several times elsewhere besides these scriptures read. It is sometimes rendered as master of a house; but in these scriptures we have it rendered as a householder, and adding interest to this is the word 'man' appearing before the word 'householder'. So that it brings in the human side of sympathy. The first, that is chapter 20, alludes to God as active directly in the house, typically hiring labourers for His vineyard; and the second would be the same, only that instead of being active in it He has let the vineyard out to husbandmen and leaves the country. The third is just a disciple, but he is a householder; a man, a householder, alluding to disciples who are attentive to what is taught and conserve what they learn, so that they have treasure. Christians are said to be of the household of God, directly. We have the highest thought of it in Ephesians, but what is before us now is responsibility on our part, first as regards working in the house, or in the vineyard of God, and what we are to learn as to the principles governing our service, that God is over His house sovereignly, and does according to His own will. He is not governed by those who labour.
A.N.W. In two of the scriptures the matter stands related to the kingdom of the heavens. Would you say a word about that?
J.T. That is the first one, and then we have it in chapter 13. The kingdom of the heavens is clearly a wider thought than householding, but still it is linked to a householder. That is, the dispensation of God as applied to christianity is a household idea in 1 Timothy. His administrative services are in relation
{274}
to His house. They are said to be in faith; "God's dispensation, which is in faith", @1 Timothy 1: 4; the word 'dispensation' involves the household.
A.McN. Is the vineyard somewhat like the house, the place of fruitfulness?
J.T. The parabolic word involves the general administrative services of a man who is lord or master of the institution. It is not only what is done inside the house, but in the land adjoining it, or the gardens or the farm, or whatever it be. The Proverbs require that we are to prepare our field without and afterwards build our house. The house governs, as the central position, the central institution, but the whole is regarded as coming under the idea of the householder, because the vineyard here clearly is involved in it.
A.R. He would be a family man.
J.T. That is the general thought. Such as the vineyard or whatever else there may be would be subsidiary to the family institution. The king himself, we are told, lives of the field. So that the field is subsidiary and yet it comes under the administration of the householder, and especially the vineyard. It says that he "went out with the early morn to hire workmen for his vineyard".
A.R. What was behind even the employment of persons to do work would be love.
J.T. The household carries that thought. What is in the master of the house, the householder in relation to his family, would necessarily affect all. Although we see that when the servants question his doings, there are no family thoughts. He just says to the questioners, or to one of them, "My friend, I do not wrong thee. Didst thou not agree with me for a denarius? Take what is thine and go". He elects himself out of the matter; whereas a servant, sometimes, according to other scriptures, becomes a son. If he falls in with the mind of the householder,
{275}
he comes in for the affections, but where he questions and criticises as the Jews did (for the Jew is in mind, doubtless), he is repudiated. That is, he is just a labourer and gets his wages and has to go.
T.E.H. Would Jacob be a man that came under the influence of a proper householder? Isaac said that the smell of him was as the smell of a field, as if he had gained the good of the field and was prepared to build a house.
J.T. That is good. When he came in Isaac smelled the smell of the field. He was part of the house, as it were, but when he came into Laban's institution it was all a question of wages, and it did not work out so well. His wages were changed ten times. He did not really become part of the house.
W.F.K. Is the vineyard a place where there is fruit for God, where God expects fruit?
J.T. That is the idea of it, and very pungent sort of fruit, because it is a vineyard, involving stimulation. That is an important suggestion as pertaining to a household.
A.R. In regard to your reference to the first man that came, the master of the house says to him, "Is thine eye evil because *I* am good?". The word is either 'envious' or 'jealous' according to the note. It was really an exposure of the first men, and the householder was marked by doing good.
J.T. It is a very exposing position that is in mind. The position is workmanship, and it is a long day. It is evidently a twelve-hour day, a good long day. So that there is time for bringing out what the motives of the workers were, whether they are in keeping with the institution. That is to say, if we are labouring in the Lord's vineyard today, what are our motives? whether we are in accord with Him, because He begins the matter. He went out in the early morn. He was there and evidently intended to bring out the inwards of the workers. How far were they in accord
{276}
with Him? Clearly it is a testing parable, and refers to the motives that underlie our services; whether we can commit ourselves to Him, or if we are not hired, to wait, and stand where the hiring is possible, not to be out of the way of it, or say, We may as well go home; there is nothing for us to do. They stood there and came in for the best thoughts.
R.W.S. Is to be passed by possibly and state that they have not been hired, as if they were not worth hiring, a good state to be in as over against the first hiring?
J.T. I think it would show that they were different in spirit from the early ones. The early ones were evidently experienced in this sort of thing. They would make a bargain. The eleventh-hour men made no bargain, nor did they go home. They did not assume there was no work to be done; there might be. So they waited, "Because no man has hired us". Why was that? Evidently it was the place of hiring; it was the place for it, and they stayed there until the last moment with the hope of being hired, showing they were not lazy.
C.A.M. Do you not think the apostle Paul, in speaking to Timothy and otherwise referring to his being brought into the service, and his unworthiness, would show he was one of these last-hour men? Would it be right to say that?
J.T. You said Paul was an eleventh-hour man?
C.A.M. I was asking whether he would come under that category relative to what was being said about their reference to their unworthiness, or the spirit which they showed.
J.T. I suppose he would. He entrusted himself entirely to the householder. The householder says to them, "Why stand ye here all the day idle? They say to him, Because no man has hired us". They were there all the day; they did not come in
{277}
lazily. They were there all the day, but no one had hired them. It would look as if they were not such workers as were in demand in that market, but they stood there hoping that work would come. There are several hours mentioned: "And having gone out about the third hour, he saw others standing in the market-place idle; and to them he said, Go also ye into the vineyard, and whatsoever may be just I will give you. And they went their way, Again, having gone out about the sixth and ninth hour, he did likewise". He did not ask them why they were not hired; but when he comes to the eleventh hour it says, "But about the eleventh hour, having gone out, he found others standing, and says to them, Why stand ye here all the day idle?". Why did he ask them that question? Why did he not ask it before? Does he know his men? Is he going to bring out something? Is it that God, in these last days, would bring out something -- what the make-up is of those who are last-day men, whether they can trust God, or whether they are only working for a consideration, whether they must have a wage?
A.N.W. The statement is made at the close of this passage, "Thus shall the last be first, and the first last".
J.T. These are the last. I think the labourers are what is in mind, the public labourers who know the market and who work according to the market, according to hire; whereas the last are the kind that really know God. They are not on the hireling list. They are the only ones that are enquired of as to why they are there, as if the parable would bring out something, and the master knew that something was there. So that it is a question of whether we come into that, this last, eleventh-hour labouring principle; whether God is going to bring out something, because we are all prone to belong to the first and the third and the sixth and the ninth, but especially the first.
{278}
The others, except the first-hour men, are all ready to go in and take on the work at the bid of the householder, but this last set are enquired of, Why are you standing idle? They have to admit something; that they are not quite in demand in the market; and why is that?
C.A.M. Is it not right to connect that with the fact that the Lord is saying something special about the assembly matters at the end? In a sense, the bringing in of the mystery was a sort of special thing after the service had been inaugurated.
J.T. They are under reproach; they are not quite the kind of men that are desired in the market, and the question is, Why is that? The others are evidently desirable. The first ones can afford to ask a wage. "And having agreed with the workmen for a denarius the day, he sent them into his vineyard. And having gone out about the third hour, he saw others standing in the market-place idle; and to them he said, Go also ye into the vineyard, and whatsoever may be just I will give you. And they went their way. Again, having gone out about the sixth and ninth hour, he did likewise". So far so clear. The first ones were the only ones that made a bargain. Is the Spirit of God raising a question as to bargain-making in the workmen's market? And that there are others who are ready to do the bidding of the householder without any bargain. And then there are those that have to answer why it is that they are there so long. And is it not that persons liable to reproach are in the market? And why are they under reproach?
T.W. Verse 6 begins with a 'but'.
J.T. The others are 'and'; "And having gone out about the third hour" (verse 3); and then again, "And they went their way" (verse 4). It is the conjunction 'and', but in verse 6 we come up against something special. That is suggestive, and we want
{279}
to understand why this special inquiry is there. What is the secret of this? What is to be brought out?
R.W.S. Would it appear that this group does not get any promise of a just compensation? I notice in verse 7 "[and whatsoever may be just ye shall receive]" is put in brackets. Is there some doubt as to whether it is really there?
J.T. Possibly that is questionable. "Go also ye into the vineyard, and whatsoever may be just I will give you". There is no question about that. But in this last set there is something peculiar. Why are you here? They have to confess they are not in demand, and there must be some good reason for that. The hirers are not pleased with them. They are there and no one is hiring them, but the master says, "Go also ye into the vineyard", and if this bracketed part is not in the original, it makes it all the more simple, that it is simply doing the bidding of the householder and saying no more; leaving it all that way. There is entire submission to the householder in what he directs, without any thought of a remuneration at all.
W.F.K. Can you give these different hours a dispensational setting?
J.T. Oh, yes. It refers to official workmen; that is, persons who have that kind of attitude, who would call themselves workers of this kind and demand a wage. They are skilled men in their own account and they demand a wage. The others are not that. They do not demand a wage, but they commit themselves to the householder. But the final set are under reproach, because it certainly is a humbling thing to stand the whole day in the market-place and get no work. Why is it?
W.F.K. Would the eleventh-hour be our day? The last day?
J.T. Very likely, only the question is whether we are eleventh-hour men; whether, after all, we do
{280}
not secretly have in our hearts that we will get some remuneration, and that it is worth while going into the ministry.
F.N.W. Would Paul be typically an eleventh-hour man in the account of his conversion? All he says is, "What shall I do, Lord?". And he was told to go into the city. That was his prime object after his conversion, would you say?
J.T. He had the thought of doing something, and the Lord did not tell him what to do, but He sent him into the city. The question is whether the voice of this parable is heard in the little services we are rendering; that is, whether we are under reproach before we get anything to do. If I am not invited out to preach or teach, or if I am, have I in mind remuneration? For we are apt to feel ourselves under obligation as invited; and if we have opportunity we will invite, too. But the danger is that underlying all that is the principle of a wage, of some gain; whereas these workers are entirely at the bid of the householder and leave it all with him, saying nothing, as it were, but going into the vineyard; and now, see what develops. There is exposure all around.
J.S. Is this parable introduced to check clericalism?
J.T. I do not feel like bringing that in, because we have not got any of those here today. What is, however, important, is what may underlie our services; the invitations that are accorded, and whether the same spirit is not with us as was with the first-hour men, the regular line men, you might say; skilled men, who were openly known to be worth something. In this last class there is something wrong from the ordinary standpoint, and the little work we are doing is not done on the principle of the ordinary standpoint at all. And that, of course, is the clerical standpoint. But we do not need to go into that. It is a question now of how far the idea of remuneration may enter into our services.
{281}
A.A.T. What represents this remuneration today? In that day it was money.
J.T. Money may enter into it today, too; one's fare paid, and that sort of thing. It is just a question of getting the truth. Even money may enter into it. But these men have no thought at all of that. They just do what the householder says. "But when the evening was come, the lord of the vineyard says to his steward. Call the workmen and pay them their wages, beginning from the last even to the first".
A.A.T. It is remarkable. It says, "These last have worked one hour, and thou hast made them equal to us, who have borne the burden of the day and the heat". Would there be some suggestion that they were looked down upon?
J.T. The householder was making them equal, but in the minds of the workers they were not equal.
A.S. What is the thought of paying the last first?
J.T. It says, "And when they who came to work about the eleventh hour came, they received each a denarius. And when the first came". That enters into the whole parable, because it finishes with this; the last first, and the first last; "for many are called ones, but few chosen ones". That is another point that is striking -- the chosen ones.
A.N.W. In the range of building and having builders in mind, Peter, in speaking of the blessed Lord Himself, says, "Cast away indeed as worthless by men, but with God chosen, precious", @1 Peter 2: 4. I wondered whether that was not somewhat parallel to the bearing of this scripture.
J.T. That is a question of the stone's value.
A.N.W. I only thought of the disallowance side in contradistinction to the chosen and precious in God's sight.
J.T. I was just going to remark in the second parable in chapter 21, the Lord brings in: "Have ye never read in the scriptures. The stone which they
{282}
that builded rejected, this has become the cornerstone". It is a question there of material, but the principle is the same. The real labourers according to God are of great value in chapter 20, and the real stone and material is of little or no value in chapter 21. Man's appraisal is not God's appraisal. That is really what comes out in both parables, first as to workmanship and then as to material.
T.E.H. Would it be right to say that the man who was found in Casiphia was an eleventh-hour man? His name is Sherebiah in Ezra. He was a man of understanding prepared to go into the service.
J.T. The one they found at the place Casiphia? Yes. But still they had to seek him out. The Levites were scarce; they did not come into the movement. But here these men are in the market all day, and what is this parable for? Is it a parable of exposure, first as to the householder, what his way is, what his outlook is? Then as to the first-hour labourers, they are men known to be worth their hire, worth wages, but then there are men who are not appointed at all. It looks as if the day is going to run out and they will not get anything to do, but they get the first place when payment comes. They are entirely at the bidding of the householder, and something develops, namely that the first is last and the last is first, and many are called, but few are chosen. So it looks as if the parable is to govern us or enter into our outlook and make-up in this period of labour, that we are not on the line of wages.
J.T.Jr. In view of what you have said, would it be well to take a look at some who are not hired at the present time? There may be some who are not hired that are fully capable of carrying on the service.
J.T. That is the point. There is nothing said about their ability. There is nothing said about their doing more work by the minute than the others. It is a question of the will of the master of the house.
{283}
And why this process? Is he bringing out something? The spirit of these men is involved. He is bringing out into the field of labour what corresponds with His eternal thoughts. We are not ordinary people. We are not governed by principles around us. God is bringing out people that are governed by His thoughts, His eternal thoughts, His choosing thoughts. That is an immense thing, because that brings you up to the top, what goes into eternity. It is a question of divine choice, and the very thing you are doing brings that into evidence.
C.A.M. This matter of whether we should be doing more necessitates a sort of inquiry in your soul, because, after all, they had to be patient. That was, perhaps, to their credit. It was not that they were exactly lazy; and then what really got them moving was the master's voice.
J.T. We may say, Well, the field of labour only runs into the kingdom and we will get our reward there; but the field of labour, according to this parable, is to bring out the eternal thoughts of God, and that is the issue finally. Because the question is against Him, what He was doing. That the men were not good, skilled labourers, that they did not do much, is not the point. What the objectors say is, "These last have worked one hour, and thou hast made them equal to us, who have borne the burden of the day and the heat". They are complaining about the master. And it says, "But he answering said to one of them" -- that is, is he a leader? Is he the leading man in this set? He said to one of them, notice: "My friend, I do not wrong thee. Didst thou not agree with me for a denarius? Take what is thine and go. But it is my will to give to this last even as to thee: is it not lawful for me to do what I will in my own affairs? Is thine eye evil because *I* am good?". That is clear enough, that God is exposing somebody and He is justifying Himself;
{284}
and the result is that it is a question of eternal thoughts, selective thoughts. So that we are coming up to the top; the real persons are coming up to the top, those that are going into eternity according to divine thoughts. The field of labour is bringing out the reality of the persons, whether they are in accord with the mind of God or not. To those who are not in accord with His mind, He says, Go; and, Your eye is evil.
C.A.M. It would look as if the qualification would be a knowledge of what the Lord is saying in ministry at the present time.
J.T. That is what it is. The field of labour is occasioning an opportunity for God to bring out something. Are the labourers in accord with His own mind? The Lord Jesus says, "Behold, I come, ... to do thy good pleasure, my God", @Psalm 40: 7, 8. That is the full divine thought in this matter, and these eleventh-hour men are just in divine hands, and it is not a question of bringing out what is in them so much, as it is that God knows; the master knows. He says, "Is it not lawful for me to do what I will in my own affairs?". This is my matter.
A.R. It works out in brothers being, say, fifty years in fellowship, and younger ones seven or eight years. I may assume that because I am older I have a greater status that those who are younger.
J.T. All that enters into this. It is a question of whether I am in accord with the divine mind. God is bringing out this selective principle. The persons who are coming up to the top are not the ones who have been in favour all these years of labour, extending back for centuries. We would not be hired; we would not be allowed to preach, these eleventh-hour men, in earlier days. That is what God is bringing out. We have no status in the labour-market, but we have a status in the field of God. That is the
{285}
point the master of the house makes. That is my affair, he says.
G.H. What about the prophet saying, "Here am I, send me", @Isaiah 6: 8? There would be a thought of readiness and willingness to serve.
J.T. That is it. God says there, "Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?".
F.S.C. Moses had respect for the recompense of the reward and chose the reproach of Christ rather than the treasures of Egypt, and went and sat down by a well.
J.T. Just so. He had respect to the recompense of the reward.
F.S.C. Does not the reproach of Christ answer to that?
J.T. I think so. They are entirely in the hands of the master of the house. He tells them to go into the vineyard. Why are you standing here? And they say, Because no man has hired us. He says, Go ye also into the vineyard. That is all. You may leave out the bracketed part. That is all there is, and, therefore, the whole matter now is in the hands of the master of the house, and he is going to use it to bring out his own thoughts, and to confound those who are governed by their own thoughts; that is christianity. Clericalism is not His thought, and the end is going to bring out that He will prevail. It runs into the eternal counsels of God, that many are called but few are chosen.
R.W.S. Does it afford God a perfect answer in a public way, in some sense at least, over against trade unionism where the servant rules? Has God in some way got an answer to that in a labourer who is completely subject to his master?
J.T. That is good, because there is so much of that coming up; trade unions are invading the divine realm. The divine realm is indicated here; and the brethren conforming to these rules, submitting themselves
{286}
to them are running counter to what we have here. It is a question of God and the spirit that is in keeping with the field of God's workmanship.
A.R. The sin of Korah, Dathan and Abiram is really this. They assumed they had the same status as Aaron in the service, but there was only one rod that budded. God says, I will prove whom I have chosen.
J.T. That is the same idea. God will have His way in His own realm.
T.E.H. Under the Lord's gracious hand, the persons who have charge of the gospel in asking a brother to serve in the service are not looking for recompense. You would be prepared to leave it under the guidance of the Lord.
J.T. Not even looking for a balance in another invitation, for he may have an inviting power, too.
A.McN. I was wondering whether the last-hour men would be waiting hopelessly or patiently.
J.T. I would say patiently. It would bring out the whole position, that they were in keeping with the divine field of labour. It is all in God's hands, and the sequel shows they come out first, according to the principle to be brought out, namely, "Thus shall the last be first, and the first last; for many are called ones, but few chosen ones". That is what is in the mind of God to bring out. And I thought in regard to chapter 21 we have another side to the position, that is, the vineyard being left to certain. The householder, it says, "planted a vineyard, and made a fence round it, and dug a winepress in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and left the country", @Matthew 21: 33. That is another position. The vineyard is fully furnished, but it is let out to husbandmen. That is, these are men who would farm, or look after such work, but they are doing it on their own. It is left to them to do. "But when
{287}
the time of fruit drew near, he sent his bondmen to the husbandmen to receive his fruits. And the husbandmen took his bondmen, and beat one, killed another, and stoned another". It is now the side of responsibility. Our brother has been remarking about those who look after the gospel, which is a sort of service that has to be looked over every now and again, so that it should be understood that it is not an office, but the question now is, what is God getting out of it? Because the time comes when He looks for fruit. It says, "But when the time of fruit drew near, he sent his bondmen to the husbandmen to receive his fruits".
C.A.M. If I understand you rightly, in both cases the defect was in the recognition of God as God. In the first case it brings in disappointment if God is not recognised in His rights. In this case it deprives God of a yield.
J.T. That is right. He sends His bondmen to receive His fruits. That is, it is a question of the Lord being absent and having committed responsibility to some, and what are the results? Our brother brought up the question of those who look after the gospel. What is coming out of it for God, and any other services that are, as it were, left to us? In due course the Lord looks for the results, for the fruits.
G.H.P. In @1 Thessalonians 5: 12 it says, "But we beg you, brethren, to know those who labour among you, and take the lead among you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to regard them exceedingly in love on account of their work". Would that help?
J.T. That does enter into it as to how much we honour those who labour, but our parable is what the Lord gets out of the vineyard as let out to certain persons called husbandmen; not bondmen, but husbandmen. They are skilled men, too. The bondmen are sent to them. The bondmen are entirely under the Lord's control, but the husbandmen are
{288}
like men that you might make an arrangement with to look after your farm. They would get so much, and you. But you want your part of it. And that is the thought here. The Lord wants His fruits; it is what He looks for.
A.R. What He is getting out of a local meeting, do you mean?
J.T. It is the responsibility that attaches to us from this point of view; working in the garden of the Lord. He looks for results, and He holds accountable those who are in the position of charge.
A.S. Would this bring out whether we desire fruit *for* the householder, or fruit *from* the householder, as bringing forth fruit for Him or ourselves?
J.T. It is a question of what was in the mind of the husbandmen. What is being brought out in these parables is what is underlying our activities, what is in the mind of these husbandmen. They are murderers, and, of course, we are not contemplating anything like that as regards ourselves, but still the question is what our motives are. The Lord has left and we are under charge. The parable of the talents is another side of this, but here it is a vineyard and persons who are called husbandmen, which is a term governing skill in farming or the like, are in charge. The Lord has left so that their hand is free. What will they do when the Lord is not looking on them? When we are entirely free in what we are doing, what are our motives? Are they such as will keep us right even if we are not conscious that the Lord's eye is over us?
J.T.Jr. Would the idea of the fence and the winepress and the tower suggest the principles that should govern the local meeting? There would not be any deviation in what is done in the meeting from what was set out by the Lord.
J.T. You mean what is done is according to what He has set out?
{289}
J.T.Jr. It says, "And made a fence round it, and dug a winepress in it, and built a tower". These are like thoughts that would govern us in the working out of what is local.
J.T. It is just that these husbandmen would know the value of the fence and the winepress and the tower. These things would greatly help in making the matter pay. What we have in mind is simply what the master gets out of it, his fruits. What are they? It says, "And the husbandmen took his bondmen, and beat one, killed another, and stoned another". That brings out the terrible condition that underlay this service that was undertaken. We are not contemplating anything like that at all. The question is whether I am tested by any service that I am taking on in the vineyard when the Lord's eye is not supposedly on me. It is a question of my integrity. Am I loyal to His interests?
T.W. You spoke about the ten days in prayer; how they carried on then. Would that have any connection with this?
J.T. How they carried on in those ten days would bring out their loyalty. The Lord could easily have sent the Spirit as He went up; we may be sure of that. But the ten days were to bring out what they were. Our meetings require a great deal of attention. The wall is the fellowship. The winepress is a sort of thing needful to bring out the fruits; and the tower, too, has its own use; but then there are other things. How much is left at loose ends? How much eldership is effective in our gatherings? How much care? It is the work of the deacons, such as the vineyard requires. How much is carried out in integrity of heart? Because it is there; because it has to be done; because the position requires that it should be done. Still, the idea of husbandman enters into this; a skilled farmer; a man that knows how to work a farm. But the point is what to do when the
{290}
owner of the vineyard is not there. He has taken it on as a matter of duty, and no doubt, recompense, but that is not the point. The point is integrity of heart, and what comes out? What comes out is murder.
C.A.M. Do you not think we should be encouraged in this way -- the fact that there is a recompense for God's Son in these last days, and that God has helped as to the truth of sonship, in regard of Christ's position, that there is an integrity? He may have had to wait a long time, but there is an integrity.
J.T. I think we can see how all this works out in these last days. There is no recompense for the Son in these husbandmen, so that if there is any recompense for Him, it is in the opposite of this. No doubt the sonship of Christ having come out so strikingly helps to have recompense for Him. We are not saying, Come, let us kill Him! It is the very opposite of that.
A.N.W. Both these scriptures bring before us the assertion of God's rights, do they not? That is evidently what we need.
J.T. I think it is integrity of heart in care meetings. "With whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness?" @1 Samuel 17: 28. Eliab spoke in a disdainful way to David, but in truth David had taken care of the sheep. It says he left them with a keeper. And, moreover, he says, I am under a charge. There is a cause for my presence here. If I am absent from my place of responsibility, I ought to be able to show a good cause for it; otherwise I am neglecting my home duties. That would promote weakness instead of strength.
Ques. Does @1 Peter 5 fit in with what you say: "Shepherd the flock of God which is among you, exercising oversight, not by necessity, but willingly; not for base gain, but readily; not as lording it over
{291}
your possessions, but being models for the flock", @1 Peter 5: 2, 3?
J.T. He spoke to the elders. That is to say, eldership and deaconship are as essential to the service and the promotion of the work of God as evangelical ability or teaching ability. Eldership is not gift, nor is deaconship gift. It is a question of certain qualifications for care, and the care is essential to the prosperity of the work of God. If there are none such, no elders and no deacons, there is exposure to the wolf. No one is in charge, so to speak. That is the idea. There is not integrity of heart in the local position, and, therefore, exposure.
G.V.D. The question to Cain was, "Where is Abel thy brother?" @Genesis 4: 9. Was he sinning on the line of shepherding?
J.T. That is right, "I know not: am I my brother's keeper?", he says, intimating he is not. Whereas we have the idea of aspiring to the office of an elder, or the office of a deacon, even deaconesses, too. That is a matter of aspiration. Well, as far as I can see, no one is aspiring to that at all. Ability to preach is good, and God gives it, but that is not the thing needed for the vineyard now. The greatest need really is care.
G.H. Stewardship underlies all this, does it not?
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. If I understand, you are suggesting that the Corinthian and the Ephesian side give us the gifts that may be used in the assembly. This other line is a line taken on. It is not designated at all.
J.T. The apostles Paul and Barnabas chose themselves elders in each assembly. They did it themselves. They took it on themselves, because God had given them moral weight for that, to select certain persons in each gathering, to constitute them elders, elders in each assembly. That meant, the apostle says, that if that service was not there, they would
{292}
be exposed to the wolf; hence he calls the Ephesian elders to him and directs them to shepherd the flock, to take care of the flock. They are not treated as evangelists; they might be, of course. An elder might teach. We are told one might be able to teach, but the care of the flock is one of the most essential necessities. That is a matter of aspiration, and the next thing is to qualify according to 1 Timothy.
J.S. Would you say something about rendering their fruits in their season? How do elders do that in a public way?
J.T. It is a question of taking care of the vineyard and promoting the growth of the crop. An elder would watch for the souls of the saints, how they get on. And it is in the growth of the saints that the Lord gets His fruit.
F.N.W. Would @Romans 16 show that if we follow that epistle we will arrive at this integrity of heart? Would it work in us inwardly?
J.T. Very touching, indeed.
A.A.T. What is the service of a deaconess?
J.T. Oh, the same as a deacon, only in a less prominent way; looking after the temporal needs of the saints, visiting them. Visiting is one of the greatest things; looking after them in their houses.
J.T.Jr. If the net breaks, you want to be on hand to try and mend it. If an outbreak of some kind happens in a town, there is a certain department to look after it. If there is a breakdown of electricity it is a question of repairing whatever it is to keep the thing going. We need to watch that in our local settings, do we not?
J.T. A brother may be delinquent in attending the meetings, growing cold; that is an illustration of what is meant. He should be sought out and restored.
R.W.S. The care that God uses would encourage us to have care, too. I wondered whether the Lord's
{293}
word to Paul at Corinth, that He had much people in the place, and Paul's labours there would confirm that, that God had Corinth in view for a long time, and that applies to each assembly. God had us in mind for a long time. He has had each local assembly in mind, and is looking to get something out of them.
J.T. All really springs from what God is; the care He expends. As in the parable of the Samaritan, it says, "Take care of him", @Luke 10: 35.
Rem. The Lord seems to give us this lead Himself in chapter 24 of Luke; there were people who were not coming to the meetings, and had their backs on the meeting, and He is going after them.
J.T. That is a good example. They came back the same hour.
A.A.T. If a brother is getting cold in his affections, or neglecting the meetings, and one or two spoke to him and he did not seem to answer to the exercise, do you think it is right to have a prayer meeting just to pray for him, a special prayer meeting?
J.T. If there is agreement at the bottom of it; "If two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens", @Matthew 18: 19.
A.A.T. You would not just confine it to two or three?
J.T. It is a question of whether it is a special case; if the persons really know it and are concerned about it, "If two of you shall agree"; agreement is underlying the act of special prayer. You are entirely of one mind about it.
A.R. In chapter 21 these men are working, and there is fruit resulting, but are they diverting it? Instead of giving it to God, they are diverting it to themselves. According to the narrative, there must have been results.
{294}
J.T. They were murderous, too. It is extreme. No doubt the Jewish system is in mind. You can see how it extends down, because the Lord has left us. In one sense He is in heaven, and we are here. And elders and deacons and persons who care with genuine feeling are the ones that are needed, persons who care with integrity how the saints get on. And then as to the other instance in chapter 13, it is again a man, a householder, who is disciplined into the kingdom of the heavens. He has treasure. It is not as wide a thought, but it deals with more precious features. There is a treasure or treasures. There is a scribe. He would be, I suppose, one who values the things that are brought to his attention by the Spirit of God. He is an active man, but he is disciplined into the kingdom of the heavens. That is, he is moving through the discipline, through the teaching that he is coming under; he is moving in that direction. The preposition shows that he is moving in that direction. He is a noted man; a man that has something, not simply integrity of heart, as we had it, or in accord with the counsels of God, but he has something positive of his own on account of being disciplined into the kingdom of the heavens. He is like a householder who brings out his treasure things new and old. That is not simply that he has them, but he brings them out. He is a noted man; he is a valuable man. He is a man that has great things, valuable things, and he takes care of them; but he brings them out.
A.S. Would Abraham under the oaks of Mamre be an example of this? He ran to meet the men, and prepared refreshment.
J.T. Very good. He had the real things that were needed. You like to have the thought in your mind as to persons of distinction in this sense, not now as labourers, but as persons disciplined. For that is the idea, I suppose, or discipled. The word 'discipled'
{295}
involves teaching and instruction, involving discipline, but it says, "discipled to the kingdom of the heavens". He is moving in that direction, or his education affects him in that way. And then he "is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old". He brings them out. He has them and brings them out.
T.E.H. Would the man in @John 9 be a person like that? He received by the way of discipline the knowledge of Jesus. Then he speaks of Him as Lord and worships Him as the Son of God, as if he finally arrived at the thing through discipline.
J.T. That is it. You can see from the very beginning that he is moving in one direction, and every crisis in the experience leads him further. He is further on every time you look at him. He is moving in one direction.
A.R. You said at the beginning of the meeting that the householder would be God Himself. Now you are really applying it to the saints as taking on features of God Himself.
J.T. It is a question of the person discipled. The Lord had been giving them long lessons. In this chapter there are seven parables running throughout. That is a full curriculum finished. Now it is a question of who is coming out of it able to pass muster and get his degree, so to speak. The disciples agree that they have understood what He was saying -- He says, "Have ye understood all these things? They say to him, Yea, Lord". Then as moving in that direction, as the preposition shows, in due course we will have treasure. He is a householder with treasure, and he brings it out. Not only is it there, but he brings it out; and when it is in his hands you understand it, and he can show you what it means.
G.H. He gains through soul exercise. Is that right?
J.T. Things are rightly valued.
{296}
A.N.W. The scribe would indicate he is an accurate recorder.
J.T. I think so. To anybody coming into contact with him this man would be able to give an answer on things. There is nothing loose about him.
W.F.K. Would it be that at every meeting he brings out something fresh and new?
J.T. That is the idea. When the opportunity is there he brings things out. If you visited him, or in the assembly, he brings things out.
E.S. Is he able to keep the balance in bringing out things new and old?
J.T. It is very interesting, that not only has he got the things, but he shows you what they are. This is new, he would say. That is as old as Enoch. Well, many would not know that.
Rem. It would be like speaking from the Old Testament and the New Testament.
J.T. Take the saying of Enoch. We do not get it until we come to Jude. Jude must have heard it. Why did other people not bring that out? But he had it. Where did he get it? He watched something the Lord said maybe, and brought this thing out when it was needed to bring it out.
J.C. I was wondering if the Object of service would be the same as the source. We receive and then we give it out. We get the treasure from Him; we move in relation to the Lord.
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Would the new things be new light God has given us?
J.T. Not that exactly. They are new in the sense that they have just been learned. It would be New Testament truth and Old Testament truth. You are able to distinguish. This belongs to Abraham's time. The Lord Jesus said something we never heard before: "Your father Abraham exulted in that he
{297}
should see my day, and he saw and rejoiced", @John 8: 56. Where did that come from?
Rem. We have treasure at the beginning of the gospel. It says, "And having opened their treasures, they offered to him gifts, gold, and frankincense, and myrrh", @Matthew 2: 11.
J.T. That was treasure suited to the moment. Showing they intended to worship the Lord; they did not come empty-handed. They brought things out of their treasure.
J.S. Was Matthew not an instructed scribe? He could bring plenty out of the Old Testament.
J.T. His gospel is full of that. If you look into the quotations in his gospel you will find a peculiar touch to it.
J.S. "That that might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord, through the prophet ...", @Matthew 1: 22.
A.S. His mother kept all these things and pondered them in her heart. Would that be the thought?
J.T. That is it. She was a treasury. The treasury is the heart and the treasure is kept in it. "Keep, by the Holy Spirit which dwells in us, the good deposit entrusted", @2 Timothy 1: 14.
{298}
DIVINE OPERATIONS (EXTRACT FROM ADDRESS)
In the early part of 2 Kings much opens up to the mind by the Spirit as to characteristics of service. Elijah and Elisha enter into this book, as also into the previous one. They represent a certain feature of God's ways with His servants; one a counterpart of the other. Such as Moses and Joshua, David and Solomon, and Paul and Timothy. The principle suggests how God in His operations works in parts. It is clear that in the physical creation this was so. All the worlds were not made at the same time. We do not know how many worlds there are, but we do know that the worlds were framed by the word of God. That is, God's mind entered into every one of them. And from @Job 38 we may deduce that the earth was made after the heavens, for the sons of God and the stars joined in as the foundations of the earth were laid. The heavens were already formed, clearly. God, no doubt, had pleasure in all the work of His hands. Although it is said of Him that He was refreshed on the sabbath after the formation of our present sphere, we cannot assume that tiredness ever eventuated from His work. His mind, His word, entered into everything. Worlds were framed by His word. Wisdom was there, occasioning joy and buoyancy; she rejoiced.
In the moral system we can see also how this principle has come through. It has developed in parts. So we see servants in pairs, one developing from another. Elijah preceded Elisha, but at the same time they become contemporary; and Elisha fitted perfectly into the work and outlook of his master, which Elijah was. God had told Elijah, when he would give up his commission and cease working, to
{299}
anoint Elisha to carry on the work, and also to anoint Jehu and Hazael. Evidently Elijah was acquainted with the divine field of operations, for all these countries, having recently become familiar to us in the Near East, were then the field of divine operations. Elijah was to know where Hazael was, where Jehu was, where Elisha was. The commission to anoint these men was given at Horeb, and Jehovah said nothing as to how to find them. If it is in the divine field, we are to know it, and God gives us opportunity to know it, a great advantage.
Elijah found Elisha, not amusing himself, but ploughing, doing useful work. He was ploughing with twelve yoke of oxen, and he with the twelfth, and Elijah cast his mantle on him. Elisha was supposed to understand divine gestures, what they meant. Sometimes in ministry things are too much reduced into parts. One feels that in one's own little services. We should all become acquainted with divine ways of communication, divine methods of influence, so that we may not miss anything, any divine gesture through God's servants or otherwise, so that we may readily fall into the current, for it is always flowing.
Elisha followed Elijah; but he said, I want to go back and kiss my father and my mother. Elijah said, What did I do to thee? Go back. He went back, but it does not say that he went to his father and mother. What it does say is that he slew a yoke of oxen, and cooked them with the implements of service, and entertained everybody. He became greatly enlarged at once. It is an immense thing to be ready for enlargement. Then he followed Elijah. He came into the divine current, and enriched the current, for he poured water on the hands of Elijah. They were not naturally mated; they were divinely mated. They were suitable one to the other; God made them that. These two servants served currently. They did the work of the
{300}
day. They did not write prophetic books; Elijah wrote the message to Jehoshaphat's son, but that is about all. They were men of the moment. What was to be done in their day they did, as the work came to them. Isaiah did something of that kind, but he served for the future. So did many others, but these two great servants were current men; they met current needs. There are always current needs amongst the saints.
{301}
HEARING AND SPEECH
@Mark 7: 31 - 37; @Luke 4: 16 - 22
J.T. What is in view mainly is the subject of speaking as entering into the testimony connected with christianity. Many other scriptures could be mentioned, but this one is mentioned because of the extraordinary exercises the Lord gave expression to in healing this man that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech. The organs of speech have a very prominent place in the Scriptures, and they come into evidence particularly in view of the ministry of the truth about to be committed to Moses. Moses felt his inadequacy for the great charge proposed by Jehovah, saying he was unable to speak, and this brought out the place that speaking has in the ministry of the truth. God had no difficulty about Moses, knowing well how He could furnish him with the power of speech. And when Moses persisted in his profession of weakness, Jehovah said that Aaron the Levite was his brother, and that he could speak well. He says, I know he can speak well. This man, the subject of the verses read in @Mark 7, seems to furnish an occasion for the Lord to show how concerned He was about persons hearing aright and speaking aright. We are told, "And having taken him away from the crowd apart, he put his fingers to his ears; and having spit, he touched his tongue; and looking up to heaven he groaned, and says to him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened. And immediately his ears were opened, and the band of his tongue was loosed and he spoke right". The deep exercises of the Lord here correspond somewhat to what we find in @John 11 in the presence of death, so we can gauge how important the matter is, that christians should hear aright and speak right.
{302}
In the passage in Luke, the Lord Himself is a model for us as to speaking. The words of grace that were coming out of His mouth point to the great liberty and rapidity in which they proceeded from His mouth. That is another phase of the subject, words of grace coming out.
Ques. Had you something to say about these two organs, the one that goes in and the other that comes out?
J.T. That is the connection. The connection here is that the man was brought to Him. It is said, "They bring to him a deaf man who could not speak right". Unless we take in divine thoughts we cannot give them out. If they are taken in imperfectly, they can only be presented imperfectly, and I think that is what burdened the Lord in taking on this case of need.
R.W.S. In @Romans 3 Paul speaks of the throat and the lips and the mouth and the tongue. Is that to indicate that that is the line of recovery for God to use?
J.T. I think that is good. How they are in the natural man employed in evil! Here the organs themselves were damaged. Whether from the outset of the man's being or whether morally through evil usage, the organs themselves were damaged. It does not say he was wholly deaf, that he had never heard before, or that he could not speak at all. But he could not speak right, it says.
A.B.P. Is it particularly significant that this comes in in Mark's gospel, having levitical service in view?
J.T. That is what I thought. It occurred to me that it is a matter of importance as to receiving and giving out, the hearing and the speaking and the great concern the Lord had. Also, that those who brought the man only requested the Lord to lay His
{303}
hand on him as if they gauged the power that the Lord had in helping him. Sometimes it is laying His hands on, but here they ask just for the hand.
A.R. Do you think the reason why some do not take part in meetings or speak at all is because they are defective in hearing?
J.T. I think they go together. We certainly cannot give out unless we take in. The name that is attached to Christ especially by John in John's gospel is the *logos*, alluding to conveyance of the mind of God, speaking, and that requires these organs. Therefore, I think Luke gives us the Lord as a model. He refers to certain who were eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word. That is, on Christ, as the communicator of the word, of the mind of God. And he gives us an example in chapter 4 of how the Lord spoke, how the divine mind came out. So that the Lord said, "The Lord Jehovah hath given me the tongue of the instructed, that I should know how to succour by a word him that is weary. He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed", @Isaiah 50: 4. This was the attitude that He took up; also in the temple He is hearing and asking questions, and they marvelled at His understanding and answers, what He took in and what He could give out. So here the words of grace were coming out of His mouth.
C.A.M. Do you think that Mark would especially feel this, being a recovered vessel, on the principle of the Potter taking a vessel of clay that was marred and making it again another vessel? Would the fact that the Lord's hands were used in this connect with that?
J.T. They only asked Him to use His hand, as if that would suffice, but the reply on His side to what they say is very striking, "And having taken him away from the crowd apart, he put his fingers to his ears". We are not told what fingers, as if they
{304}
were all involved. That is, it was a very big matter, "And having spit, he touched his tongue; and looking up to heaven he groaned". It seems you have one of the deepest movements of Christ there in His healing services. In fact, there is not anything more in regard of healing than this. The boy who was a lunatic was a bad case too; the father said to the Lord, "If thou couldst do anything, be moved with pity on us, and help us", @Mark 9: 22. Well, the crowd rushed up, and the Lord said, "The 'if thou couldst' is if thou couldst believe" (verse 23). 'The "if" is not Mine, but yours'. And as the crowd rushed up He healed him immediately, as if the crowd hindered the work. But here He takes him away from the crowd, the matter is so important, and possibly affording the enemy opportunity. He took him away from the crowd, and then there are all these deep emotions that we have recorded. It is a matter for our consideration, as to why the Lord is so profoundly affected by this case, and whether there is any corresponding need in each of us as to hearing and speaking, hearing rightly and speaking rightly. Has the Lord in mind the havoc that has been wrought in the ministry or in the conversations between the saints by bad hearing and bad speaking?
Rem. In the next chapter He takes charge of a blind man. I wondered what the difference was between the two organs, the eyes and the ears; that is, what goes into us, and the tongue, what comes out of us.
J.T. Yes; speaking is what comes out. He spits also on the blind man. That is another thing to be noticed. It indicates more than simply power from God. It alludes to what He is essentially, as if that is applied in meeting these two cases.
A.R. Do you mean that the damage that is done is not what is said in the meetings but what is being said out of the meetings? Is it your thought that our
{305}
conversation outside is coloured by how we take on the truth inside?
J.T. Taking the thing in first, the power of hearing. And then, how we give it out. The right impressions are conveyed.
A.A.T. Is Zacharias an example of one who did not take it in right and then is silent and could not give it out?
J.T. He represents those who pray for things and then forget that they prayed for them, or did not really expect to get the answer. He had prayed for a son, and when the time came for him to get an answer, he did not believe he would get such an answer. His case is really unbelief. He did not believe the testimony of the angel in answer to his prayer.
R.W.S. Would the blessing in this district in chapter 5 be more or less evangelical, whereas the blessing in this chapter has more teaching in mind? The man out of whom the demons were cast in chapter 5 proclaims what great things Jesus had done for him, but here the man speaks right.
J.T. What is in mind here as to Decapolis is not any testimony rendered to it; it was the coming through the place. "And again, having left the borders of Tyre and Sidon, he came to the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis". Is the man in chapter 5 not the occasion of testimony rendered to the Lord?
R.W.S. It says, "And he went away and began to proclaim in the Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him; and all wondered", @Mark 5: 20.
J.T. That verse is what I was thinking of. He is proclaiming to the cities, a testimony, that is, whilst the preaching goes on in these cities, because the ten cities allude to the power of Satan in the cities; chapter 5 would allude to divine attack on that through the man. Whilst the attack is on, whilst
{306}
God is aggressive, the evil of a place or a city is minimised. But when the testimony is quiescent, when the Lord simply passes through, the evil of the place is felt. If we are preaching in a town, we feel it is a divine offensive, and the evil is modified; hence the importance of preaching in the streets, or wherever we can, because evil is modified by the preaching. But when we simply go to the meetings, and do or say nothing, or pass through, the evil is not disturbed. And I believe the Lord felt that in chapter 7: "He came to the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis". He would feel the power of evil in the cities, and that would, I believe, be in His mind, as to the awfulness of the human organs of speech, of hearing and speech, what they are engaged in, what wickedness they are promulgating, in places of amusement, and even in religious places. Cities have ammunition of satanic power, and if we are quiescent in regard of that, the evil is not disturbed. The Lord came through Decapolis, not intending to minister there. He was going to the sea of Galilee, but He came through those quarters, and undoubtedly that was on His spirit. The connection is between the ten cities and this matter of man's power of hearing and man's power of speech. It does not say this man was absolutely dumb from his birth, but he could not speak right. And he was deaf. Was he absolutely so? We are not quite sure. Probably the correspondence was in the speaking. It was not right. The hearing would not be right, either. That would be on the Lord's spirit, the awfulness of what is given out among men because of the distorted condition of these organs.
G.V.D. Was it also on Paul's spirit while at Athens? "But in Athens, while Paul was waiting for them, his spirit was painfully excited in him seeing the city given up to idolatry", @Acts 17: 16.
{307}
It was a matter of speaking and hearing on Areopagus.
J.T. Quite so. Athens would represent what we are saying in a very striking way. The Greek speaking was supposed, in man's account, to be the best in education and literary powers, all that Greece was famed for. Well, that is just what you get. It corresponds with what we are at here, the power of cities, the influence of cities.
Rem. This idea of speaking -- right speaking is in the assembly?
J.T. This man spoke right. We are not told what he said when he spoke. You would like just to know what he said. In Luke's gospel the young man that was raised in Nain began to speak. We are not told what he said; but in @Luke 4 we are told what the Lord said, and stress is laid on how He said it. The words came out freely; words of grace were coming out of His mouth.
Ques. Would you regard it in any way as a contrast between this idea of speaking right and the speaking which is going on in the world?
J.T. They are not speaking right at all. Take for instance when the Lord enquired from the disciples as to what men were saying about Him. Not one of them was saying the right thing, not one of them. That is what we should take on. We want to say what is right, and if we do say what is right we must hear what is right and hear it properly.
W.W.M. Would you say that there is a great contrast in hearing in @Luke 4 where they marvelled at the words of grace, showing they were not affected by it; but in @Acts 10: 33 when Cornelius sent for Peter, it says, "Now therefore *we* are all present before God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God"? And then at the end of that chapter it says, "The Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word" (verse 44). Does the reception of the
{308}
Spirit have a great deal to do with how we hear things and how they affect us?
J.T. They were hearing right. They were all there to hear; and it says, "And Peter opening his mouth said" (verse 34), alluding to the way he spoke. And so the Lord's mouth is alluded to in @Luke 4, and we have Jehovah's remarkable comments on Aaron, and at the same time saying, "Who gave man a mouth?" @Exodus 4: 11. So that that is the thought running through this instruction, the organs of hearing and of speaking; if they are not right, then we have a defective result.
T.M. Would the right kind of speaking be found in Philip and the eunuch? It says Philip opened his mouth.
J.T. We are just commenting on that expression. Peter opened his mouth, and then we are told Paul took the lead in speaking. People noted that he took the lead in speaking; and it is said of the lame man that was healed by him, "This man heard Paul speaking", @Acts 14: 9. That is the point the Spirit of God is stressing. That chapter begins by saying, "They ... so spake that a great multitude of both Jews and Greeks believed". This man heard Paul speaking and was evidently impressed by it, and made ready for the work of God in his soul.
C.N. Do you think the Lord taking up this matter and dealing with him as He did shows what is needed to arrest the conditions in a city that may be adverse?
J.T. I think so. So that the Lord coming through these ten cities, through the midst of them -- it would be on His mind; the impressions as He came through. We will suppose He came through a town where they had a cinema and a queue of people waiting to get in. How He would be impressed by that! The devil has those people. How will they hear? What will they hear? They will not hear anything right. It comes from the pit. Then they go and talk about
{309}
these things. That is how the whole population becomes morally deformed. That is how the matter stands in the great cities of the world. Hence the importance for us to have right hearing and right speaking; even to the point of the language we use. The language called slang is usually from these places.
F.H.L. In @Genesis 11: 1 it says, "And the whole earth had one language, and the same words". There was great unity in that way.
J.T. God confounded the languages. He did not confound the organs of speech. It is simply that He made languages; they became diversified so as to prevent unity in evil; not to prevent unity in good. It says in @Acts 2: 11, "We hear them speaking in our own tongues the great things of God".
T.H.H. In His groaning, the Lord looked to heaven as though heaven is to be brought into this matter of hearing and speaking.
J.T. To speak simply about the Lord, He stood up in the presence of this thing as if to say how awful it is, and He groaned. And then He spat and touched the man's tongue. Remarkable! There is no doubt He is bringing His own essential Being into the thing in the spittle.
A.A.T. I think you made some remark about a gospel preaching on the street corner. What was that reference?
J.T. Even if you do not get conversions, you certainly modify the evil that there is. In @Mark 5, as I was remarking, the testimony went to these cities in the man that had the demons cast out of him; but here there is nothing like that as the Lord comes through these cities. The Lord is coming to the sea of Galilee, and He just passes through, but He would be impressed by what He saw, and felt it.
C.A.M. This matter of feeling things creates an impulse in us. Mark seems to be a very definite case
{310}
of a man that had strong feelings, do you not think so, in the way he writes his gospel?
J.T. He is very forceful and pungent in all that he would say. His is the shortest of the gospels, is it not? showing that in ministry we are not long. Of course, it is necessary to be long at times, but Mark's gospel is comparatively short, and things are done straightway. As soon as a thing should be done, it is done; and when a thing should be said, it is said, and said briefly.
A.S. What is the thought of the 'they' here? In verse 32 it says, "And they bring", and then it says, "And they beseech", and then in verse 36 it says, "They proclaimed". Is that the taking on of the ministry after this has been done?
J.T. You do not know how many there were. It is one of the most remarkable things. It does not say there were four of them, as in chapter 2. It is 'they' without saying how many, I think the plural would mean it is a sort of general feeling.
Ques. Would this be the same place where they beseech Him to depart out of their coasts?
J.T. That is in chapter 5.
Ques. Do you think 'they' would be some who had been affected by the miracle?
J.T. Apparently He had come all the way, "He came to the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis. And they bring to him a deaf man". It would seem as if He had come to His objective. And so you get Bethsaida here, which has been alluded to, where the blind man was. That is on the sea of Galilee, I would connect the 'they' with the sea of Galilee here, rather than with the towns; "they bring" alludes to an evangelical spirit in the place, which did not mark Decapolis at all. The sea of Galilee seemed to be in an area blessed of God by the Lord's ministry.
{311}
F.H.L. Is there not a suggestion of the Lord's personal individual dealing with this man? He took him away from the crowd here, the issue is so great.
J.T. That is what marks this area, because the same happens in regard to the blind man in @Mark 8: 22 - 26: "And he comes to Bethsaida; and they bring him a blind man, and beseech him that he might touch him. And taking hold of the hand of the blind man he led him forth out of the village, and having spit upon his eyes, he laid his hands upon him, and asked him if he beheld anything. And having looked up, he said, I behold men, for I see them, as trees, walking. Then he laid his hands again upon his eyes, and he saw distinctly, and was restored and saw all things clearly. And he sent him to his house, saying, Neither enter into the village, nor tell it to any one in the village". I think what is conveyed is that the Lord reached His objective in coming through these towns. They are not His objective. He had been there and had been asked to depart out of them, but He comes through them. He is going somewhere else. That is, He is going to the sea of Galilee, and in arriving there it would seem as if there was an evangelical spirit or feeling in the people. It is a good sign if you can get feeling: "If indeed they might feel after him and find him", @Acts 17: 27. It is a very vague word, feeling after. And it seems when you get another person bringing a person to the Lord Jesus, that is the idea. There is an evangelical Spirit in the place, but that is not enough for the Lord. He wants to have the man by himself, and He takes him apart from the crowd, and then the same thing happens in Bethsaida. He takes him out of the town even. You cannot trust this feeling in a neighbourhood.
C.A.M. At Athens Paul told them that: "If indeed they might feel after him and find him". Evidently they did not exercise the other senses. Apparently they were not any good at hearing.
{312}
J.T. It is a very little thing to feel after God; if they do, of course, it is to be noted. Paul says, "He is not far from each one of us" (@Acts 17: 27), showing it is worth while to feel after Him. But when you get the plural here, there is something of God in the place. And that is why the sea of Galilee has such a great place in connection with the Lord's ministry.
J.T.Jr. There did not seem to be any wilfulness in the matter. He did not say he would not go with the Lord. We need to get into His hands to get clear that we might hear right.
J.T. Many a young person pulls away the shoulder, although the parents may speak about the Lord to the young. I find it very hard. But this man is subject, "And they bring to him a deaf man who could not speak right, and they beseech him that he might lay his hand on him. And having taken him away from the crowd apart ...". The man was subject, and hence he got the blessing.
F.N.W. I was thinking of the details of @Isaiah 50: 4, 5 to which you alluded earlier; the personal references are interesting. "The Lord Jehovah hath given me the tongue of the instructed, that I should know how to succour by a word him that is weary. He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed. The Lord Jehovah hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious; I turned not away back".
J.T. I am glad you mentioned that, because the tongue is brought in there as well as the ear.
R.W.S. Is the tongue connected with the moistened fingers more than the ears, or is that reading something into it? "He put his fingers to his ears; and having spit, he touched his tongue". I wondered if there was something to that; if there was some connection between the spittle and touching his tongue.
J.T. I think there must be, if we accept that the spittle denotes what the Lord is essentially. It is
{313}
more than what He is apparently. It is the unseen side of the matter that is brought into it. It is a question of God coming into the scene and dealing with it, meeting this awful condition of man in his disorganised organs, so to speak, deranged moral conditions, immoral conditions.
A.B.P. The fact that it says simply that He spat is in contrast to the other place where He made mud of the spittle; it is more the general fact of the thing, that He is God manifest in the flesh.
J.T. That is what I was thinking. Really, it is new creation that is in mind. You must bring God in for new creation. The Lord Jesus is said to be "the beginning of the creation of God", @Revelation 3: 14. Not that He was part of it. He is the Creator. But He is the Beginning of it. That is, it all issues from Him. I believe that is what is implied. It is the new man that is implied, which is new creation. "For in Christ Jesus neither is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision; but new creation", @Galatians 6: 15. We must bring God in for creation.
T.E.H. Is Mark impressing us with that in the beginning of his gospel? He speaks about a messenger of the Lord, as if that would imply hearing, and then a voice of one crying in the wilderness. The two organs would be employed.
J.T. Just so. And the One speaking audibly is Himself the Creator. Not only is He the Mediator, but He is Himself the Creator. @Hebrews 1: 1, 2 says, "God having spoken in many parts and in many ways formerly to the fathers in the prophets, at the end of these days has spoken to us in the Person of the Son, whom he has established heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds". That is, He is the Creator. It seems as if the spitting here would mean nothing less than that will do, this is such an awful thing. It is not reformation; it is not improvement
{314}
of what there is, but a totally new thing that has to come about.
A.B.P. Sometimes in speaking about young people who do not take part there is an exercise that they may get to God in their soul experience. I wondered if this might be a little bit further than that? Would it be right to pray, if there is no response to that, that God might make a move?
J.T. God is here. That is what we get here. But then the other side is that He might bring us to God. He has not far to go, because God is there. When Thomas, who needed recovery, was recovered, he said, "My Lord and my God", @John 20: 28.
C.A.M. This matter of new creation is a wonderful thing. It connects, perhaps, with the idea, "And the vessel that he made was marred, as clay, in the hand of the potter; and he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to make", @Jeremiah 18: 4.
J.T. That is the thing exactly. It is another vessel. The first was defective. That is what is going on here. There was something there. He must have stuttered out something, but he could not do it rightly, and that will not do for God. You must have everything perfect. And the word here in result is: "He does all things well; he makes both the deaf to hear, and the speechless to speak", @Mark 7: 37. Everything is perfectly done, and that is new creation. It is not making things over; it is new creation.
J.T.Jr. To the woman in @John 4 He says, "I who speak to thee am he" (verse 26). He makes a point of speaking there to the woman, so that she goes and speaks in the city.
J.T. Quite so. So in chapter 9: 37, He says, "Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he".
Ques. Is the thought of new creation in @Psalm 45: 1? "My heart is welling forth with a good
{315}
matter: I say what I have composed touching the king. My tongue is the pen of a ready writer".
J.T. Well, it is new creation, only there he is speaking about God. I mean, new creation is essential; nothing less will do. But @Psalm 45 is not dealing with the creature. The leading thought is what a creature is saying about God; what he has to say is about the King, and He is called God in that psalm, is He not? so that we are in the presence of God. All these signs, I believe, or miracles, or good works of Jesus had in mind the making of everything new. Things are to be made new. You cannot remake the old thing. It is new. Everything is to be made new. And that is why God is brought in. The creation requires God.
C.A.M. The Lord's fingers are alluded to in the first creation. All that line of things is really suggestive of new creation.
J.T. That is the idea. Here He is operating; the great divine Operator is here operating. They say, Lay Thy hand on him; but the Lord is going to do the thing thoroughly. He brings His fingers into it. He is going into it in detail.
F.H.L. Mark had turned back, but now he says, "He does all things well".
J.T. He would say every time, I did not do so well. That is what Mark would say after being restored. I made a poor hand of it, and I see now that it is not simply remaking, but a new thing altogether. The first is, as has been remarked, useless; it is marred in the making. It is a wholly new thing that the Potter makes.
A.R. That involves that I say things that I never said before, and my language would be choice; my selection of words would be choice.
J.T. I think God helps us in the words we use. You remember that it was said of Cornelius that he had "been divinely instructed by a holy angel to send
{316}
for thee to his house, and hear words from thee", @Acts 10: 22. That is enough; it was a question of words, "Peter, who shall speak words to thee whereby *thou* shalt be saved, thou and all thy house", @Acts 11: 14. In chapter 5 the apostles are imprisoned, but they are told to go out and speak to the people all the words of this life. The men that brought this dumb man to the Lord, no doubt, had heard He could do great things; and they asked Him to lay His hand on him; but the Lord is operating now in connection with crowd conditions. He is operating to make the thing perfect. It is a wholly new matter. He spoke right.
A.A.T. What is the point in the Lord asking them not to speak about it?
J.T. You do not want to garnish the world as it is. That is what is always meant in these cases. It is said that God by His Spirit garnished the heavens. That is a perfect creation. They stand there now. They are a glory to look at at any time. But He is not garnishing humanity as it is. He never intended christianity to improve the world. That is what the Lord means here. It is a wholly new matter; it is not reformation. It is not bettering things at all; it is a wholly new matter. And, therefore, if you begin to tell the people about these matters, they will think, Well, we are wonderful to have such a Man amongst us. And they are not converted at all. Christianity to them is simply unconverted men affected and made better than the rest of men. They are not really made better, but it is external. These things are never to be made common subjects of conversation. If you speak to a man about the things of God, link him on with what is unseen, in faith.
A.R. Is that why the Lord was rejected by the Pharisees and scribes and chief priests? They did not like Him to cut across what they were at. They were on the line of reformation.
{317}
J.T. They were ready to take on John the baptist, because they saw he would be used in their system; but the Lord is not going to be used in their system at all.
A.A.T. They did not take His advice; they went out and published it.
J.T. That is what we are all prone to do. It is simply desecrating the truth; spreading it out before natural men, as if it were a subject like others.
A.B.P. Would you make a little clearer the matter of new creation as applied to the recovery of Mark?
J.T. I think that must be the aim in everything in the incarnation. The incarnation had in mind the new creation. "For in Christ Jesus neither is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision; but new creation", @Galatians 6: 15. That is christianity. That is what is in mind. It may not be fully seen at the beginning but that is what is in mind. So that, "according to his promise, we wait for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness", @2 Peter 3: 13. Even the millennium will not do for God. It is only preliminary. The new creation is promised in Isaiah, but it is only what takes form in the millennium. The new creation that Paul touches is wholly new, and what Peter says is wholly new, so that "if any one be in Christ, there is a new creation", @2 Corinthians 5: 17. You say, It is not yet; but there is a new creation. It is the principle of christianity that is received; it is only a matter of time. So that we may as well give up reformation.
A.B.P. Applying that personally to Mark's experience, would you say there was no evidence of new creation before his failure?
J.T. I should not say that. He simply failed. I think it is alluded to in his own gospel when he fled from them naked. He was exposed as not on the line of new creation.
{318}
C.A.M. Looking at where he failed in the Acts, he failed before Paul went to Philippi. In @Philippians 3: 3 it says, "For *we* are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh". He was not fully equal to that.
J.T. Just so. It came into @Acts 15. He departed from Paul and Barnabas in chapter 13 on the first missionary journey, and went back to Jerusalem. When this matter of legality came up at Antioch, that they must be circumcised and keep the law of Moses, they were denying new creation. That is really what the truth was, and that is why Paul says in the letter to the Galatians, "For in Christ Jesus neither is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision; but new creation. And as many as shall walk by this rule, peace upon them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God", @Galatians 6: 15, 16. That is, the rule of new creation. You may not have reached it fully, but the rule is in your mind. And the primary thought for Israel is the Israel of God. When the debate took place in Jerusalem about this matter, undoubtedly John Mark was there. We know he was there. Titus was there. Now, John Mark would be a Jerusalemite. That is where the legality was finding its home. Things were waning in Jerusalem, and where there is a waning condition in christianity, you may be sure legality will come in, a mixture. John Mark was there, but Titus was there. Paul tells us expressly, "Taking Titus also with me", @Galatians 2: 1. Why does he mention that? Because Titus represents new creation. That is what was going on among the gentiles through Paul's ministry. Nothing less would suit him. It is the principle of new creation. But then John Mark was there. Would he shake hands with Titus? Would he measure himself up with Titus? Would he converse with
{319}
Titus? He would not, apparently, because he went off with Barnabas.
C.A.M. That throws a lot of light on it.
J.T. It was the parting of the ways. Barnabas took John Mark, and Paul took Silas. And then Titus, as we know, had a great place with him. That is the position. And I believe Mark's gospel is working out this great principle, because he is restored. Nothing will do but new creation, and this man needed that. God is there Himself in creation in the spittle, I believe, as He was in @John 9. The Lord said, "Neither has this man sinned nor his parents, but that the works of God should be manifested in him", @John 9: 3. That is the idea in new creation. Mark has that in mind. And every servant, if he does not go out with the rule of new creation in his pocket, will miss it.
C.A.M. That allusion to Titus was very interesting. They did not compel him to be circumcised.
J.T. What better can you make him? That is the inference. You will only make him worse.
F.S.C. You referred to @Exodus 4 where it says God made man's mouth. "Who gave man a mouth? or who maketh dumb, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? have not I, Jehovah?" @Exodus 4: 11. Is that what is meant in @John 9?
J.T. That is exactly what is meant. The disciples say, "Who sinned, this man or his parents ... ?", @John 9: 1. They could not get out of the realm of the government of God. But the Lord says, "Neither has this man sinned nor his parents". You just wonder how He could say that, but He did. He says, "But that the works of God should be manifested in him". That is, that God should begin another creation.
R.W.S. Is new birth the first item in new creation or does it not go as far as that?
J.T. New birth is a family idea. It is a generative idea. The creation primarily was not generative; it
{320}
was created. It is another idea. Paul is working on that line, and Peter, too. Peter speaks about new creation, but John speaks about new birth. But undoubtedly they are collateral thoughts; but new creation is a creation. The word 'create' is not generative. It is another matter. It is God beginning over again to bring about His thoughts in new creation.
W.B-w. Would you say Paul links reconciliation with new creation in 2 Corinthians?
J.T. It is leading us to new creation; it is the principle. Reconciliation is effected through the gospel. In @Romans 5: 10 it says, "Being enemies, we have been reconciled to God through the death of his Son", but new creation is not on that line. It is God taking us up to create us again. Of course, the old history has to be dealt with, but it comes to nothing.
F.H.L. Do you read new creation into @Luke 4: 18 where it says, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me"?
J.T. That is the gospel. He had nothing else in mind. If we are ministering, we must have in mind that God is making everything new. But birth is a family idea. I may be very vague in what I am trying to say, but it requires a lot of attention. New birth is another thing, because John is dealing with the family. Paul deals with the family too, but he deals with new creation, and the spittle involves that. Mark takes it up here and in the next chapter too.
A.B.P. You referred to the young man that had the linen cloth cast about his naked body. The young man sitting in the sepulchre after the resurrection of Christ would hardly be a development of that young man, but rather in contrast to him.
J.T. He represents the full idea. The young man in the tomb glorifies the tomb. Instead of a dead
{321}
Christ you have a living new creation. That is what I had in mind, but Mark is before that. The linen cloth about his naked body would allude to the way he took on the truth; not in a truly inward way, and yet he was a true man. There is another thing about him: if I remember rightly. Mary was his mother; the Mary in whose house the prayer meeting was going on when Peter came according to @Acts 12. There is rather a bad link all the way through. That prayer meeting was not too good, either, and yet God recognised it. But it was imperfect; they were not ready for Peter.
C.N. So then, we have already referred to Romans as describing what comes out of the mouth, the tongue. Would it be right then to say what we have here in Mark is God making another vessel? Romans is describing the vessel as marred; now the action of the Lord here in @Mark 7 would be the making of a new vessel, or new creation, as you say, so that this young man speaks right.
J.T. That is what I would say. @Genesis 2: 7 says, "And Jehovah Elohim formed man". The first chapter says He created him, but the second chapter says He formed him, or made him. The creation is one thing, and the making is another; but the same idea runs into them, that we have a creature that can speak. God says, Now, Adam, what about this creature here? God is bringing in a creature to speak about creation. Well, Adam says, That is a lion; that is a cow; that is a sheep. He is speaking right. That is the thought. God says, That is right; that will do. So that God has His creature there according to what He intended; but when you come to new creation, then we have what we have here; it is another thing, another order altogether, I mean, that is what is in the Lord's mind in spitting and touching his tongue. It is the contact of Deity with the creature.
{322}
J.T.Jr. And the detail in the fingers would be suggestive that it is a matter of detail with us. We cannot be slovenly; it is a careful matter. The man in @John 9 can set out in detail what is in his soul.
J.T. The use of the fingers is interesting here, because they are alluded to in the creation.
W.B-w. In Colossians and Ephesians you get the new man referred to. Is that the model? The idea of new creation in the new man?
J.T. Just so.
W.B-w. It says, "And your having put on the new man, which according to God is created in truthful righteousness and holiness", @Ephesians 4: 24.
J.T. "According to the image of him that has created him", @Colossians 3: 10. We do not call you a new man, or any of us; meaning it is the same as the human race under Adam. It is a new order of things; it is new; it is a creation, and it is beginning in this man. The next thing is, what will he say when he speaks? If he reports something he heard, will he report it correctly?
Ques. Are there two creations in @Romans 8? The one says, "For we know that the whole creation groans together and travails in pain together until now". And then, "But even *we* ourselves, who have the first-fruits of the Spirit, we also ourselves groan in ourselves" (verses 22, 23). Is that new creation?
J.T. It is involved in that. The first-fruits of the Spirit would mean Christ is much in evidence. It is making much of the Spirit. That chapter is full of the Spirit. It is a question of making much of the Spirit of God in that chapter. The Spirit is mentioned thirteen times in the first thirteen or fourteen verses in that chapter.
Ques. Would the Holy Spirit involve new creation?
J.T. That chapter has mainly in mind to stress the idea of the Spirit of God as taking charge of the believer.
{323}
C.A.M. Would it be right to say that the Holy Spirit makes use of the feelings by coming on to our side in the midst of it all? He makes use of the feelings in this present set-up of creation, and carries the feelings over in some holy way into the other.
J.T. It is not made out of nothing as the first creation was. It is said to be made out of nothing. Where did God get the material? But here in Christianity He takes up persons already persons and quickens them. Ephesians says it is out of a dead condition. There are no feelings God-ward, but God begins there and quickens them there and makes them a new creation. He takes up persons already in existence.
T.E.H. Would you help as to @Titus 3: 5, "Through the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit"? Where does that come in in connection with the family?
J.T. Regeneration is usually the family. The word there is only used twice. The one is in Matthew and the other there. It is not simply creation, but regeneration. It covers the millennial state of things in Matthew. And with you, of course, you can see if you look back, that it has taken place in you. The renewal of the Holy Spirit is to keep you going. The primary thing is regeneration, but you are kept going by the Holy Spirit. The water of new birth may be linked with it.
T.E.H. The note alludes to a bath, as if you took it all over you.
J.T. That is the idea.
A.A.T. The new creation is definitely God's work.
J.T. It is. God as a Creator. That is behind it; whereas new generation or regeneration, or new birth is God as a Father. He has families, but He has creatures. A creature is created; a man, a child is born, but a creature is created. "And remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth", @Ecclesiastes 12: 1.
{324}
That is God as the Creator, but that same Being is my Father as well.
A.A.T. In the chapter before us I can see the Lord working in making the spittle and using His fingers and all that, but how is that worked out today?
J.T. Everything is by the Spirit now, the details in which you are cared for from the time you are created; the details into which the Spirit descends in caring for you. In fact, all the divine Persons are occupied with us.
G.H. It says in @Genesis 2: 7, "And Jehovah Elohim formed Man". Would that mean He went into detail in making man?
J.T. He must have gone into detail. Look at all the organs. In @Ezekiel 37 we have the valley of dry bones. We only have the externals there, the sinews and the flesh, and the skin. But think of the internals; think of the detail! Infinitely wonderfully made, and fearfully made. We are so accustomed to ourselves we forget what has been expended on us. What a Creator we have! And we are to remember Him in the days of our youth. Every organ you have -- remember that God is the Creator of it.
A.R. So the new man in Colossians includes the organism really.
J.T. The body of Christ includes that.
A.R. I was thinking, if we understood it, how closely we would be brought together and understand the links we have with one another.
J.T. Quite so.
T.E.H. In speaking to God about one's exercise, in referring to new creation or referring to the matter of the family, you would address either God or the Father intelligently in that way.
J.T. Yes; God is the Creator. The Father did not create the worlds. It is a remarkable thing; it is the Son that created the worlds, but still it is God
{325}
that created the worlds. The Father is connected with the family.
W.B-w. Does new creation refer more to eternal conditions rather than millennial conditions?
J.T. Isaiah has millennial conditions in mind when he says, "For behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy", @Isaiah 65: 18. The principle is in the millennium, but the millennium is not a perfect state of things; but in new creation old things are passed away and all things are become new.
A.R. The new heavens and new earth are a new thing.
J.T. That is the final thing that God has in mind. The heavens are not even clean in His sight; everything is to be made new.
R.W.S. He takes away the first that He might establish the second. There is nothing after that.
J.T. Just so.
A.B.P. After the recovery of Mark he appears to be serviceable in connection with the ministry of the kingdom of God. His gospel seems to emphasise the kingdom of God, too.
J.T. Just so. Mark says, "And he said to them, Verily I say unto you, There are some of those standing here that shall not taste death until they shall have seen the kingdom of God come in power", @Mark 9: 1. He would mean, 'that is what I have experienced myself since I have been restored'.
A.B.P. Paul says to the Colossians about Mark and others, "These are the only fellow-workers for the kingdom of God who have been a consolation to me", @Colossians 4: 11.
J.T. You can understand that in the way he treats of the kingdom of God in his gospel.
A.Pf. You are calling our attention to the world that was, and the world that now is, and the world
{326}
which is to come; there is nothing new; it is the same world.
J.T. The world that then was, and the world that now is, and then the world to come is the millennium. It is the habitable world that God has put under men and not under angels. But then the expression 'kingdom of God' is sometimes vaguely used to cover eternity. It is the idea of God's rule which love always delights in.
{327}
PRESENT BEFORE GOD
@Acts 10: 24 - 27, 33
"Now therefore *we* are all present before God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God". That is the verse I had in mind principally in what I have to say, for it is applicable to this meeting. Cornelius had called together "his kinsmen and his intimate friends" and now they are all together and Peter has come in, and he says, "Now therefore *we* are all present before God". The passage is a challenge as to why we are here. Other meetings are not so well attended sometimes, many are missing sometimes, and many are missing here. The principle governing this meeting no doubt most of us know is in @1 Corinthians 14: 23, "If therefore the whole assembly come together in one place". It is a matter to be considered seriously. In order to accommodate all in this city to be here, much larger accommodation than we have would have to be provided. So that it is obviously of special import that the whole assembly never does come together in one place -- I mean those of it in this city who are supposed to know that congregating is meeting together and that it is a great feature of the assembly. Luke says, "We being assembled to break bread" (@Acts 20: 7); and as he records earlier, "They were all together in one place", @Acts 2: 1. So we are challenged tonight as to how many absentees there are, and why they are absentees, why many who are numbered with us never appear at these meetings; hence, it is a question as to how much reality there is in the material, for the word in Corinthians is, "If therefore the whole assembly come together in one place". I thought it would be helpful to call attention to the first gentile assembly known by Luke mentioned in the Acts -- what marked them;
{328}
not that Caesarea was necessarily a gentile city for it was in Palestine, but it was under foreign domination, and gentile domination was represented here in Cornelius, who is of the Italic band. And what underlying history enters into the passage! -- for it is really underlying secret history that counts in assembly formation, and if that be so with us that God has His rights, these meetings will take on spiritual character, more spiritual than perhaps we have been accustomed to think, for the very bigness relatively of the meeting may attract some; the bigger the meeting, the more attraction it has for a certain state of soul.
Cornelius did not think of a big meeting, nor did the visitation he received by the angel suggest to him anything of the kind. Clearly it was a question of quality, and the angel came on account of that; for the angel says to Cornelius, "Thy prayers and thine alms have gone up for a memorial before God", @Acts 10: 4. Think of that from a man who you can hardly say had heard the gospel yet. "Have gone up", the angel says, "Thy prayers and thine alms have gone up". The angel would speak from the standpoint of heaven. How conversant angels are with matters of this kind! For they are all cognisant of repentance; there is much joy in their presence on account of that. The transactions in heaven indeed become wonderfully interesting in that way, everyday matters. Heaven, I suppose, is more active than any place on earth. We cannot say how many angels there are, but there are a great many, and they speak feelingly, too, "Thy prayers and thine alms", the angel says. Let us not forget the alms! Apparently, they should go together, prayers and alms. They "have gone up for a memorial before God". So that we have remarkable history alluded to in view of the context of the chapter, what underlies these meetings really, or ought to underlie these meetings, history
{329}
with God. Who in all Caesarea thought that Cornelius had made any such impression in heaven, perhaps more than he had ever made in the army or any other way, for there was no love there?
Well, I mention all this, but wish to dwell on verse 33 that I read; what is heaven thinking about now? The heavenly messenger moved out to this man, so that, dear brethren, we are reminded in this chapter which treats of the gospel going out among the nations and being received among the nations, what it really was, what an assembly was, man having secret history with God, and certain fragrance, as I may say, before God as a memorial, and God saying, This must be kept before Me; it is treasured up here. The angel knew that. No doubt he was charged with his message, but he knew apparently about this great matter that was taking place above, for he appears to speak from that standpoint -- "have gone up". The prayers and alms are properly balanced, for if I pray for people, the next thing is, Can I help them myself? God can help them, of course, but can I do anything to help them? Of course, I cannot do much better than pray for a person, but then the alms are not prayers; they are substantial things that I have got, that Cornelius had; I mean the means of alms, for soldiers usually do not have large pay, but clearly he had the means of alms-giving and used them, for a man is accepted according to what he has, not according to what he has not, it may measure a small amount or a large amount; so that both the prayers and alms went up and were regarded there as a memorial. Think of all the history of the testimony from the beginning, everything carried down in that history, and know it is something that must be, not simply going up to a place in heaven, but that it must have a place in heaven, a memorial before God which must stand. I hardly know of anything so suggestive of spiritual history,
{330}
and how one becomes known in heaven and so known and so valued that a memorial is there; hence the results show that this remarkable product of the work of God so far should be properly instructed and have the right teaching, the teaching he needed; and so for this, the teacher must be prepared. Great indeed as Peter was as a teacher, he had to be specially prepared for this matter. This was important in heaven that the assembly is to reflect the mind of heaven, and this teacher must be there, and he must be there as having come under peculiar divine instruction. He is already in a trance, a highly spiritual man, and then we are told what he saw, and how the Spirit of God takes him in hand. It says in verse 17, "And as Peter doubted in himself what the vision which he had seen might mean, behold also the men who were sent by Cornelius, having sought out the house of Simon, stood at the gate, and having called someone, they inquired if Simon who was surnamed Peter was lodged there. But as Peter continued pondering over the vision, the Spirit said to him ...", that is, the Holy Spirit comes into this matter, so as to be sure there is to be no miscarriage at all of heaven's mind. The angel is engaged in it, the vision is engaged in it, and now the Spirit of God Himself is engaged in it, "The Spirit said to him, behold, three men seek thee; but rise up, go down, and go with them, nothing doubting, because *I* have sent them". That is an assuring position; there must be no interference with it. You can discern, dear brethren, that there is no other hand here, and so it should be with every meeting like this. For Satan is all ready to come. He came when the sons of God came up to present themselves. It is a question of state, and if there is a wrong state, he comes. Apparently there was none here, and so we are told that Cornelius waited for them, "And on the morrow they came to Caesarea. But Cornelius was looking
{331}
for them, having called together his kinsmen and his intimate friends". What marks this man was secret history. He was known in heaven, and now he is waiting for Peter. It is true, indeed, that he would worship him, but Peter debarred the devil there, "But Peter made him rise, saying, Rise up: *I* myself also am a man". What beautiful manly qualities are here! The thought is that the assembly is made up of manly qualities. Peter is acting as a true man. He is saying he is a human being, but he is a real man in the matter, and Cornelius must be that, too. He must be delivered from all that would interfere with real companionship among men, "*I* myself also am a man. And he went in, talking with him, and found many gathered together".
Now, dear brethren, this is what one had in mind -- they were come together. We are told who they were. It is no question of age there; it was a question of persons known as "his kinsmen and his intimate friends". The matter is very important. We must all get the benefit of this. That would be in his mind, a full result -- and what a result, what a widespread result coming down to ourselves, this very night in this very city, this comes out. So without saying much more, Cornelius refers to what happened, "Four days ago I had been fasting unto this hour, and the ninth I was praying in my house". He did not know it, but undoubtedly that was the hour in which the Lord died on the cross; at least, when He said, "My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me?". Peter and John had gone up to the temple at that hour, the hour of prayer, and Cornelius was not behind in that. What material, dear brethren, we have in the persons in this chapter, and of course the point is a challenge to our hearts as to material and where we are as to these matters we are brought into and whether we are in the current of what we are brought into. So he says, "And lo, a man stood
{332}
before me in bright clothing" -- you can see he is not losing anything but rather gaining -- 'a man' -- "and said, Cornelius, thy prayer has been heard, and thy alms have come in remembrance before God" (not now that they have gone up but they are there), "Send therefore ...". And then our verse, "Immediately therefore I sent to thee, and *thou* hast well done in coming. Now therefore *we* are all present before God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God".
So the question is, dear brethren, are we here for this purpose, thirsting for the word of God? Scripture speaks of thirsting for the word of God, and now the gentiles are coming into that. "Now therefore *we* are all present before God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God". It is not what you have learned, but the things that are specially commanded, because it is a special matter. It is not simply what they were saying at Jerusalem. It is a special matter, what is commanded for *this* time. You want to hear it all. So, dear brethren, that is what is in one's mind as to how we are here and why we come to this meeting, what is the underlying thought? If it is to break bread, we do that; if it is a care meeting, the apostles and elders come; but this time, it is a company in these remarkable circumstances and the leader here, for God uses leaders. That is a great principle with Him, and Cornelius was the man here, "Now therefore *we* are all present before God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God". Not before Peter. Only a little while before he fell down before Peter. He would not do that again. It is before God now, as the angel in Revelation says, Worship God. "We are all here before God", he says. He can speak for others, for his kinsmen and friends. Did he know them all personally? Apparently. We are all here, and here for one purpose. It is not a social matter this but to hear what is commanded. We are ready for that, "to hear all
{333}
things that are commanded thee of God". You can see as Peter proceeds, the Holy Spirit comes in: "While Peter was yet speaking these words the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word". He did not wait for Peter to stop. The Holy Spirit takes the matter over. So Cornelius was right in his judgment. They were all there to hear what God commanded, and the Holy Spirit says, Yes, and I will take you on. Heaven is taking them on in the most positive way by the Holy Spirit; not an angel, but the Holy Spirit Himself falling upon those who heard the word. They came to hear it, and they heard it, and the Spirit took account of it, and He fell on them. That is all Peter says, "And the faithful of the circumcision were astonished, as many as came with Peter, that upon the nations also the gift of the Holy Spirit was poured out, for they heard them speaking with tongues and magnifying God". That is the result.
{334}
GIRDING
@Job 38: 3; @John 21: 18, 19; @Jeremiah 1: 17 - 19
I wish to speak to the brethren about girding. It is a service that each renders to himself in ordinary circumstances constantly. It is usually a self-service, and it is so presented in these three passages, the first person mentioned being under discipline, under the discipline of God. He is being delivered from his captivity, for anyone under discipline in the house of God is in captivity. Job was delivered from his captivity when he prayed for his three friends. Jehovah is endeavouring to bring this about in Job's soul. He is taking him on, after Elihu has served him, and he served him well, preparing him for the direct service of God. It is the direct service of God that perfects the work of recovery. He loves us so well; He would take us on Himself. He took on Job here and He said to him, 'Now, in what I am going to say to you, I wish you to be in the attitude of a man, not to hide yourself behind trifling subterfuges, but to be manly in your attitude and in what you say'. All else is rubbish, and has to be thrown out of the window as quickly as possible, or burnt. Paul says, "When I became a man, I had done with what belonged to the child", @1 Corinthians 13: 11. And God, whilst He takes care of the little ones, and as the Lord says, "Their angels in the heavens continually behold the face of my Father who is in the heavens" (@Matthew 18: 10), a very precious word for parents, yet in His governmental dealings and His dispensations He deals with men. In giving the disciples to the Lord Jesus, the Lord says to His Father of the giving, "The men whom thou gavest me out of the world", @John 17: 6. It was a transaction between the Father and the Son; the Father gave the Son men. He had revealed things to them as babes, but He did not
{335}
give them to Him as babes; He gave them to Him as men. They were worth giving, and worth receiving. And if we are to have to say to the things of God in His house, we are to be in this worth, this standard of value, men. Even to the Corinthians, although they were very poor and low down, the word was, "Quit yourselves like men", @1 Corinthians 16: 13.
Now Jehovah says, 'Gird yourself now': "Gird up now thy loins like a man" (@Job 38: 3), a very direct word, "and I will demand of thee, and inform thou me". God is ready to receive answers from men, even from Job. Now, this is repeated later in the interview between Jehovah and Job, and the speaking is almost entirely by Jehovah. Job had learned to listen. He was a great talker, and an eloquent talker, and thought he knew, but at one point it says his words were ended. But still God is ready to hear from him, and He proceeds in chapters 38 and 39, telling Job about creatures, about thirty in number in those two chapters. It was no matter of the lower creatures with God, neither was it a matter of botany, but of reaching Job's soul, getting him right. He was worth it. He was lost to God, and God knew it, but he was worth restoring, but it was on the principle of a man.
As God went on to speak to him, Job breaks out again and makes a confession, which was good. They are rare. Confessions of any value are rare, and Jehovah said nothing about his confession, whether for good or bad; but He again challenges him as He did here. Gird up your loins like a man and answer Me, as if God were to say, It is not worth discussing with you the importance of your confession. I am not saying one thing or another about it. I want the man to talk to Me. He was making headway with Job, and in chapter 40, which many of you have preached from, it is said that Job answered the Lord, "Behold, I am nought: what shall I answer thee? I will lay
{336}
my hand upon my mouth. Once have I spoken, and I will not answer; yea twice, but I will proceed no further. And Jehovah answered Job out of the whirlwind and said, Gird up now thy loins like a man: I will demand of thee, and inform thou me" (verses 4 - 7). I have more to say to you. That is in effect what God said. He was not saying that what Job said was wrong. It was not wrong. He was pleased with it, doubtless, but it did not lift Job out of his captivity. He had to hear about two great creatures from Jehovah's mouth. One of them, He says, was made with you. His name is behemoth. It is a creature, I made him with you, God says. He lifts the creature to the level of Job in that sense. They were made on the same day, as it were. He is the chief of the ways of God. Job, you are not that. You might think you are important, but you are not that. We are humbled by comparison. He also spoke to him about leviathan. Job was not leviathan, either. He was not the chief of the ways of God, he was a violent creature. He was the king of all the children of pride, but Job had to hear about him, for he was not wanting in pride in his time. He was getting rid of it; he was unloading; but he had to hear about this creature who was the king of all the children of pride. And Job says, I know that You can do everything.
I am not going to follow the history, because all the preachers here have used these scriptures, but Job reached the point of recovery, the point of deliverance from captivity; because it is not only deliverance from one's own self, but captivity. That is a great leading feature of recovery with God; He led captivity captive and gave gifts to men. Deliverance from captivity would mean you come into the benefit of gift. In captivity it is the lash, but deliverance from captivity is that you come into the realm of gift, gifts to men, and that was what Job reached.
{337}
But it was men; God was operating with men, and He indulged them as delivered from captivity; so that Job becomes a priest, a high priest. He intercedes for his three friends; that is the order, dear brethren, of what ensues from this girding, and hence the importance of following Jehovah's advice. Who can give us better? "Gird up now thy loins like a man"; notice, it is the loins in these three cases except Peter; the loins are in question, because the loins are the seat of the affections. We may gird them up in an illegal way, but the word is, "Having girt about your loins with truth", @Ephesians 6: 14. The affections are rightly adjusted, usable. And another very beautiful thought in that connection is the virtuous woman. She strengthens her loins; she girds them with strength. Another does not do it; that is the point I would make; it is a self-service. A common expression nowadays is 'self-service', and this is a self-service. If it is not done, then you are not doing it, and you are missing it. You cannot complain. If you do, you complain about yourself. She strengthens her loins; she girds them up with strength. That is to say, it is the assembly in principle; for she represents femininely the highest divine thought in service in the last chapter of Proverbs. It is the wise man speaking; he says in one place, "One man among a thousand have I found, but a woman among all those have I not found", @Ecclesiastes 7: 28 -- a very solemn word for the sisters, but still he has an ideal in his mind; "Who can find a woman of worth?" @Proverbs 31: 10. And then he describes her, and among the many things that she can do is, "She girdeth her loins with strength", verse 17. One is reminded of the assembly in Philadelphia. She had a little strength, and that is the best way to use it: to gird up the loins with it so that the affections are under control, and the service flows out evenly. She is in no way preferential; love is never preferential. Love flows
{338}
out itself from its seat in the service of others if it is girded up with strength. And it is not beyond our reach collectively to do a little. Indeed, there are things being done collectively, not very much, but I think the Lord would be pleased to see a little collective girding up of the loins with strength, unity in the care meeting, and the administration of affairs, of divine bounty, that the loins are in it, girded up with strength, and the arms made strong, too. She does it herself. This self-service matter, dear brethren, is one of the most interesting things for us to look into, because it makes us independent in one way. Others, of course, are served. God has a wonderful system that He has brought us into, in which He has a great Priest above. But this is a self-service matter. It saves us from a lot of grumbling and complaining. There is so much I can do for myself. So that the apostle says, "So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law", @Romans 7: 25, "*I myself*": it is taking up this attitude that strengthens the whole position, and as we proceed individually in this self-service, we can serve each other in this way, this 'self' way; "Its self-building up in love", @Ephesians 4: 16. It builds up itself in love.
Well, I have spoken of these things, and it comes home to one as to what there is in the way of collective strengthening of the loins. We certainly cannot do it by debate in the meeting. It is a love matter, this collective self-service. The assembly is the greatest vessel in the universe in this dispensation. I am not speaking of divine Persons, of course. They are never to be compared; They are always left by Themselves. But the assembly is the greatest vessel in the universe; she comes down in the light of sonship from God. Her description plainly indicates she is ready for self-service, but she is ready also for universal service; she serves the universe. It is the idea of girding up the loins with strength.
{339}
Well, I go on now to Peter, to show how this matter of girding comes into individual history, because the Lord has that in mind in dealing with Peter, that he is to be a historical man. In the world there are men who fill history, fill the history books. In some cases we get their lives. Usually there is an attempt by the biographer to give a life-size history. Peter is intended to be a man of that kind that the Spirit of God can use to depict a life-history; and that life-history brings us back to the time of our birth and what immediately follows. The most interesting babe that we get in Scripture (I am not speaking of the Lord Jesus) is Solomon. He was said to be loved by Jehovah just when he was born. The young people here, I am sure, would like to have a reputation, a distinction like that, and to keep it up. There is no discrepancy in Solomon until he comes to the throne. Jehovah loved him. Well, you would say, I want to get the whole history of that man, a man that was loved so early. Well, the Lord, of course, gives us the history of that man; but when he was old he did not do so well as Peter, so I prefer to keep to Peter, I prefer to keep to a man that gets better and better, and does not drop out before he becomes old. And Peter serves in this matter of girding. The Lord says, "When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst where thou desiredst", @John 21: 18. This is history, you know. How we see young people whose hearts are not fixed. I wonder if there are any young people here whose hearts are not fixed. Where shall I go tonight? Every evening brings up its problem, and my mind is not fixed, I have nothing certain before me. You may, as a last resort, say, I will go to the meeting tonight. Your heart is not fixed but you have to gird yourself according to the decision you have come to. Where shall I go? What shall I put on tonight? You have to attire in relation to your decision. But heaven is looking on.
{340}
"When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst where thou desiredst". Turn around the corner, and you are gone. Who knows where you are going? "Walkedst where thou desiredst": a remarkable word at such a time, when Peter was just restored. He is like Job who had turned aside. He had been self-confident. The most potent causes of downfall are self-confidence and pride and he had both. "Lovest thou me more than these?" (verse 15), the Lord says to Peter; Peter, of course, would say, I love the Lord better than them all, but the Lord did not think so, and Peter had to come to think as the Lord did. And so it was that He challenged him and challenged him and challenged him, and He committed His lambs and sheep to him. He has come back to trustworthiness. One of the most important items in any brother or sister, if he is to be used in the service, is that he is to be trustworthy, that the Lord can commit something to him. How can I represent the Lord unless He has committed something to me? see how, before sending them out, He breathed into them. That was committal; it was not only formal. They were to represent Him. How can I represent Him without His Spirit? And so we had today, "The Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip". It was the Spirit of the Lord that did that. The Lord was in it; it was a question of authority, but the Spirit Himself was in it, too, and He caught away Philip. So that it is a question of trustworthiness. How can I represent the Lord in any little way without His Spirit? A criticising spirit is no representation of Christ at all. Martha had that. If we did not have John's account of Martha, we would never know she was a christian, and yet she was. She was a real one. How often we are hidden up by our naughty, complaining, criticising spirits! The Lord intended that those who represented Him should have His Spirit, and I want to have His
{341}
Spirit. There is a rich supply of It, the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, says the apostle. I must know where to get It, and get It, and get the measure I need. If we are to represent the Lord there must be that.
Now Peter is trustworthy. The Lord has brought him to it, and He says, "Feed my lambs"; "Shepherd my Sheep". 'They are apt to stray as you have done yourself'. As a rule, what we are used in by the Lord is what we have experienced at some time. He puts us through experiences which He intends to be useful in our services. If I have wandered a bit, then I know what a wandering person is, and I have sympathy.
And now the Lord says, 'When you were young'. It is a question now, Peter, of your whole history, and it is just as well to face the whole matter. The whole history has to come up; it enters into the present history, 'When you were young'. Well, that directs Peter back. How young? As soon as I began to walk and talk and run about; he girded himself; he did what he liked, and girded himself accordingly. If it be a football match, I must gird myself for that; or a cricket match, I must gird myself for that; or a theatre, I must gird myself for that, I walk where I like. Oh, beloved young people, the Lord would say something to all of us as to when we were young. One says, I have been young, but not any more; now I am old; and it is those who have come through that who can talk with some measure of authority. The Lord says to Peter, "When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst where thou desiredst; but when thou shalt be old, ..." The Lord is saying to Peter, There is to be no more turning aside. Oh, you say, did he not act very naughtily to Paul? Well, but there was no definite turning aside. The Lord does not challenge him about that; He does not warn him about it
{342}
even. He is a recovered man; it is a settled matter, and the Lord knows what he is going to be when he is old. He will glorify God. He will not say, I will go here and there, any more. "Thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and bring thee where thou dost not desire". He has thorough recognition of the will of God. And so the Spirit of God says, "But he said this signifying by what death he should glorify God". I do not want that death to be in the battlefield. No. Many, doubtless, have such deaths as that. The Lord is not alluding to a death like that; He is alluding to a death in which Peter had no sword in his hand, no gun on his shoulder. He had taken the sword, and the Lord says to him, Peter, put that into its sheath where it used to be, not in your hand. Let others take it. The Lord is not saying a word against that. Others have to take it, for the powers that be have swords, and we are to pray for them with those swords. But it is not for christians to take the sword; not young christians; no, they have no swords in their hands, according to this picture. The Lord says of Peter, "Thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee". If I be a soldier, I put on my accoutrements; if I be an officer, I will put them on as showily as possible. We love to do that, and the world offers us that. If it were not for the glory of the ranks, the recruiting of armies would be much more difficult than it is. There is the appeal to pride in it. Time was when soldiers had plenty of rank. They do not have so much now. There is a good deal of supervision among them. But here it says, "Another shall gird thee". What kind of a girding would it be? Prison garments -- a jailer would put them on, carrying him forth to the arena, perhaps, to be destroyed by the lions, or be beheaded in the prison. "Another shall gird thee". How appealing that is to the heart. So that Peter was taken, undoubtedly,
{343}
and murdered. We are told in Rome very likely another girded him. As usual the prison officers do that, "And bring thee where thou dost not desire". But what was that for? It was to glorify God. Naturally, Peter would never go that way. He failed to go that way in the high priest's palace; he denied his Master there. He would not go that way, but now he is going that way without a murmur. He is a martyr of Christ. Paul says, "Thy martyr", about Stephen. He thrilled heaven; Stephen thrilled heaven with a wonderful reflection of the Spirit of Jesus in his martyrdom; and so Peter -- can we not assume that Peter was equal to Stephen? Certainly. The Lord is speaking about it here. He is anticipating it. What a martyrdom that should be; girded by another; carried out to the arena or whatever it was to be murdered by a cruel emperor. But the Lord spoke of that not as a mere matter of history Peter may have, but of the glory of God in it. And that is the point, dear brethren. We are coming to the end of things, and how are we going to die, if death must take place? It may. It is just as well for us to face it. The Lord has taken a good few of our dear brethren, and am I immune from the influences of these things? They have died before our eyes, have been taken away to be with the Lord. Our time will come. If the Lord is going to carry on for a while, there are many of us who will have to go that way. We are enjoined to number our days. You say, How can you tell? Well, that is what Scripture says, that we may acquire a wise heart. But then, it is how we are going to finish; whether we are going to glorify God in the finish. "But when thou shalt be old". Old age, of course, has certain disadvantages even in the service of God. It weakens our powers, and in the weakening of powers we cannot give the same effectiveness in service, and it is apt to mar our joy in death. It is well for us to anticipate. Let us number our days so
{344}
that we may acquire a wise heart and be ready, so that we are not taken by surprise. It is the Spirit of Jesus, dear brethren. So that the apostle says, I desire to depart and be with Christ. I would like that. It was his desire to depart and be with Christ, which is far better. Great as his victories were, and his ministry among the saints, he says, It is far better.
Well now, just one word at the end about Jeremiah. He is a great servant. It is a question now of a prophet. Peter is not here viewed as in active service, he is viewed in martyrdom (that is what the Lord is dealing with) in his old age. He was dealing with Job to recover him from his captivity; he was a captive brother. Jeremiah is starting out in his great service in this chapter, and Jehovah says to him, "Thou, therefore, gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I shall command thee", @Jeremiah 1: 17. That is the point I wish to stop with. In service it is a question of the divine commandment, especially for the prophets. The fact is, christianity really implies that we are under orders, every one of us. The government of this land is doing its best to bring all the citizens under orders, big and little, men, women and children; and they are very wise, too, to get them under hand. The independence of this country is baneful. It is not for me, of course, to talk about politics, but I am illustrating that God would have His people under hand, under orders. What good are we if we are not under orders? And you may depend upon it, that what I am saying is right; the governments are wise in getting the whole nation under orders. They can put their hand on this and that one, and they know all about their history, when they were young, and what they are now, and what they are going to be. They have their whole history. One great general said he robbed the cradle and the grave. Some of the nations may have to rob the graves and the cradles. It is an awful time
{345}
for us, but God has to say in these matters, and God is getting His people under hand, and in getting them under hand, He is bringing them into the presence of the leaders of the world. He is getting their voices heard, getting their words heard as they assert their loyalty to Christ; their words about the sword and about non-combatant service are heard. These words are vocabulary words now; they are emblazoned in the minds of people. Is that for nothing? It is bringing in the kingdom of God, alongside the other kingdoms where the sword has a place. There are two kingdoms, and they are both to be under orders. I am speaking now of the Lord's people, to get under orders.
And so it is here that Jeremiah is taken up. If you look through the chapter you will be impressed by what I am saying, but in verse 17 Jehovah says to him, "Thou, therefore, gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I shall command thee". That is it; "All that I shall command thee". In our ministry meetings, and this meeting that I am seeking to serve in now, or whatever it be, it is a question of divine commandment. Christianity is divine commandment. Read John's writings especially in regard of this matter. It is a wonderful thing that the Lord says that even eternal life is a divine commandment. It is not only a promise, it is a commandment. It is a great thing that it is a promise, but it is a greater thing that it is a commandment, because it must go through. The whole power of God is behind it.
Well now, Jeremiah was in this position. God says to him, "Be not dismayed at them, lest I cause thee to be dismayed before them". The servant is simply confounded before the audience unless he carries out the commandment. There is nothing that will do but the commandment. It is as if it were God Himself. His commandment is Himself in that sense. So that Jehovah says, Now you are a young man;
{346}
you are starting out in your service and I want you to have this before you. Gird up your loins like a man, and do not be afraid of hurting people's feelings if it is a question of the commandment, and the truth of God. That must be stated at all costs. And He goes on to say to him, "And I, behold, I appoint thee this day as a strong city". Think of a man being that. If every soldier on the continent of Europe were a defended city, think of the change! Whoever heard of a man being a defended city? God says, I have made you that. One would have liked to have met a man like Jeremiah, but still it is not so far away from us, because God does give us power in service. You can never be overthrown. No matter who is standing for God in His testimony His commandments can never be overthrown. Fear not those that kill the body; they can do no more. So He says here, "And I, behold, I appoint thee this day as a strong city, and an iron pillar, and brazen walls, against the whole land; against the kings of Judah, against its princes, against its priests, and against the people of the land. And they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: for I am with thee, saith Jehovah, to deliver thee". That is the end of what I had to say; what the servant is in girding himself for this matter. Think of the immensity of the thing that is proposed in all these necessary subdivisions of men. You have to contend with them, and God says they will not overthrow you; I will be with you. So that one is to fit oneself, if he is going into the service in any little way, with these thoughts and gird himself accordingly. If I meet you on the street I will know how you are girded, what your attire is, what your mind is, what your outlook is, where you are going, and what you are going for. It is remarkable that Timothy is the only one said to be a man of God in the New Testament. As it were, God would furnish us in these last days
{347}
with that principle, the man of God. And that is what Jeremiah is here. No one can overthrow him; he will go through. And he did. His book is a testimony to it. He went through with the word of God in his mouth.
{348}
SONS OF THE RESURRECTION
@Luke 20: 34 - 36; @John 11: 41 - 44: @Isaiah 38: 19, 20; @Jonah 2: 6 - 9
I wish to speak about the sons of the resurrection, with a view to our souls acquiring increased power, for the resurrection of Christ represents the exceeding greatness of God's power. It is said that we are raised with Christ "through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead", @Colossians 2: 12. That faith is the "working of God" involves His power, never so energetic as when He raised Christ from the dead. So my proposal is to show somewhat of the import of a son of the resurrection.
The Lord in @Luke 20 alludes to the full thought of resurrection and shows that participation in it implies worthiness. It is not viewed as simply an act of sovereign power apart from the state of those who are acted upon, for the state of those who are acted upon in the resurrection from among the dead implies certain worthiness. The Lord visits the graves of those who have part in the first resurrection. All that are in their graves shall hear His voice, we are told. They are not yet raised. Something has taken place in them enabling them to hear His voice and they come forth; energy is there, divine power energetic is there and they come forth. Earlier in the same chapter, @John 5, the Lord said that the hour was coming and even was then, that the dead should hear His voice and they that had heard should live. They are not dead literally, but morally. Still they can hear His voice. Something has happened in them in the way of change from what they had been. That is what is going on, the voice of the Son of God; it has come down the ages, penetrating dead persons, causing them to hear the voice of the Son of God, and in hearing, to live.
{349}
The next allusion is to the persons who have actually died. Think of the millions who have died. But there are those who will have part in the first resurrection. All the dead will not have part in this. All will have part in the resurrection in some sense, but I have no thought whatever of speaking of the resurrection in which the wicked dead have part; it is an awful thought. They remain in their graves one thousand years after the dead in Christ are raised. They will stand before the great white throne after they are raised. They will come forth to stand before God. The dead, small and great, shall stand before the Lord Jesus as He appears on His throne in judgment. But the dead in Christ that hear and know His voice, come forth as worthy, those who have done good.
No one must assume that I am weakening the gospel, but salvation is accompanied by these things. Salvation is not worth the name if it is not accompanied by good works; "those that have practised good" have part in the resurrection of life. The Lord has all this in mind when He says, "They who are counted worthy to have part in that world, and the resurrection from among the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage". He says that they are equal to angels. We have to read Scripture always contextually or we do not get the sense of it. But on this particular point, as He is speaking to the Sadducees, wicked opposers of Christ, He just brings out what is enough to confute their folly, because they did not believe in angels or Spirits. The Lord says to them that those who are accounted worthy of that world are equal to angels. That is enough to prove His point, and then He adds they are sons of God, sons of the resurrection.
Now that brings in what I am speaking of, I wish to show how the matter works out today in us as believers, as experiencing the power of resurrection.
{350}
That is the power that wrought in Christ when God raised Him from among the dead. We become sons of the resurrection, and as sons of the resurrection we are able to face the difficulties of the moment, the terrible opposition that is developing, the evil that is current, and we are furnished with what is available so as to be victorious. All the way through Scripture the prime thought of God is that His people should be victorious. "Who is he that gets the victory over the world but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" Power in the soul goes with that. So it is a question of being sons, not simply children, but sons fully developed in the truth in this particular matter. We learn in part. It is folly to attempt to learn everything at once. We learn in part and the best place for learning is in school, and God has established the greatest school that ever was, and we christians are supposed to be in that school. If we are not in it we are missing it, nor shall we ever become sons of anything that is of God. We have the word 'sons' applied to persons who belong to a country, persons initiated in the plans, constitution and policies of the country. They are sons of the country. In the Scriptures we have sons of light, meaning persons developed in all their senses and capabilities in the light. For such people, when problems come up for consideration, would say, Before I talk on that subject I will get my armour of light and clothe myself in it so that in speaking to anybody about that subject I know what I am saying; I know how to name things. They are sons of light. As the Lord Jesus says, "While ye have the light believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light". If I have on the armour of light I will know how to name things. The person I am speaking to may be in darkness. It is a most important thing to know how to name things, so that we become sons of light. There are very few, but it is within the
{351}
range of all, so that in speaking to persons in business or school, and problems are always coming up, I know what to say, I know how to name things. So also we have sons of Zion, persons versed in the great thought of Zion, the sense of divine counsel that nothing can be moved in the system that God has established. It is thus in many other instances.
Now I am speaking about sons of resurrection, because my point is power. The Lord says that sons of the resurrection are not governed by the common custom of men that marry and are given in marriage. Marriage is a divine institution, but the Lord says they were doing that until the day that Noah entered into the ark; it was just human custom. But sons of the resurrection are not governed by that thought. The sons of the resurrection are equal to angels. But the Lord in speaking to the Sadducees, just brings forth things that are necessary. He does not tell them the mystery. Now they are sons of the resurrection, the Lord says, on that account, they are sons of God. Is that all a son of God is; he is just as great as an angel? No, but it is just enough to prove His point. We keep to the point whatever it be.
And having this in mind I just wish to bring out the well-known chapter in John's gospel speaking of the resurrection of Lazarus and bordering on what I am saying. And having arrived at this chapter I want to point out that the great servant Paul had among his exercises the thought that he should attain to the resurrection from among the dead. That does not mean that God should raise him from the dead, but he should attain to that now. Paul would be a son of the resurrection if he attained, as he wished, to the resurrection from among the dead. He is the only one that we hear of having this exercise. He went beyond that, and yet he had not already attained but he went beyond that, for he says, "I press toward the mark", not only to the resurrection, but to the
{352}
calling on high of God in Christ Jesus. That takes us to heaven. He does not say heaven but, "the calling on high", wonderful verses, "of God in Christ Jesus"; he was pressing towards it. Of course, the Lord is to come to take you to that point. He is speaking of his own exercises, of the power that works in us enabling us to arrive at it.
But I speak only of the resurrection now. He had a desire to attain to the resurrection from among the dead. What a mighty force he would be in this world, so that death lost its power. He says he did not deprecate dying; that was the power he had in his soul. Indeed he said, I die daily. That was his own act of power that he had in his soul and that would constitute him, as I said, a son of the resurrection, for it is the power that works in us, the same power that raised Christ from the dead. The believer pursues. His guide is the armour of light enabling him to see what the thing is and the power to go forward against it. Having done everything, "Having done all, to stand". That does not mean having done all I can, that is not what this passage means: you do all that is required. It is only a question of setting our minds to it, the power that works in us. "I have strength for all things in him that gives me power"; do all things. It is not what we are able to do, but what is to be done. God says, I furnish you with what is necessary.
To go to the chapter in @John 11, I want to point out what is in mind, that faith should be in the disciples, and He never speaks otherwise except with a view to some believing. It is most instructive to hear what Christ says to the Father, "And Jesus lifted up his eyes on high and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me; but I knew that thou always hearest me; but on account of the crowd who stand around I have said it, that they may believe that thou hast sent me". I expect He had spoken
{353}
to the Father about this great matter before. "I thank thee that thou hast heard me". The Lord had always this thought for His utterance that faith should be found somewhere in those who heard. So here, for those who heard, the Lord says these things. "Because of the people which stand by I said it, that they may believe that thou hast sent me". You will find throughout the chapter He had this in mind that there should be believers, and what He has in mind, if He is saying anything through me, is that there should be believers. I have been speaking about schools, the school of God; it is just as great as any other school and we must begin from the bottom and learn one thing after another so as to be educated spiritually. "They shall be all taught of God". You do not want to miss the school. In the divine school I learn, and so through this chapter, perhaps one of the best known in a way, but it is intended to make sons of the resurrection. The Lord says, for instance, I know that Lazarus is sick and I am glad for your sakes that I was not there. It is just so that ye might believe. What are these meetings for or these fixed convocations? They are to the end that the brethren should come together and that the Holy Spirit should work that there might be believers, sons of the kingdom, sons of light and sons of the resurrection. These are wide thoughts. Think of being a son of the resurrection. What can overcome you if you are a son of the resurrection? You are beyond the greatest power. The devil turns away. Lazarus is a son of the resurrection so that this chapter, as I said, is full of this and one of the sons of the resurrection, so to speak, is Martha. She had a conversation with the Lord after Lazarus had died. He waited until Lazarus was buried and Martha met Him and they spoke about the resurrection. She says to Him, "I know that he will rise again in the resurrection in the last day". The Lord says, "I am
{354}
the resurrection and the life", too. She is brought to a halt in her soul. This means that, not only has the Lord full power to raise the dead but He is the resurrection, and He explained to her as regards those who are living that he that lives and believeth in Me though he have died yet shall he live. If the Lord were to take us to heaven He would quicken us; though he were dead, says the Lord, the word is, "Every one who lives and believes on me shall never die". That is what He told Martha. It is that life which you have now which never dies. He had just fallen asleep. He is making a son of the resurrection out of Martha, a very unlikely case but the Lord accepted it. He pointed out this great fact to her that anyone who believes, if he be fallen asleep in Him, shall live. Then He says further of persons like us, "Whosoever ... believeth in me shall never die". Well, it seemed folly to say that, but it is not; it is true because Jesus is the resurrection and the life, therefore the death of the saints is just sleep, asleep through Jesus, a very beautiful thought! It is right for those of us who are older to think of the probability of actual dissolution. When He says that you will never die, He means to say that death is sleep to us, and we will live. The matter is simply if we do not die and we believe in Him, when He comes we will never die. So He says the sons of the resurrection shall never die. It applies in this way that I am speaking of now, but He says to Martha, "Believest thou this?". He is making a son of the resurrection out of her. She says, "Yea, Lord; I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God". Let us open our hearts to the truth to become sons of the resurrection. I know she was a poor failing woman and when He told them to roll away the stone from the mouth of the grave, she said, "Lord, by this time he stinketh". It is a question of faith, one who really believes as Martha did, "I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of
{355}
God". Then she goes to tell Mary. So the Lord says it that they might believe.
The resurrection of Lazarus made a great stir and they came to see the Lord Jesus and Lazarus also. He says, "Lazarus, come forth", and Lazarus is typical of the sons of the resurrection because he came forth bound hand and foot with grave clothes. Power was working in him. No power in the universe could hinder him from coming forth. Power was working in him and the Lord says, "Loose him and let him go". He does not put any guard over him; the Lord has confidence in him. As a son of the resurrection he will be used of God to call attention to Christ, and that is what happened.
I want to speak of the passages in the Old Testament to point out how Hezekiah and Jonah are, typically, sons of the resurrection. The history of Hezekiah is known to many of us; how he tasted death and came out of it and lived fifteen years more which was plenty to bring out the point. He could have been allowed to live longer if God had wanted to, but he does not. Fifteen is quite enough to prove the point. What could God not do? He caused the sun to go back and it was through the power of God. It is a very simple thing to God. As the Lord says, "Ye err, not knowing the scriptures nor the power of God", and so He causes the sun to go back. Well, that is enough to prove the point and so Hezekiah lives fifteen years more. Eternal life is a great extension of fifteen years. That is not connected with what I am saying but sons of the resurrection are not afraid of death. Think of the energy of God to raise him up. There is no power that can stop a believer on those lines. All the power in the earth could not stop Lazarus from coming forth. The power was working in him. The same thing is true now of believers. "I have strength for all things in him that gives me power". Hezekiah was sick, we are told, unto death
{356}
and he went through it, too. I cannot read it, but it is well worth reading. I only want to show that sons of the resurrection contribute to the service of God, they add to it. It is quite right to go on with what there is, but a son of the resurrection will have much, he will add to what there is. So that what we get here is, "The living, the living he shall praise thee, as I this day: the father to the children shall make known thy truth". It is for our children so that our children grow up in it. It is not simply that I come into what there is of ready-made service, but I add to it. That is what Hezekiah does. He says, "The Lord was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my songs to the stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of the Lord". Hezekiah contributed to what there was. He is a son of the resurrection. We will sing -- he has provided a song for them to sing -- my songs in the house of the Lord, the very highest notes in which God is to be praised on stringed instruments.
Now just a word about Jonah. The Lord Jesus cites Jonah as a sign and He says they will get no other. So that people who deny the book of Jonah will get no other sign. It refers to the death of Jesus, three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. He says, "I went down to the bottoms of the mountains. The earth with her bars was about me for ever: yet hast thou brought up my life from corruption, O Lord my God. When my soul fainted within me I remembered the Lord; and my prayer came in unto thee, into thine holy temple. They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy". How many there are who ridicule the book of Jonah. He is plain in regard of them now, saying of them that observe lying vanities that they forsake their own mercy, forsake the mercy of God in Christ. Then he goes on to say, "But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving; I will pay that that I have vowed. Salvation is of the Lord". The fish vomited
{357}
him out. This is a very searching word. A christian is not worth a name that has not vowed. The point is not that you have not vowed but have you paid your vows? some may not have identified themselves with the Lord and His people, but have put it off. The Lord is calling upon you now to pay your vows. Jonah says, I will do it. "I will pay that that I have vowed". There is no other way out but through God. Salvation is of Jehovah, not that He may not use these things as He doubtless does, but faith says, "Salvation is of Jehovah". Have I paid my vows? Has not God a controversy with me in what is happening? Have I paid my vows in what is happening? I will pay, Jonah says, and then he adds, "Salvation is of Jehovah". Is He not a God to be paid? Why should He be left out of all my payments? God keeps books. Jonah says, I am going to see to it that I will pay my vows, I am going to think of Him. Why should we leave Him out of all our reckonings, why not look into the ledger and see what is due? Much will happen but it is waiting the state of the saints. What God is looking for is state, an answering recompense so that it is time to wake up and see if God is not speaking to me; has He not a voice to me? I may perhaps see His hand delivering as soon as I pay my vows so that I will say, "Salvation is of Jehovah".
{358}
DIGNITY OF THE ANOINTING
@Genesis 35: 9 - 15; @Exodus 40: 9 - 16; @1 Corinthians 12: 12, 13
J.T. The hope is that we may see through what may come before us the dignity of local companies of God's people who recognise the Christ and the assembly. The last passage read contemplates the assembly as anointed, so that the thought is not to speak of individuals receiving the Spirit, anointed individually, but in a collective sense. The passage in Genesis helps us to see how the idea took form at the beginning. Abraham and Isaac were anointed as well as Jacob, for it is said, "Touch not mine anointed", alluding to them, "and do my prophets no harm". The prophetic ministry attaches to the anointing and, therefore, has a great place in our local companies, at least in the mind of God, and the hope is that it may be in our minds too, more than it has been, especially as to acts, not only prophetic ministry, but acts of discipline. Whatever is done in that sense is in the dignity of the anointing and supported by heaven, so that in having part in these services for prophetic ministry or for discipline in the assembly we have to bear in mind that we cannot speak lightly of what is done, nor can we separate in our minds the individual involved in the discipline from the anointed position. That is what the enemy is seeking to do, to separate in our minds persons who are disciplined or in any trouble from the anointed position. The thing becomes very personal at first, although the collective is in mind, because Jacob said where he anointed the pillar, "This is none other but the house of God", @Genesis 28: 17. Then Exodus connects the anointing very specifically with the tabernacle, and 1 Corinthians connects it very specifically with the assembly: "so also is the
{359}
Christ" (chapter 12: 12), the anointed vessel. Or if we include in our minds Christ as Head, the same thing is true.
R.W.S. What is the basic thought in the anointing?
J.T. It is, I think, God's way of committing Himself to a person or a thing like the tabernacle. The ointment was to be carefully compounded. It was a type of the Holy Spirit, so that the word simply means in the full antitypical sense that the Spirit is come upon us. He is seen, if it be an individual, in the external walk and ways and ministry, but if it is a collective thought it is the dignity in which we hold ourselves in relation to one another, as having jointly the Spirit according to what is stated in 1 Corinthians, that God has committed Himself to us in that formal way.
A.R. Is there more committal in chapter 35 than chapter 28? God was at the top of the ladder in chapter 28, but here it is spoken of as the place where He had talked with him.
J.T. Yes; He came down. There is nothing abnormal now between Jacob and Jehovah. There was distance before. Evidently Jacob had but little immediate contact with God earlier, but as at Padan for twenty years he lost ground in his soul so that God directed him to go back to Bethel where he anointed the pillar. That is what God had in mind, that he should come back to the greatness of the anointing. He does not fully appreciate it apparently at the outset, but still he had the idea. It is said in chapter 28: 18, "And Jacob rose early in the morning, and took the stone that he had made his pillow, and set it up for a pillar; and poured oil on the top of it. And he called the name of that place Beth-el", which means, 'house of God'. He had the idea of the anointing and a collective thought attached to it; and then when he returns after twenty years or more to Bethel -- God has directed him to do so; he tarried
{360}
at Shechem, but he finally came to Bethel -- it says "God appeared to Jacob again after he had come from Padan-Aram, and blessed him". He changed his name, it is said, and made promises. Then it says in verse 13, "And God went up from him in the place where he had talked with him. And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he had talked with him, a pillar of stone, and poured on it a drink-offering, and poured oil on it". The drink-offering would mean he was now pleasurable to God. There was no drink-offering in chapter 28 or subsequently until now, which would mean that Jacob, through his experience and discipline attached to his position in Padan-Aram and his going and coming, had gained in his soul. In fact he had wrestled with God in the way and gained in his soul, so that he is conscious now of being of pleasure to God. Then he anointed the pillar after he poured the drink-offering on it. And it is said, "And Jacob called the name of the place where God had talked with him, Beth-el". It is a greater place to him now than it was before. He is conscious that God is pleased with him and these things enter into the house.
C.A.M. Would you say the right act at the first would make him worthy of being called a prophet, the light of Beth-el coming into his soul? You numbered Jacob as well as Abraham and Isaac among the prophets.
J.T. I should. Of course, we know he prophesied in blessing his sons. We know that Isaac blessed him and even Esau, and Abraham had that place too, his father. They are all, I think, included in the word in @Psalm 105: 15: "Touch not mine anointed ones, and do my prophets no harm". Abraham is spoken of as a prophet, and he prayed to God, too, for Abimelech.
C.A.M. You were connecting that with the matter of discipline -- this prophetic matter?
{361}
J.T. That is what I was thinking. "Do my prophets no harm", included them all. We know they all did have that place. We know from other scriptures they conveyed the mind of God.
A.N.W. Will you make a little clearer what you have in mind in making the house of God local? Do you wish to stress the local position?
J.T. It is never local. No local company is ever called the house of God. It is a term that applies to the assembly universally. We never have a plural; there is only one house of God. There are many assemblies but it is the general thought in Genesis, although the locality was in mind, the place that had had another name before. It had acquired a new name, but it means the house. I suppose it runs on in a universal way. David took it up and said that he would not give sleep to his eyes nor slumber to his eyelids until he found a habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. That is, the allusion would be to the fact that Jacob had used the word 'house'. He had the idea of the house in his mind, so that it is a general thought. There were not two houses; there is only one in the Old Testament. There were many synagogues in the Old Testament. A synagogue had somewhat the idea of a local position, a meeting, but in Corinth we have the local assembly there viewed as taking on assembly character. In 1 Corinthians we have, "When ye come together in assembly" (chapter 11: 18), and it says, "The assembly of God which is in Corinth" (chapter 1: 2), and in chapter 12 it is the assembly in which the gifts are set, meaning the whole assembly. It is simply that in chapter 12: 12, "so also is the Christ", connects the idea of the anointing with Corinth. "The Christ" is a general thought, but he is dealing with the local company and giving them that character as anointed.
W.F.K. Was the assembly anointed at Pentecost?
{362}
J.T. That is the idea. It was a public matter. It is what they saw. They saw cloven tongues as of fire that sat upon each of them, and they began to speak with other tongues. The anointing was there.
R.W.S. Is it anticipating too much if you would make clear what you mean by dissociating those under discipline from the anointed position?
J.T. Well, I have observed that there is but little sense of the anointed position. We speak of persons under discipline, or who have been under discipline and are no longer, as if they are just ordinary people, speak loosely of them, it may be, when the matter is settled and they are reinstated. We still continue to speak of them and of the things that caused the discipline. On the other hand, when persons are still under discipline, the discipline is not recognised and, therefore, the action of the assembly, which is an act of dignity because of the anointing, is ignored. If I begin to speak of a brother under discipline as against the discipline then the dignity of the assembly is interfered with and discredited.
H.G.H. Does the thought of the anointing convey the thought of God's approval of the circumstances? Your speaking of the assembly as being anointed conveys the sense of God's approval and thus carries authority.
J.T. Quite so. The position is there before it is functioning. The position is there, and as soon as the functioning begins, it has to be regarded as dignified, a representative of God. So that in the position in @Exodus 40 each part functions as it is in its place. The whole idea, the whole tabernacle is in mind abstractly, and as each feature or element of the whole takes its place it is functioning. It is viewed as functioning, as if God would say, That is My idea. The functioning means there is life; power to act for God.
{363}
A.R. If I am breaking bread and I disregard the judgment of the assembly it is questionable if I understand it.
J.T. Just so. It is worse sometimes if I do understand it and disregard it. My will is at work when I am down to the level of speaking of persons, ignoring the great relation in which they stand in a collective sense.
Ques. In @Numbers 12 they did not move; the whole system apparently did not move until Miriam became cleansed. Would that be the way she stood in relation to the whole anointed sphere?
J.T. There was a delay until she was restored. Quite so.
R.W.S. Does David help in his words in his song about Saul? "For there the shield of the mighty was vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as not anointed with oil", @2 Samuel 1: 21.
J.T. That is a good allusion, and involves the kingship which David had come into himself. He is spoken of much as the Lord's anointed. It is remarkable that the anointing is mainly attached to royalty in connection with the temple; not with the temple itself, but with royalty, whereas in the wilderness the great stress is on the tabernacle and the anointing of it.
A.R. Are we not inclined to hold in our minds that the assembly is a long-distance speaking place, whereas chapter 35 suggests it is God speaking in the house, and this reference to Numbers suggests that God is here and the Spirit is here speaking? Moses went in to speak to God, but God spoke to him.
J.T. I think that is good. It is the place where they spoke. "And God went up from him in the place where he had talked with him". Jacob's conscience now is greatly affected because he pours the drink-offering on the pillar and then anoints it.
{364}
as if connecting the anointing with what is pleasing to God.
J.S. Do we see the true Jacob in the end of @John 3 -- the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of man?
J.T. The allusion there is to @Genesis 28; just so. It is on Christ. In Genesis it was on the ladder. The angels of God were ascending and descending on the ladder, but it is on Christ in John, showing it is a question of the Spirit of Christ. On earth, He was the Object of heaven, now He is in heaven and He is the Object of earth.
J.S. Is it a divine principle that whatever God has done is always by His Spirit?
J.T. "By his spirit he garnished the heavens". I do not know that it is said that they were created by the Spirit. The fine work in the creation is by the Spirit anyway.
Ques. Does the fact that Jacob gets his name changed enter into the anointing in relation to the house of God?
J.T. That is right. He had gained in his soul. The changing of his name is seen in chapter 32, but it is linked on finally with Bethel, showing that God is not honouring Shechem, or Jacob on his journey to Shechem nor on his journey to meet Esau. He is linking on the idea of Israel with Bethel. That is how it stands here. It is a cumulative thought, and the full position of Israel is not reached until he reaches Bethel. He had the name Israel in chapter 32 at Peniel, but that was from God's side. So that we have here a cumulative thought in the narrative in verse 9. "And God appeared to Jacob again after he had come from Padan-Aram, and blessed him. And God said to him, Thy name is Jacob: thy name shall not henceforth be called Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name. And he called his name Israel. And God said to him, I am the Almighty God: be fruitful
{365}
and multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee; and kings shall come out of thy loins. And the land that I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give the land. And God went up from him". You do not get this earlier, and yet it is in measure accomplished at Peniel, but the whole matter is now brought into Bethel as if it was a cumulative thought until he reached Bethel. Whatever happens earlier in our lives of importance, you will find there is finality in Bethel, that is, in the assembly. It is there that you get the drink-offering. It is what is for God's pleasure through discipline and the like.
J.T.Jr. The idea of the pillar of stone is carried forward. There is no change in that, is there? Chapter 28 brings that out, too. That abstractly is what may be before us early in our lives which we have to come to later.
J.T. That is a very important matter, because each of us, if we are able to read our histories in a retrospective way up to now, will have to admit we had things only in an abstract or objective way at the beginning, but God through discipline in our daily lives has brought us to a reality of His presence in the house, the assembly, and that is where we are sensible that we are pleasurable to God.
A.N.W. Is that not the problem? There are so many of us in the process and the process is so long. I was thinking of the baptism by one Spirit into one body. At Pentecost everybody was conscious of it, but is every Christian conscious of it today?
J.T. I think it is very largely a theory with many, but God knows we are honest in the theory. We are not trifling with it. We say we have the Spirit in an honest way and God puts us through discipline to bring us to it. Not only that each has it himself, but we have it in the assembly. We are all baptised by the power of the one Spirit into one body. That
{366}
is where the great defect is as apprehending the anointed vessel in which we have part. We accept it primarily, but take a long time to come to it, so that in coming to it we are pleasing to God. We have found out how to please God in our walk and ways.
C.A.M. While it is a theoretical idea, he would make a way, and he says, "If God will be with me", @Genesis 28: 20. The presence of God was valued by him.
J.T. That is a good point -- the abstract thought that he had at Bethel; apparently he grew a little bit even while he was there. At first he says, This is a dreadful place, and then early in the morning he has changed his mind, apparently. He says, "How dreadful is this place! This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven". Then it says, "And Jacob rose early in the morning, and took the stone that he had made his pillow, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil on the top of it. And he called the name of that place Beth-el", @Genesis 28: 17 - 19. Now it seems as if, through the remaining part of the night after he had the vision, he got help in his soul and became more settled. But then he made a bargain with God. He made a vow and said, "And this stone, which I have set up for a pillar, shall be God's house; and of all that thou wilt give me I will without fail give the tenth to thee" (verse 22). Well, we do not just know how far he carried out that vow. He had considerable cattle as he came back. He decided to give a good part of the property to his brother to appease him, but on the way it would seem as if he were gaining in his soul. So that if we are honest as we start as christians, God will be with us to the final thought. It may be somewhat theoretical at first, but it will become more and more real.
F.N.W. Does chapter 33; "El-Elohe-Israel" indicate they were to expect a measure of discipline? I may act for God in my position, but I must return to Bethel.
{367}
J.T. In chapter 35, as has often been remarked, it is El-Beth-el. He built an altar and called it El-Beth-el, because, it says, "there God had appeared to him when he fled from the face of his brother" (verse 7). This happened at Beth-el. Before that the one at Shechem was just "the God of Israel". He connected God with himself, whereas now he is connecting God with the house of God, which is a great move forward.
W.W.M. Do you think the great blessing is in connection with discipline? I was thinking of @Matthew 18. The Lord anticipates what will be taken up later, but the idea of discipline is not to get rid of people but to bless them and bring them into the blessing.
J.T. That applies to Jacob in all the twenty years. Why did he stay so long in getting to Beth-el? He remained until he had a large family, a large number of cattle of all kinds, and even when he came back to Canaan he was directed to come back. God said, "Where thou anointedst the pillar". He was so long in doing it, so loth to leave Padan, and then when he came to Shechem he remained there. Why was he so slow? Is it not written down in this way so that we might examine our own histories and see why it is we are so slow in getting into the truth of the assembly, that when anything comes up we are not able to deal with things? In the assembly we are never pushed to the wall. We are always able to settle matters. God is with us in the assembly and, therefore, the question should be, Why am I so slow in getting into this great matter of being sensible of God's pleasure in a collective way, and then the anointing in a collective way, so that whatever comes up we are able to face it and settle it, the Lord being with us, and when it is settled in that way, it is settled? Let nobody attempt to ignore it. The thing is settled because it is ratified in heaven. Therefore we can move on with good consciences and be happy with one another, and not
{368}
bringing up things that have been settled as if they were not settled. There is plenty to occupy us in a good sense and to move on, because it is said here that they journeyed from Bethel. That is, we move on spiritually after things are settled and the position is clear.
A.R. You come onto a Benjamin.
J.T. It is a chapter of burial here, but it is a chapter of finalities. That is, this thing is settled. The position at Bethel is now a ratified thing, and then it says they journeyed from Bethel. Well, you say, are you leaving Bethel? You are not leaving Bethel; you are going into the heavenly side. The house of God is down here, not in heaven. He went on until he came to Isaac. Isaac is the great objective, because he is the centre or vessel of the promise while he is alive; that is, Christ risen from the dead and now in glory. That is the great objective for faith. So that when we settle a matter in assembly it is settled. We do not need to revert to it any more except as an example of God's help. We journey and go on to the highest point God has for us.
C.A.M. Your allusion to Isaac -- is that the end of chapter 35?
J.T. Yes; that was the end of the journey.
C.A.M. It seems to be all in sonship. Even Esau is referred to there in that way: "His sons Esau and Jacob".
J.T. Isaac is the depository of the promises, and he is the objective for faith; that is, Christ risen and now glorified. That is where we are journeying to.
A.A.T. The care meeting is not the place where matters can be settled?
J.T. Oh, no. You must have the brothers and sisters together in assembly for the anointed vessel where the Lord is, where, you might say, God is. The thing is done by divine sanction. Although God
{369}
is in heaven, there is a sense of the Lord being with us.
A.N.W. Is there a certain conclusion reached in the care meeting?
J.T. No; it is all tentative, on the line of investigation, but ratification and divine sanction is in the assembly as we are together in holy dignity, and to interfere with its conclusion is where the evil lies that we are dealing with.
A.A.T. Would the interference be on the part of the one under discipline or those who form part of the assembly?
J.T. More generally the latter. It is principles we are dealing with. Of course, we do not overlook the state of the persons, but the anointing relates to the principles governing the assembly, and we are to abide by them and act according to them.
J.T.Jr. It is the assembly of the living God, and is the pillar and base of the truth. God appeared to Jacob here. He is living, and the truth stands in relation to the assembly as coming out and governing us.
J.T. Just so; Benjamin is said to have been born here. Rachel called him Benoni and his father called him Benjamin, which means the son of his right hand.
J.S. Would that represent a moral journey for us to take?
J.T. An assembly action or an assembly meeting is not the end. It is the end for the time being. We have reached the end provisionally but we move on after that. As it was in the wilderness, they decamped and moved on from place to place. Well, each assembly gathering is an encampment but then we separate and go out with a heavenly touch, in greater power and lustre than before we came together, but still the principle is movement. The whole principle down here until Christ's coming for
{370}
us is movement. If we encamp and have an assembly meeting, it is a provisional thing. We may reach the heavenly side of things, but it is only provisional. There is movement. We decamp and go on. So here they journeyed from Bethel. Isaac is the end typically here, because it is a question of Christ, I think. Christ is the Centre of the promises and heavenly relations.
J.T.Jr. Laban is left a long way behind. I suppose if he could have voiced what he knew about Jacob he could say plenty to criticise him.
J.T. You may be sure he could.
C.A.M. @Numbers 33 has a lot of encampments. They went from one place and encamped somewhere else. The Holy Spirit puts down a very large number of places.
J.T. Very large. You are impressed with that, as if God made a note of every encampment; what He has in the encampment as well as what we have, but we are journeying on to the final place. So that rest in the final sense never attached to the ark until it was set up in Solomon's building. I think that is important to get into our souls, and what is consummated in any encampment has the character of the assembly action which heaven ratifies. Then there is the moving on in positive things, because they moved on positively, carrying the things of the tabernacle. The Levites carried them. So that the idea of the assembly, even while we are moving, is there, only waiting for another encampment, and we carry with us all the gain of the previous encampment. So that it is a series of encampments, and the number of them that you get in @Numbers 33 is remarkable.
Rem. So that after the settlement of the matter of Ananias and Sapphira it is said that believers were more than ever added to the Lord.
J.T. That is just the point. They moved on. The apostles became greater and greater. Whether
{371}
it be the service of God on Lord's day morning or in the matter of discipline, it is the assembly in her character.
J.S. They moved on here after Rachel is buried.
J.T. Yes. If we go to the beginning of the chapter, God said, "Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there, and make there an altar unto the God that appeared unto thee" (verse 1). That is one thought. It is as if it were finality, because the thought in mind would lead us to that. It might be a final thought, but if we decamp there is another journey. So he went to Bethel and in verse 16 they journeyed; then in verse 18 we have the birth of Benjamin and in verse 21, "Israel journeyed and spread his tent on the other side of Migdal-Eder". And then they go on. Jacob came to Isaac, we are told. That is final in verse 27, "And Jacob came to Isaac his father to Mamre". We come to a final position now.
A.R. There can be no difference of opinions in Hebron.
J.T. The point is that you come now to an out-of-the-world condition where Christ is risen and glorified. Of course, it is just a dim picture, because Isaac dies, but according to what is said to Jacob later, "The God of thy father, Isaac"; in Him every promise is yea and amen. We have come to finality, which is a very great thought to get into our souls.
F.N.W. The assembly meeting is not exactly the place for the bringing forward of the pros and cons of the case, is it? Should not a certain judgment be arrived at in the care meeting?
J.T. That is the idea. The assembly is the place for action, for execution. It is an executive idea, and that is final. It is done representatively, and the promise from the Lord is, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on the earth shall be bound in heaven", @Matthew 18: 18.
A.N.W. Turning "the battle to the gate" would relate to the care meeting.
{372}
J.T. That is it. The place of judgment is at the gate. Let us take it up in the assembly. That is where the victory is, "to them that turn the battle to the gate".
R.W.S. Does the Lord normally give the clue there?
J.T. I think He does. He is with us and heaven ratifies what is done, so that bringing it up again and reciting what we had to do with the person or persons earlier, before the settlement, is only reviving the matter. Are we going to keep on at it for ever? Is there no point of settlement where we are in union with heaven, so that we can journey on in the things of God?
A.A.T. Going back fifteen or twenty years, is it not so that matters were taken up by the elders and stopped there?
J.T. In some cases. There are some assemblies that do that, when one or two brothers settle matters. That is not the idea at all. We must have deliberation and investigation, and then authoritative assertion of the thing to be dealt with, and dealt with according to God in assembly, and it is finished.
A.A.T. You cannot call it an assembly action at all if just a few brothers take it up.
J.T. Well, it is not. The facts ought to be stated and the thing weighed over by the brethren, and after investigation you arrive at the truth of what it is and the brethren agree. The principle of the anointed vessel is that we are in unity. That is what 2 Corinthians teaches.
A.A.T. Supposing a case happened twenty years ago and we know it was badly handled, should it be taken up now?
J.T. Well, the facts are all changed. What about the person? Every minute brings about a change. We have to deal with what is there, not what was, because the person may be changed and God may
{373}
have adjusted the thing Himself in His own sovereign way.
A.R.T. I think you have heard of cases handled twenty years ago, which, if they were handled today would be handled differently.
J.T. You cannot bring in twenty years ago. Think of the weakness of our memories. What exists today? As the apostle says, "being such", not 'having been such', but "being such", in @1 Corinthians 5: 5: "To deliver him, I say, being such, to Satan". "For *I*, as absent in body but present in spirit, have already judged as present, to deliver, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ (ye and my spirit being gathered together, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ), him that has so wrought this: to deliver him, I say, being such, to Satan for destruction of the flesh". The word 'being' may be left out making it all the more present. It is the state of the man as he is, not as he was. It is a question of the person and the principles that govern the state of that person. What is his present state? That is how the matter is reached. Who can tell what happened twenty years ago? How many of us can remember? It is the present time that you are conscious of and sure that what you are saying is the case. What is his state now? Is he repentant? Well, if he is not then there is nothing to say. If he is, it is a question of his present state.
J.S. You have always recovery in mind.
J.T. It is a question of the present state, "Being such". You are dealing with a person as to what he is now.
J.S. In this chapter you come to a fixed position in Benjamin: "Son of the right hand". The authority is there.
J.T. The authority is there. God is there, really, in a previous paragraph. God is there Himself in Bethel. The matter is settled. He is God. By and by heaven is brought into it, but we are now dealing
{374}
with the person that may be involved. What is his present state?
Ques. In @John 4: 27 it says, "And upon this came his disciples, and wondered that he spoke with a woman; yet no one said, What seekest thou? Or, Why speakest thou with her?". Does it seem that the case was settled in the anointing? There was no need to find out any more.
J.T. You might ask many questions. What about those other five husbands? What about the one she has now? Well, the Spirit of God does not tell us, but He does tell us that the Lord told her He was the Christ, and that He could do everything, and all these matters of her previous husbands and her present husband would be settled. She herself is settled, because she left her water-pot and went her way into the city and went to the men. She says, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?". He is the One that will settle the matter if you give Him room.
J.S. Had He not got something, too?
J.T. That woman's case would be a settled matter, you may be sure, if she came into fellowship. Christ would see to that. The anointing settles things.
C.A.M. That is a very helpful thing to say. You could have gone into all sorts of detailed history about it, but it would only becloud the mind, because after all Christ is Son over God's house, whatever things we may think about in the past.
J.T. I am sure things will become solved in our minds as we accept the anointing. The Lord said He was the Christ to her, and she asked the men to come and see if it was not so.
J.T.Jr. I suppose Nehemiah had to contend with very difficult circumstances, and it speaks of the nobles of Judaea who wrote to Tobijah. How they would hinder the work, and Nehemiah had to act very severely in the thing, bringing the judgment in
{375}
himself. He exercised such severe measures against those people. Do you not think the nobles sometimes hinder the matter? You cannot get a judgment because there are undercurrents.
J.T. I am sure that is true. Nehemiah was a very unselfish man and a very great man, and a man who took counsel with himself and knew what to do, and went about to do it. That is the thing, to do things, as also in the book of Esther. If we add the idea of the anointing to these books, we can see how they may be brought into our own circumstances, and the anointing is the solution of every difficulty. We will solve it if we recognise the anointing and not pull down what has been done, but stand by it. Of course, we have to recognise facts if they have been overlooked, but we are speaking of their not being overlooked but investigated and everything declared as it is. As Job says, "The thing as it is", and Paul says, "being such". That is, all the matter that may be said about that thing is out, and he is reaching that with the Corinthians. It is for them to know that, whether the facts are true; "being such" involves that. So that we move forward on those lines. It is a settled matter and should be left a settled matter. Interference with it is simply the enemy's work.
J.S. The moral question is settled in @John 4.
J.T. She was settled herself, anyway, and as regards the details that the Lord Himself had mentioned, the Christ would settle all that, if He is recognised. The men would recognise Him. "It is no longer on account of thy saying that we believe, for we have heard him ourselves, and we know that this is indeed the Saviour of the world". You have assembly material when the Holy Spirit comes into Samaria.
A.R. Generally speaking, those who are received do not cause difficulty normally, but those that are withdrawn from. Sometimes the work of God is held up in their souls because they get sympathy.
{376}
J.T. Exodus is a great book in this way, because we are furnishing the material. The material really in the antitype is the saints themselves, whatever it be. They are providing this material, and presently the material is there, plenty of it, and the workmen are there, and everything is done, and Moses passes on it all. It is good material, and now it is to be set up as a united thing and the anointing is brought in as a statement of the inauguration or setting up of the tabernacle. So that it says in the verses read, "And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is in it, and shalt hallow it, and all its utensils; and it shall be holy". Holiness underlies the anointing. "And thou shalt anoint the altar of burnt-offering, and all its utensils; and thou shalt hallow the altar, and the altar shall be most holy. And thou shalt anoint the laver and its stand, and hallow it. And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons near, at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and bathe them with water. And thou shalt clothe Aaron with the holy garments, and anoint him, and hallow him, that he may serve me as priest. And thou shalt bring his sons near, and clothe them with vests. And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may serve me as priests. And their anointing shall be to them an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations. And Moses did so: as Jehovah had commanded him, so did he". Well now, this is just a concise statement of the anointing in the chapter, and everything is seen functioning, and then it is said, "And the cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle", @Exodus 40: 34. So that we have a complete collective idea anointed; a representative of God in the wilderness which corresponds with what we have in @1 Corinthians 12: 12: "So also is the Christ".
J.S. What would you say of the use of water?
{377}
J.T. That is a current need always, being in the wilderness. We need that, as the Lord says to Peter, "Unless I wash thee, thou hast not part with me", @John 13: 8. It is a question of the priests, in order that they may serve as priests.
T.E.H. When Paul and Silas were in the prison at Philippi, did the truth of the anointing and the suffering that went with it help to set up an assembly at Philippi with all the features of joy and restfulness before God?
J.T. That is what the facts of the epistle show, the sufferings must have entered into the very constitution of the assembly, but I think this anointed position is one of the greatest things that could be before us, however feeble we are, that we have the thought in our hearts, and when a thing is settled, let it be settled, and these settlements take place in localities. The Lord indicates that things are never settled now on the principle of a general council, but in localities, and if I come into a locality I recognise what has been done before I came, and I do not interfere with it unless I have some new facts. Otherwise I am doing harm by bringing up old facts that are already known. We are to go on in positive things. We have plenty of positive things to go on with.
A.A.T. Was not @Acts 15 a general conference?
J.T. That was the last one. God honoured Jerusalem as the great centre. There were none after that. There were plenty of councils after that, but that was the last one that had God's approval. Paul brings out local companies: "Thus I ordain in all the assemblies", @1 Corinthians 7: 17. All matters are settled in local assemblies and they are ratified in heaven, and, therefore, should be recognised by all and not interfered with. The Lord is able to make the thing stand, if it is right and it is ratified in heaven.
{378}
R.W.S. Does the principle of this country make the accomplishing of this more difficult? I wondered if the ministry we are having on this from year to year would be that the independency and form of government and all that might lead to the despising of what is small and the ignoring of the authority of the assembly possibly more so than in other parts of the world.
J.T. Of course, this country was started in that way. It was started on a negative principle of revolution, resistance to an existing government at the time. Of course, God has changed all that now. God is with this country, but the constitution of the people is radical. That is the sort of thing and we have to be on our guard against it because whatever marks the natural mind is leaven.
R.W.S. As knowing that, the Spirit of God would help us to honour the assembly as over against the military and the nation.
J.T. God would bring up graciously His idea in the anointed position. It has been here for many years, probably nearly one hundred years, and it is here, and we should cherish the thought that we have part in it, and not interfere with it by any meddling.
C.A.M. Our trouble is our slowness to learn. "In order that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house", @1 Timothy 3: 15. We are very slow to know how to behave properly.
J.T. Quite so.
A.N.W. We should certainly have seen the gain of the recognition of it practically.
J.T. We have seen it. The Lord has been with the brethren, and will be with us, but He will be with us on those lines. The last is the great central thought of the wilderness, and that is our position.
A.A.T. I notice how we have been dwelling on the thought of discipline, but in Exodus is it more "Serve me".
{379}
J.T. That is the main thing. That is what it says here: "That they may serve me as priests". That is the primary thought of the priesthood in chapter 28 of this book.
F.N.W. Is the service of God in this chapter contingent upon the setting of things in order in verse 4? Would that link with Paul's instructions to Titus, setting things in order and putting elders in every city?
J.T. "And thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the things that are to be set in order upon it". Well, that is good.
{380}
TIME
@Acts 1: 6 - 8; @Revelation 1: 9 - 13; @John 20: 19 - 23
I have in mind to speak about time. In the first scripture the Lord dissipates in the minds of His disciples all thought of fulfilment of prophetic events indicated in Old Testament scriptures save in so far as these prophecies entered into the period in which we are, saying to them that it was not for them to know the times and seasons which the Father had kept in His own power. As regards time, they were, therefore, left without any definiteness as to it. In truth, it would be in the hands of the rulers of the world under God. They, as for instance the Romans, would name the days and arrange all that pertained to government, days and weeks and months and years. They would arrange them according to their own outlook, and they are doing that, and have been doing it. The disciples were left without any definiteness as to times or seasons. Instead, however, they had a great substitute; that is, the Holy Spirit; and they could well afford to put themselves and all questions of time and history in His hands. They were to traverse countries over which the rulers of this world had dominion, not to make maps of them for military purposes, or for farming purposes; still they were to go to the countries as others would go according to their names, as the Lord specifies: "Ye shall be my witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth" (@Acts 1: 8), a very wide field. There was no thought of their marking off the earth for any purposes. They were to take it as it was. It belonged to the Lord Jesus by right of purchase and by right of creation. But all that was left; no information was given in answer to their enquiry as to the earth or as to the
{381}
times or seasons. They were shut up to the Holy Spirit who was about to come, and to themselves. What corresponded with this earlier was that after the great display of glory on the mount, the Spirit tells us that "they saw ... Jesus alone with themselves". That is how the matter stood. So that whilst momentous things were happening, very like things prophesied of old, the Lord gave them no clue as to when and where. They were to be preoccupied with positive things, namely the things that the Holy Spirit would bring down from heaven. The Lord Jesus had brought them down, too. The Holy Spirit would give understanding of them and they would become His witnesses. They could not be really without the Holy Spirit. They could tell many things to reporters at a press conference, Peter or any of them, about the doings of Jesus. There never had been such doings on the earth before, but we do not ever hear of anything like a press conference attended by or afforded to any apostle of Christ. They never at all gratified human enquiry or curiosity. They were shut up to the Spirit and their business was to be Christ's witnesses in Jerusalem and in all Judaea and in Samaria, and to the end of the earth. How many questions they could have asked; for hours and days they could have kept on asking about things, and He could give them an answer too, but He did not. He just gave them those few facts and instructions and went up to heaven. What are they going to do? Just a handful of Galileans in the midst of Jerusalem; their Master went up to heaven after saying that to them. So that they do not need any maps, no means of physical research, nor is there any question about money, nor about preparatory education for them to be representatives of their Master. Nor is there any thought of how long they are to be here. The Lord went up and they saw Him and they kept looking after Him, and two men in white stood by them and said,
{382}
Enough of that! "Why do ye stand looking into heaven?" What were they seeking? The cloud received Jesus out of their sight. What else could they see? The cloud did not yield much. It concealed Jesus from them.
Well, you can see, dear brethren, what the position is. Some man in Jerusalem might see the apostles (I suppose they were all there on the mount of Olives looking up into heaven). Suppose he were a merchant, the Jews are the best, you know, he would enquire as to what they needed, what he could buy or sell, and a number of things could be proposed to them. Seemingly they were just alone, eleven of them; the Lord had just gone up. Well, Peter, we may say, or, Bartholomew or James or John, how long are you going to stand looking at one another? Not very long. Jacob said to his sons, How long will you look at one another? What will they get from looking at one another? Well, they went back to Jerusalem and went to the upper room. We are told who were there. The eleven were there and the mother of Jesus was there, and His brethren were there. They soon found the way; that was the inauguration of the way, as it is called in this book. People spoke of the way, but they did not flounder about; they went to the upper room; they did not notify any of the religious authorities that they were there awaiting orders from the high priest or from some other officer. They took counsel among themselves. They found a leader. Peter stood up, and the first thing was this matter of Judas. This matter must be settled, this matter of another apostle. It had to be settled. You see, I am saying these homely things to show you the way. The Lord was gone. They could not ask Him any more, but they had the holy page of Scripture and they had been taught how to pray. They had no prayer book, I am certain. They had been taught how to pray. If there is anyone
{383}
here calling himself or herself a christian and he does not know how to pray, he had better learn. They had learned and they employed prayer and they employed the Scriptures, they employed the lot, and they found the apostle that was needed. They set up the position that God intended to be set up, that would be victorious as witnessing to Jesus, whether it were for a year or a century or twenty centuries. They had found the way. There is no question of years or maps or boundaries. They had already been there.
Well, that was how matters stood. God had left them in that way, and the matter of an apostle to take the place of Judas was settled. It never came up again. Never did any of these decisions come up again. They are all settled, and they could go on to something else. So they are found together. They are all together in one place, and they heard a sound from heaven: 'Hark'. That is the idea: 'Hark to the sound'. Jesus went up and the sound comes back. Can I not hear them? Can I not see them; their gestures; visualise them, 'Hark to the sound', and it filled the house where they were sitting, nowhere else. They are the objects of heaven. There is no such sound in the temple or in the sanhedrim. It is nowhere else. It is with these people. Well, I want to belong to these people, you say. If I were in Jerusalem I would make no delay; I would take the hand of Peter and the hand of John like the man in the temple who was healed. These are the people.
Well now, you say, What about them? Well, the Lord dissipated in their minds all thought of the times. There is plenty to do; never mind the times and the seasons. There are times and there are seasons, but you have plenty to do without going into that. Do not buy any books about times or about seasons. You have more than your hands can hold, so that, dear brethren, the point I am making
{384}
is that there is plenty to occupy our hearts in the most positive way, as we have hearts to be occupied; or are they occupied with the war and the possibilities of it and the potentialities of it and business, and a thousand things, or are they occupied by the Spirit of God? Think of that sound filling the house. It was a mighty breathing, from the very innermost of God. Speaking reverently, and it filled the house where they were, nowhere else. They were all filled with the Holy Spirit; there was no room for anything else. That is the principle; filled with the Holy Spirit, and they began to speak. Never had there been such speaking in Jerusalem before as that speaking. What were they speaking about? The great things of God. You cannot bound the great things of God with time. They are brought into an unbounded scene in the Spirit. As a matter of fact, there is no time limit at all to the feast of Pentecost. All the other feasts are bound by time, but not that. That is what they had just come into, and it is a feast. They have joy; they have the means of joy; joy in the Holy Spirit, so that time can be left alone. Well, you say, what about Daniel? But the Lord did not say a word about Daniel. He could have given them a long discourse about the book of Daniel and about the seventy weeks. No, not a word. It is not for us to know; not simply not for us to hear about, but it is not for us to know. We are put under restrictions. Very few of us accept restrictions; take up any book at all, a novel or a newspaper and drink into the dregs, no restrictions, but the Lord is putting them under restrictions in regard of times and seasons. It is not for us to know, He says. Well, you say. What did the apostle Paul mean in the book of Thessalonians when he says, I do not need to write to you about times and seasons, which you know perfectly well? But what did they know? That "when they may say, Peace and safety, then sudden
{385}
destruction comes upon them ... and they shall in no wise escape". How did they know? The apostle says, You know yourselves perfectly well. But he did not tell them very much; they knew enough. No doubt he told them when he was with them. He did; he told them about the man of sin. He says, "When they may say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, ... and they shall in no wise escape", @1 Thessalonians 5: 3. There is not much to think now if that is the outlook, and it is. Let no one think of a Utopia after this terrible struggle. They will make a peace, and I hope they will too, just long enough for the testimony of God to finish, for that is all it will be. They will make a peace and think they are secure, but sudden destruction, a most solemn thing, shall come upon them and they shall in no wise escape. The League of Nations, whatever covenants or understandings they make, will be broken up in an instant and they shall not escape. We are not told who the 'they' are, I do not want to be one of them. Anyone who is going along with this world may be one of them. Well, that is all about 1 Thessalonians. The Lord has, therefore, shut us up, beloved brethren. Shut us up? you say, Yes, shut us up. He has restricted us in regard of these things I have been speaking of, but He is shutting us up in infinitude. There is no restriction in that connection at all; there is scope far beyond any measurement man can devise. There is a divine scope in the divine realm, and we are to know it. As the apostle Paul says, the breadth and length and depth and height, but what else? The love of Christ which passes knowledge and the fulness of God, which is illimitable, so that there is no restriction on those lines, and the way is into that, I hope I am speaking so that people will understand. There is a certain moral in what I am saying. There is restriction on this side, but infinitude on the other. The apostle
{386}
says, "They shall in no wise escape". Who are they? Well, do not you belong to them, let me urge you. There are millions of them. "They shall in no wise escape". Sudden destruction. That is how the Lord leaves them, and it was in perfect wisdom, perfect calculation. He just went up; He just said a few words to them and went up.
Well now, I am afraid I have said too much on this scripture, but I want to go on to Revelation to show you how time is named there. It is called the Lord's day; the bit of time of John's consciousness as he spoke. It was not the year of the Lord nor the day of the Lord, either; it was the Lord's day. That was the bit of time he was living in in Patmos when he heard that great voice. He was restricted as to time. Well, the Lord would say, John, you know there are seven days in the week and thirty days in the calendar month, and so many days in the year. Now, I have just taken this one day out of this week; that is My day. That limits us, you say; that is time. If you are going to reckon time, think of this: the Lord's day. Well, you say, there is not much time for taking walks and the like, or playing games; we are very limited as to time. Well, the Lord says, I have taken that day out; that is My day, I made time. He could say to John; I made time and I was the first to use it. Now I am just satisfied to take one day out of the seven; fifty-two days out of the year. Are you satisfied, John? Can you get along with that time? John says, I was in the Spirit that day. I had a wonderfully good time. Not any one in Rome or in Jerusalem or in Athens had such a time as I had, and as I am having. I was in the Spirit, he said, I was using the day. Now there is a good deal of overtime, I have been speaking of this lately, and you say the government requires that I should work overtime. Are you sure that is the motive? Are you sure you have to? You get twice as much,
{387}
you might say. Well, that is the Lord's day, and the Lord is telling you that is a very precious day. It is My day, and John, the one that I love so well, was in the Spirit on that day. He was not working overtime. You say, He was in prison. He was in the Spirit and he was not in prison when he was in the Spirit. He had access to infinitude on that day. But it is the day of authority. If you want overtime, twice as much as you get on ordinary days, you have to consult the Lord. You are trespassing on My day, He would say. It is not a bit of a field or a farm, it is time I am dealing with, and you are to redeem the time. You are not doing it at all, if you are making money out of that precious day. The Lord says, It is the Lord's day; it is the only time you get this expression in the Scripture. You get the day of the Lord; that is another matter. This is a sort of dominical day; it is a day in which the Lord says, I want all things My way on this day, I want you to do your work on Monday or Tuesday, but I demand a right to you, if you are professing Me, on this day. He told Paul to speak about the Lord's supper, and those two things go together. Those two things fit, and you are casting both to the winds. You want to make money. Well, that will not do for the Lord. John says, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and I heard behind me a great voice as of a trumpet". I do not know that I have ever stopped to think of what that voice would be, what volume there would be until now, today. The word is, "a great voice as of a trumpet". It is the voice of Jesus. He had cried when He was here, but think of the volume of that voice! Think of the power of sound that came at Pentecost into that room at Jerusalem and filled it. Now it is in Patmos and it is behind John, and it is "a great voice as of a trumpet". The Lord is saying, There is something wrong. It is not a voice of love. It is not a question here of
{388}
the activity of love, or dove's eyes and the like, the singing of birds. It is a great voice as of a trumpet. It is a great military idea. He does not tell us yet, he tells us later what happened as to him. I am speaking now of the great voice. Something is wrong and the Lord wants John to write about that thing. This is on the Lord's day, remember. Were you at the meeting last Lord's day? Did you break bread last Lord's day? Did you miss the voice on that day? You cannot afford to miss any voice spoken by the Lord, especially on His day, because He is speaking with authority. It is the Lord's day, I will say a word presently about the first day of the week. I am speaking now about time, how He takes one day for His purposes; He visits Patmos on that day, and He finds His servant in the Spirit on it, and He uttered a great voice as of a trumpet. Well, that is remarkable. What effect did it have on John? The effect of it was -- the voice was the Person; and that is the truth, if the Lord speaks so loud to me, it is a question of the Lord, and so John turns around to *see* the voice. Did you ever see a voice? But it is a Person, and all that that Person is enters into that voice on that day, and He is saying there is something wrong, and we do not want to be doing wrong on the Lord's day. We want to be right as we have to do with Him. As Paul says, Are we stronger than He; do we provoke Him to jealousy?
John turns to see the voice, and he tells us what he did see. "And I turned back to see the voice which spoke with me; and having turned, I saw seven golden lamps, and in the midst of the seven lamps one like the Son of man, clothed with a garment reaching to the feet, and girt about at the breasts with a golden girdle: his head and hair white like white wool, as snow; and his eyes as a flame of fire", @Revelation 1: 12 - 14. That is what he saw. Well, dear brethren, this is a very solemn matter; this voice and then what is
{389}
accompanying the Person; the habiliments that He is wearing. They are judicial, and I would gather from that that the Lord's day is a judicial day. The first day of the week is not a judicial day; it is a day of love. It is a day on which the Lord Jesus came in, not as the Son of man. The scripture in @John 20 tells us about that incident. That is not judicial; that is love. It is His hands and His side; that is love. I will come back to that in a moment. I want to speak of this judicial day and how, first of all, it began in the Lord's being seen in the midst of the golden candlesticks. There is no throne yet. The throne is in chapter 4. It is not so severe as the throne, but the Judge is there. There is no courtroom yet, but the Judge of all the earth is there. The Judge of all mankind is here, the Judge of the assembly, the Judge of the professors of Christianity, and that is what He is dealing with; and so John sees that and He tells John to write, and to write in a book, too, not on scraps of paper, or a notebook, but a book. That is a whole idea; something to be kept for all time, and it is to be kept in the possession of the assembly. They have had the status of an assembly; they are not yet rebuked, but the Lord is saying, Things are not right and I want what I am going to say to be written in a book and sent to those assemblies. They are to have it in writing. They can refer to it in every care meeting. Every elder in every meeting can look into the book at any time. If he has to deal with lawlessness in a meeting, he can look into that book and he will find a description of Me, the kind of garments I wore, the kind of eyes I had, as a flame of fire, and if you have to deal with persons tell them about Me. I have authority to restrict. I gave them plenty of scope in the spiritual realm, but I will restrict them as regards this world. I have restrictive powers. I have just taken one day and I want you to be on that day for
{390}
Me. That is what He would say. Write to Ephesus, write to Smyrna, write to Pergamos, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea the whole book, what you have seen, and the things that are, and the things that are about to be after these.
Well now, as I said, dear brethren, there is not a throne yet. He is in the midst of the golden lamps. The assembly is the Lord's seat or place of authority yet, and that is not the throne. He is walking in the midst, visiting the assemblies in His grace yet. The addresses will tell us what these are. Of course, I cannot go into it now. I am seeking to show how the Lord takes account of time. He is saying, You asked Me before about times and seasons; I am telling you now about time, I am speaking on the day that is the Lord's day. It is that day. It is not three hundred and sixty-five days; it is one day, and it is My day, and it represents My authority. Those that profess My Name have to do with Me on this day, and this day is to be a test to them.
Well now, when we come to chapter 4 we have a throne. That is the outlook now for the world. He is finished with the assembly. He is not finished with it yet; this meeting here tonight belongs to the assembly. In chapter 4 we have the throne, and Him that sat on it; and in chapter 5 we have a Person in the midst of the throne as a Lamb slain, a precious thought, a touching thought! He is in the midst of the throne and then we have the book opened. That is, now you can take your maps out; now you can take your bearings; I am speaking about the earth. The Lord says, I am going to have to do with the earth, and when I come to do with the earth I will take the sea first. You say it is very different from what He said in the Acts to them. We are now coming down to the earth, I will take the sea first, the Lord says. The nation that has the power of the sea has the power of victory in the wars.
{391}
The Lord knows that. He takes the sea first, but He says, I am going to take Asia and Africa and Europe and America and Australia with all the waters of the sea and the rivers and the lakes. They are all going to be Mine. I am going to take them; I have the power to take them, I am armed with power to take them. Why not? He bought the world; He made it and He bought it as well. And then, He says, I am going to take the people I want, I am not going to take them all. The lake of fire is at the end and there are a lot going there; an awful thing. But then how precious it is! The Lord says, I am going to have the people I want to have, I will have one hundred and forty-four thousand of Israel, I am going to have an uncountable number as far as man is concerned out of the nations. He is on the throne, or in the midst of it. He says, I have a lot of horses and men on them that I am going to send out among the nations to deal with them, so that way should be made for My assumption of My rights here below. And then you will have had times and seasons for seventy weeks. That is all I am going to say about that.
I just want to say a few words about the first day of the week. What I have said ought to help as to what hinders us, young people especially, on the first day of the week; people that do not mind whether they break bread or not. The Lord's day means little to them. In fact, young people would rather it was not there at all because they are so restricted. They cannot do as they please. But the first day of the week is the love day; a time for love. The Lord said, Do not say anything about times or seasons, but in John He says, It is a time for love. That is a beautiful thought, a time for love. The leaders of the present time, most of them, would say it is a time for war, and we want to make war and instruments of war. The Lord says it is a time for love. That is a
{392}
beautiful thought. The wise man says there is a time for certain things and among them he says there is a time for love, a time for embracing and a time to refrain from embracing, a great balance. It is a time for love. I want you to think of that, dear young people. That is, the love of Christ; that is the love that is spoken of. What kind of love is that? It passes knowledge. Nobody can describe it; it passes knowledge. But there is a time for it, and the Lord says, I know the time. It is the first day of the week, that is the time. That is the day I have taken out. It is the same as the other. The other is My authority; this is My love. I want to assert My authority so that you may enjoy My love. Unless I accept the restriction of Christ's authority, I shall never come into the favour or to share the greatness of His love. It is in subjection I get into the love of Christ. "To know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge" (@Ephesians 3: 19), and again, "For the love of the Christ constrains us, having judged this": so that we are called upon to judge about things, "That one died for all, then all have died; and he died for all, that they who live should no longer live to themselves, but to him who died for them and has been raised", @2 Corinthians 5: 14, 15. These are the terms, and so we are told in this passage I have read in @John 20, a well-known passage to most of us. He had been talking to Mary; He had got up very early Himself that morning; the Father raised Him by His glory, and then a good deal happened after that, among the things happening was that Mary Magdalene was brought around from a measure of darkness to call Jesus, Rabboni -- my Teacher. Jesus is the Teacher. She says to Him, Rabboni! which is, my Teacher. She has the right Teacher, and the Lord says, You can take a message to My brethren. Who can take a message to the brethren save one who is taught by the Lord Jesus? It is no mere
{393}
thing written down; she had seen the Lord and He had said these things to her. I do not think she took notes. She kept the things in her heart. The Lord's mother herself had been accustomed to that, but this is Mary Magdalene. Mary, the Lord's mother, kept the things in her mind and pondered them in her heart. They are much better than notes. I am not discrediting notes. Thank God for the sisters who take them, and we pray they may take them better. They are valuable. But she did not seem to have any notes. She came to the brethren and said, I have seen the Lord and He said these things to me. That is all. That is how the passage reads: "Mary of Magdala comes bringing word to the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her" (verse 18). They are not repeated; that is all. And then, "When therefore it was evening on that day". The Lord is now dealing with time. He is dealing with this same day, the Lord's day in Revelation, the first day of the week in John. He uses the time of this day first to establish His authority over our souls, and then to tell us what He is going to do with the world when we are in heaven. That is Revelation. He told the disciples before, according to Mark, how that as regards these things that should happen, the Father alone knows the time, I have no doubt the Revelation modifies that, because it is the "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to shew to his bondmen what must shortly take place". It is an enlargement of things that have happened and are yet to happen that we are to be instructed in. The Lord got a revelation from God and He made it known to John by His angel, and it was on the Lord's day He made it known. That is how He used that day, but on the first day of the week it was a love day, and He comes, as it says, "When therefore it was evening on that day, which was the first day of the week, and the doors shut where the
{394}
disciples were, through fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace be to you. And having said this, he shewed to them his hands and his side. The disciples rejoiced therefore, having seen the Lord. Jesus said therefore again to them, Peace be to you: as the Father sent me forth, I also send you. And having said this, he breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit: whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained". Now, dear brethren, this is a different story from what we have had in @Acts 1. The Lord here does not tell them about the coming Spirit; He breathes the Spirit into them, and He says to them, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you". And then, too, If you remit sins I will remit, and if you retain sins, they shall be retained. So that you see, on this love day, dear brethren, the Lord is setting the brethren up. He is going, although He does not speak about going here, but He is opening up love to them. This, He would say, is the time of love, and I have come to assure you that I have plenty. It is My day and if you want to know what I do out of My love, there are My hands and My side. Think of what you see! Then He says, I am going to commission you, I am going to set you up in My Spirit. I want you to understand you have an inlet into heaven. It is not only the Spirit now, but My Father is your Father, My God is your God, and you are My brethren. I am setting you up here. You have access up there. You have full liberty. It is the first day of the week, the beginning of eternity. The Lord would say, I am setting you up in the full light of divine counsel, and that My Father is yours and My God is yours. Can you ask any more? They would say, No. Do you need any more? No. We have the Holy Spirit; we have Your full confidence. That is the point. The Lord is now, instead of stressing restriction, instead
{395}
of stressing His authority, He is stressing His love and what His love will do, what divine counsel has thought out, what the disciples were brought into; how they were set up here, if they are to be for the Lord, full of love; as it were, enveloped in love -- the Father's love and the love of the Son and the love of one another, and He says, I have full confidence in you. I do not know of anything so comforting as when one realises, as having responsibility about certain things, that one can confide in the Lord. It is one of the most comforting things. But if you discover in moving with the brethren and seeking to serve the brethren, disloyalty to the truth, disloyalty to Christ, to His authority, and disloyalty to all that belongs to christianity or anything that belongs to christianity, what pain of heart it brings! The Lord is telling the brethren here that He has full confidence in them. Lord, I would say, Can I betray that confidence? Can I be so mean, as I might call it, after all the gifts of love and the feasts of love, the liberties afforded to us, the relationship into which we are brought, can we afford to betray or deny the rights of Christ? We cannot. Love would say we cannot. And that is what the Lord would put upon us. He says, I am counting on your reliability. I am counting on your trustworthiness, I am counting on it. Will you betray it? That is what is in these statements. Can I afford to betray such a love? On the contrary, as John says, as He laid down His life to teach us love, so ought we to lay down our lives for the brethren.
{396}
GROWTH
@1 Peter 2: 2; @Exodus 2: 11; @1 Samuel 3: 19: 20
I wish to speak about growth. I have begun with Peter who indicates in this first scripture how growth appears in Christians. He does not address us as babes, but as those who learn to take account of themselves in view of this matter, no matter however old we may be spiritually, according to what we are at the beginning of our spiritual history, that is, as new-born babes. It is not that they were all this, doubtless many of them were quite old in the truth, but each has to learn to go back in his history, and recall what a keen taste he had for the things of God. As we get old and older and older still we lose taste in a natural way for food, and the like, but that is not to be so spiritually. We cannot, by an act of will, go back physically to babe conditions, or boy conditions, or young man conditions: our bodies are not controlled by our minds. Our bodies depend upon automatic organs which, to a very great extent, are independent of our wills, and as they become old and weak, we cannot make them young by the mere act of will. We have to accept limitations humbly. But in spiritual things, Peter would indicate that we, at any time, may go back to early conditions when we had a keen taste for the things of God. It is always refreshing to come in contact with new-born babes, persons who have just been converted and in whom the work of God has taken effect. The same is true if we have been away from the Lord, and we get reconverted, for reconversion has the same character as a first conversion. There is a certain freshness and joy in the soul. That is what the apostle has in mind, dear brethren, in this verse: "as newborn babes desire earnestly the pure mental milk". The note to the
{397}
word 'mental' indicates that there is an allusion to the word of God, '*logos*'. That is, the apostle is concerned at the moment about the mental growth of the saints. Of course, other features grow relatively but the mind is the controlling faculty in man. The man himself, of course, is the controlling faculty; he is an authority; he is a moral being. The mind is his leading faculty, the faculty which he controls, which he is to control, and it is imperative that he should control it. If it gets out of hand he is dislocated in his constituent parts.
So the apostle chooses his word clearly to indicate that he is dealing with the mental faculty of the believers. As I said, there are other things, such as conscience, such as heart, such as reins, and all the automatic organs, that are used to convey spiritual features to the believer. All of them have to be understood too. We are to learn to understand our make-up as to how the organs are affected spiritually and what the function of each is. So the apostle Peter is concerned for the moment about mental milk, pure mental milk of the word. That is, it is not strong meat yet that he is dealing with but milk, and it is mental milk "that by it ye may grow up to salvation". If we fail in the mental side we shall be imperfect, of very little use in the organism, the body of Christ, in the way of certain affections. We shall be of very little use in that great working system, the greatest thing that God has reserved from before the foundation of the world, to be used and developed down here. The Lord would have us to be concerned, so as to have our minds in order, so as to join in in this matter, this great organism, called 'the mystery'; that we should be capable of having part in it in its functioning capacity. It is called 'the Christ', one of the most remarkable things of the scriptures, in @1 Corinthians 12: 12, "So also is the Christ", referring to the body composed of us, or millions or more millions and
{398}
millions and millions of saints. When you come to the concrete presentation in scripture of this the measure is enormous, and it is a solid measure, as we have often remarked, in @Revelation 21. It is a solid matter and when you come to think of it, it is all solid, all persons, not thrown together promiscuously, but as a functioning entity which God designed before the world was, even before creation. It is a greater thing than creation. Creation was never viewed as a mystery, but this is. God can seal it carefully when the time for it arrives, and in order to have part in it our minds must be nourished well. That is the basic thought that I had, dear brethren, the word 'desire'. As the apostle says here, "As newborn babes desire earnestly the pure mental milk of the word, that by it ye may grow up to salvation". Now, in order to confirm it, look at the note to the word 'mental'; you see that it says, 'The word here translated "mental" has the sense of "suited to the rational faculties" -- the mind in contrast with the body -- yet I believe there is allusion to *logos*, from which it is derived, and I have added "of the word" to mark this allusion'. There is a link between the word '*logos*', and the word 'mental'; so we take in the mind of God, conceived through our own minds; the '*logos*' is the mind of God, where expressed or otherwise as expressed. The word 'of' is there, you see; the Lord Jesus became The Word in order that He should be thoroughly, fully known to us, but it depends upon the faculty which God has given to us to take it in, and that is the mind. It is important to keep that before us; you say, Well, the mind is a dangerous thing, and so it is if it gets out of hand. It is then the most dangerous thing, but it should never get out of hand. The believer is the moral being in the world of God and he controls his mind. The Holy Spirit in him helps him to do that, so that we have the pure mind, which Peter speaks of, that can be safely stirred up. The mind of an unconverted
{399}
man is polluted; it can never be stirred up; the theatres are intended to stir it up; the polluted mind of man corrupts the whole world. But the believer's mind is not that; it is the pure mind. Peter says, "I stir up ... your pure mind", @2 Peter 3: 1. How is that acquired? Well, the Holy Spirit helps us. The epistle to the Romans shows us that there is the renewing of pure minds: "That ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God", @Romans 12: 2. The renewing of our minds is a word that runs through Romans and indeed through all the epistles, I might say; so pronounced is it that when the mind is mature in the christian, the apostle Paul says by the Spirit, "*We* have the mind of Christ", @1 Corinthians 2: 16. Think of the greatness of that!
Well now, laying down these basic thoughts, I am seeking to show with the Lord's help how we can grow and the effects of the growth, and I proceed to Moses. His history is given from babyhood. We get no more accurate history of any person than we do of Moses -- put by his mother into an ark of bulrushes, carefully daubed with pitch so that it will not be lost in the waters of the Nile. The staunchness of the ark and the position of the vessel in which Moses was preserved, allude to the power of God. Baptism is no mere rite; it is not a mere service, religious rite or ceremony such as thousands and millions have taken on without any real meaning to it at all. It is the power of God that is in it. We have been buried with Christ in baptism, the apostle says, "In which" -- mark that -- "in which ye have been also raised with him", @Colossians 2: 12. That is the power of God; "In which ye have been also raised with him". How are we risen with Christ by the faith of the operation of God who raised Him? It is not simply that we believe that there is such a thing as the operation of God, the power of God, but we have faith that that power is operative in the believer. That is the idea of the ark. You say,
{400}
Well, had it gone out a little further in the Nile it would have been swept down and never been heard of again. Well, we might say the Lord Jesus was put into a grave maliciously made by wicked hands; but He was not -- God saw to that, and God saw to Moses preservation and God sees to the preservation of every one that is baptised on the principle of faith. How can there be preservation? How can there be salvation except by the power of God? And that power is unlimited.
Well, the saviour came; the saviour, you say, what saviour are you talking about? Pharaoh's daughter; she was the saviour. You say, How do you know she was a christian, a believer? Well, she opened the ark and looked at that babe and she was moved as she saw it weep. Her father would not have had feelings like that; she saved the babe; she saved that boy. God ordered her to do that; God controlled that, you see. Well, I am only alluding to that one point so that we might have clearly in our minds all that scripture speaks of as facts, facts for the believer to take in in faith. They are not mere useless incidents; they have a meaning and we are to understand their meaning. And so Pharaoh's daughter gives him back to his mother and his mother looked after him and saves him, and then he comes back to Pharaoh's daughter and grew up among the Egyptians. What influences he came in contact with! He was possibly one of the best athletes in Egypt. We are told that he was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, a well-known man, we may be sure, as he grew up, 35 or 40 years of age. Well, is that the growth that Peter is speaking about? No, that is not the growth that Peter is speaking about. There is no growth morally in a man who is brought up in the wisdom of the Egyptians. There is nothing moral in that at all; his companions were the royal family and they were no doubt brought up the same way. But one day something
{401}
came into his heart. Where did it come from? It came from God, not from the schools of Egypt. It came into his heart to look on his brethren. That is growth. What a change in that young man! Not the cricket match, the football match, the tennis match, but it came into his heart to look on his brethren. God brought it in there; He put something in that heart that affected the whole race for thousands of years. A little grain was put into his heart, and it has worked and worked, up till the present moment. It is growth, and so the Spirit of God, commenting on it says, "When he had become great", @Hebrews 11: 24. Oh, you say, that is when he was a renowned cricketer or football player or musician or officer, or something like that, renowned in the classics and the like. No! When he became great was when it came into his heart to go down and look upon his brethren. He was full grown; he renounced for ever the joy, the pleasures of Egypt. He "refused to be called son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction along with the people of God than to have the temporary pleasure of sin". A great man indeed! He did not have an equal in his day; he became great.
And now we can see, dear brethren, you young people here, how it applies: it is as soon as you begin to look on your brethren. Oh, you say, let the brethren look on me. That is your attitude sometimes, or you do not like them to look on you; you get out of their sight, to do your own will. It has never come into your heart to look on them and bear their burdens. Moses looked on them and their burdens, as if he would take them on. Why the change? That is real growth. That is a great man, dear brethren, in real growth. He looked on the brethren to see how they fared; it came into his heart to do so, and he did it. Stephen tells us things about him; it looks as if Stephen had Moses in his mind a great deal in his discourse. He tells us about him as a babe, and about
{402}
Pharaoh's daughter; and how he was educated in Egypt, how he knew the wisdom of the Egyptians, and how he went out to look on his brethren one day; he thought, Stephen says, that they would know that God was going to use him. His heart had been changed; he was thinking of his brethren. He was no longer thinking of being a great man in Egypt or of the crown. He had given that up for ever. He looked upon his brethren and thought his brethren would know what was in his heart. But they did not. But it was in his heart nevertheless, and we are not to be unobservant as to brethren who are able to serve us in any little way. If young men come forward and give a good address, do not fail to take account of that; maybe the Lord is going to use that young man. The next thing is to pray for that young man and encourage him in every way. It is well to have in your heart what may be in his heart; namely, that God is going to use him, and if God is going to use him, he is a treasure to be cared for.
Well, the brethren, two of them, were striving together, as is often the case, and Moses would set them at peace one with the other. Before that, however, one of them was overcome by an Egyptian, but I will not say much about that. Anyway, Moses took the side of his brother; he looked on his brethren. That is the point; he took the side of his brother. It does not say anything about his saving the Egyptian, but he was on the right line, you know, and the next day, he went out again to look on his brethren and this time two Israelites were quarrelling. It might be two sisters quarrelling or two brothers quarrelling. He did not like that. He did not attempt to kill them. He put that away. He said, as it were, to the one in the wrong, Ye are brethren. You can be sure that if there is a quarrel one is wrong, maybe both are, but usually one is very wrong, and the wrong one is sure to take issue with the saviour, with the person who would speak the
{403}
truth to them both. How ready he is to take an issue, and so this one did with Moses. Stephen does not conclude the story until he comes to the time that Moses was commissioned to lead Israel out of Egypt. He says, "This Moses, whom they refused" (@Acts 7: 35); the whole nation was debited with that, what that man said to Moses; that they rejected him. But in spite of their rejection of him, God used him. So that he really did become the saviour; he really did become the leader of the people out of Egypt.
Well, now I speak of all this to young men who are aspiring to serve, and it is a good thing to have a desire to be an evangelist or teacher. God honours it, and on the other hand, we who are served should have it as treasured in our hearts, for if he be what he seems to be, he is to be great, for right to the end of his days he will grow in value with the brethren.
That is my first illustration of growth; it is the case of a man who had every prospect in this world and something came into his heart from God which changed his whole life. He became the leader of God's people; there was really growth, and the Spirit of God said of him that when he became great (meaning when he began to really grow) he went out to look upon his brethren, that, so to say, in his heart he loved his brethren, and as sure as possible, if the Lord is using you you will have it in your heart to love and care for them, for that is representation of God, caring for the Lord's people.
Now I go on to Samuel to illustrate the point. Samuel is one whose history is given in detail, generally in relation to his mother, but more detail is given as to growth in him than we have even as to Moses. And one of the first points to notice is that he is seen as a very young child wearing a linen ephod, a linen one. He is going to be a real priest. And if you are aspiring to be servants, dear young people, you must take account of this word 'linen'; it refers to influence that sobers and
{404}
subdues. There are such influences. We may enquire what and how I am to know; it is a good thing to find out how to begin by accepting the obligation to know. If I accept it as an obligation I am always learning until I do know, and if I am an honest man, I will not fail to find out how the thing is to be done. And so the Lord Jesus says of the scriptures, 'How do you read them?'. You are to learn how to read. So with many other influences; the knowledge exists; it is for me to know. It is my obligation to know, and if I accept the obligation I shall find out the way to know. So there are influences that promote sobriety in the world. There are influences that are against sobriety, all these influences, these institutions, that the devil has set up for the young and old are intended to promote lightness, frivolity, coarseness, blasphemy; do not think I am using hard words! They promote blasphemy; theatres and all these things that the devil has invented are intended to be against God. That is what they are. We have heard today of the man that speaks froward things, and there is the woman who flattereth. That is another feature of the theatre and the play-house, human flattery. It promotes corruption. So that there is a great need for sobriety, and this young boy is wearing a linen ephod at the outset. Now that is remarkable. The next thing you get in the record is that his mother brought him a little coat every year. Why did she do that? She is a godly woman; her name is Hannah. She is one of the most remarkable women in Scripture. Why did she wait until he had worn the linen ephod until she brought the coat? Well, what did the coat imply? Well, every time she brought it he had grown; he had a linen ephod and he is worth taking account of. You will find him reading the Bible sometimes and praying sometimes and talking to God's people sometimes. He is worth taking account of, and so she brings him a little coat. Who is this that gets a little coat? Well, it is a godly young man, a
{405}
godly boy, if you like; that is what he was. Godliness belongs to boys; why not if the Lord has His way with us from the very outset? It is remarkable how quickly a babe shows that he or she has the faculty of thinking, which you do not get in the lower creation at all. Well, as soon as that is active, God will come in, if possible. Sometimes He got in, and He got in in Samuel, although we are told definitely that he did not yet know the Lord, as if the Spirit of God would mark the time that the knowledge of God came into that boy's heart. He is influenced by a godly mother and he is placed there in the temple where everything around him spoke of God, and as soon as he is wearing a linen ephod his mother brings him a little coat. He is worth taking account of every year; she brought him one, and it would be bigger every time. She came up there to Shiloh. The ark was in Shiloh in those days; that was the centre for God in those times, where He placed His name. She would come up there and the first person she would make for would be Samuel. How her heart yearned over the boy. She lent him to the Lord, but why lend him? Why not give him? Well, the Lord would say he is yours; the word 'lent' means you can come and take him, so that when the Lord laid His hand on the little children He departed, He left them. You say, Why did He do that? Because the father and the mother should look after them, and that is what Hannah did. You can be sure as soon as she got to Shiloh she would make for the little boy. How big is he now? He has still got the linen ephod; he is ministering to the Lord before the high priest, and she would say, Samuel, my boy, how are you getting along? He would tell her, you can be sure. There is no indication of any lightness with Samuel or any frivolity or any effort to get out of the tabernacle into the field. He is a typical boy, a typical young son; that is what he is and he has a coat, too. He is growing steadily in that way; he is not losing ground.
{406}
He is as healthy as other boys in spite of their playgrounds and all that. Well now the point is that he grew: "Samuel grew, and Jehovah was with him". He has got a wonderful companion now. Where is the boy that ever had a companion greater than the Lord? There is no such thing; the Lord was with him. What an incentive there is with young people to go in for these things! Whatever else you go in for, it is only for a few years; it is all over in a few years, but what about this? This is an eternal matter. The Lord is with you; He is with Samuel. Will He ever cease to be with him? Never! He will be with him for ever. "Thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me", @Psalm 23: 4. So Samuel grew and the Lord was with him, and "let none of his words fall to the ground". A dear brother was writing to me this very week; he spoke of certain stock stories and he has come to see that there is really nothing in them at all to help him. Well now, that is a fine word, you know, from a brother who is older than I am, I think. He is growing. Well, I want to grow too on these lines, not to be occupied with trifles, with things that profit nothing, foolish talk and the like. It says of Samuel's words that not one of them fell to the ground. Well, what words they must have been! Think of all the words that one of us speaks from the time he is born till the time he dies. Think of the words; think of the profitless things there are; the many that have fallen to the ground; the many that are buried for ever. But the ones that Samuel spoke did not fall to the ground; they were worth keeping. And that, dear brethren, is the word of the Spirit: "Let your word be always with grace, seasoned with salt", @Colossians 4: 6. Such is holy conversation. It says, "They that feared Jehovah spoke often one to another; and Jehovah observed it, and heard, and a book of remembrance was written", @Malachi 3: 16. There were no trifles in this thing, but right talking. Not one of Samuel's words fell to the ground. You will understand what I
{407}
am speaking about. I have no doubt that Samuel had to speak of ordinary things that are not preserved for us, but what is in mind is what he said in ministry; undoubtedly he was constituted a minister; he was a prophet. God says to the brethren, to Israel in his day, Listen to what that young man is saying; do not let one thing that he says go without knowing about it; listen to it; it is worth keeping. How did God keep them from falling to the ground? He got them into the hearts of His people; that is what He intended; He intended that the hearts of His people (I do not know how many Israelites there were in those days, a good number possibly; in David's time there would be eight million in Israel; I would reckon that from the census that was taken. About two million came out of Egypt through the wilderness into the land). Well, now, God says, these hearts, these children, they are all Mine; that is the right that God has: "My son, give me thy heart". Well, what will God do with your heart? He will use it to contain words spoken through servants that they may have a resting place there and that you might be able to say something too that will not fall to the ground. That is how the testimony goes on. And then it says further in the passage I read: "And all Israel, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, knew that Samuel was established a prophet of Jehovah". You see they all knew. How did they know? They knew by hearing what was said. It was no mere hearsay; they heard the things. If my heart is containing the prophetic ministry, it is germinating there, I know who is giving it. Where did I hear that? Do you not know? It was when Samuel spoke of it; that is when I heard it. It remained in your heart, a sure evidence that it has been a prophetic word is that it remained in your heart, "All Israel, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, knew that Samuel was established a prophet of Jehovah". And not only that, it was established. God did that; God saw to it that not only
{408}
had he the prophetic ministry, but He saw to it that the brethren knew. Wherever you went you would hear them say, Well, we thank God for Samuel; Samuel is going to be here today. One day he came to Bethlehem to anoint David. That was a wonderful meeting; that is one of, what you might call, the exemplary meetings of the service of Samuel. He would go around from where he lived, Ramah, Bethel, Mizpah and so on; he made a circuit every year. What day of the month is this? so and so, and so and so. Samuel is going to be here shortly. Let us all be ready for Samuel; the young women came down to one place where Samuel was and the two young men were looking for asses that were lost. They did not find them; they were poor servants, at least; the leader was Saul, and as they drew near to the town they found young girls there, maidens, come down from the town, and they enquired about Samuel. Is he here? Oh, yes, they knew all about Samuel. An excellent example for young girls and young boys amongst us. They knew all about Samuel. Where is he? Oh, you will find him at so and so; they knew all about Samuel. And that is how the matter was in those days: how God brought this boy, this babe, this young man into establishment as a prophet and how the saints received his words and how when he came to their localities they feared, for it is said in one instance that they feared greatly. He might have to rebuke us, but he came anyway. God established him a prophet in Israel, to be a prophet of the Lord; that is, he was a real representative of Jehovah; God had a real representative. Well, that is a great incentive to growth, dear brethren; who knows but that God has some one here who has great thoughts about us? He would bring them out and develop them and he is to be in it himself, to grow every day, every minute, every year, with a linen ephod. He is a real priest able to pray, to get to God about things. Presently he is set up from Dan to Beer-sheba;
{409}
everybody knows he is a prophet of Jehovah. And then finally, "And Jehovah appeared again at Shiloh; for Jehovah revealed himself to Samuel at Shiloh by the word of Jehovah". The whole of Shiloh gets the good of the ministry of Samuel.
May God bless the word!
{410}
RESULTS
@Jude 14; @Genesis 5: 21 - 25; @Acts 9: 31, 32; @Acts 16: 4 - 6
I have in mind to speak about the results which accrue from exercises arising in the course of God's testimony here. The apostle James in his epistle alludes to the end reached in such exercises. He says, "Ye have heard of the endurance of Job, and seen the end of the Lord". The teaching in his epistle is very practical; among other things he alludes to knowledge amongst the brethren. He wrote, as we know, to the twelve tribes that were scattered and in doing so he referred to the patience of Job. The book of Job has its own peculiar importance in scripture as dealing with the work and testimony of God outside Israel but collateral with the testimony to Israel. It thus finds a place in the holy writings, and James alludes to it as being known. He says, "And seen the end of the Lord". The "end" in that book illustrates what I have before me, namely, the end which the Lord has in view in dealing with His people. That end is to be triumphant and blessed!
Enoch is said to be the seventh from Adam. Jude mentions that fact. He would count from Adam, Seth, Enosh, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared to Enoch. Each of these names would have a place in his thoughts as he would come down to Enoch; but he would stop with that name, not merely to round out a sentence but to call attention to a result reached. There are ten names mentioned in @Genesis 5, Noah being the tenth, which, no doubt represent a process to develop a further result, which is seen in Noah. But I believe Enoch is peculiarly in the mind of the Spirit of God, for He pauses there at the seventh from Adam to indicate a given result, and then goes on to a further result in Noah, which is also important, for these exercises
{411}
which arise are like the ripples caused by a stone being thrown into a pond, they expand and become far-reaching in effect. What arises is thus turned to a definite result. Enoch suggests an assembly result; Noah a further one, typical of another world, a purified world. These thoughts are in the mind of God for us and we should not stop short of them.
So I began with Jude, a short epistle which is lighted up by this verse which refers to an antediluvian saint. This is not a casual, but a careful reference, embracing a particular exercise, and a result reached through it. What a history is involved in reaching the seventh from Adam, a remarkable line leading up to such a result! Chapter 4 gives us the line of Cain, but the most casual reader will notice the correspondence in it with the names in the line of faith, through Seth. Chapter 5 is called by the Spirit "The book of Adam's generations". Chapter 5 is the life line, and so the names given, save Methushelah's, are significant. His longevity is instructive for it points to God's longsuffering. We are through grace in the period of God's great longsuffering and patience. But the names of each of the others have a significance, Enoch's pre-eminently so. His name signifies tuition, education, learning, discipline or discipleship and I believe, has greater moral significance than the others, for it relates to the heavenly calling, and no saints are more distinguished than those who have part in that calling. Thus we obtain character and distinction through discipline, as it says, "My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when reproved by him; for whom the Lord loves he chastens, and scourges every son whom he receives", @Hebrews 12: 5, 6.
Now in Cain's line we have the very name -- Enoch -- given to his son. It suggests, though occurring here before Enoch's birth, imitation of what is of God, which is all round us. And so we find that this name is placed on this first city, that is, one of the most
{412}
cherished thoughts in the spiritual line is placed on a city built by a murderer, by Cain. Some christians of today no doubt would say, 'See, this city; see our church membership; our bells and architecture', and flatter themselves by attaching the name of Christ to it. We find today that heavenly name everywhere, and the names of the apostles, too, on the most distinguished architecture in the world. How sad and offended they would feel were they to see it, and yet we see christians taking refuge in this very thing. It is profanity! The Spirit of God would recoil from chapter 4 and what answers to it today, that sacred names are found on bill-heads, bills-of-lading, stationery and such things in the city of Cain. How incongruous! He would turn away from all this and speak of Enoch, as the seventh from Adam, who prophesied about the Lord's coming amidst his holy myriads. And so one would dwell on the exercise and its result, on what the seventh means, and see what is worked out from it, and what the Spirit of God means by referring to it in this epistle which deals with apostasy, in the midst of which we are found today. He would direct our attention to each of the preceding names also, for it is a time when Cain's world is spreading out in commerce, music and social life. It needs exercise to get out of chapter 4, the line of imitation, and get into chapter 5, the line of life. That line of life goes through, silently I might say, and secretly, but none the less, surely. In Seth, we have the principle of recovery as it says in chapter 5: 1, the book of Adam's generations. Chapter 2 gives the creation; chapter 5 introduces a restored Adam, reaching a fixed state of things in his son. Then Seth has a son and he called his name Enosh which means man as weak and mortal; that is, he accepts a dying condition. How important to remember our mortality. It is in the acceptance of this that we reach the seventh from Adam, for they all die but Enoch. He reached the full result of the exercise spiritually, and
{413}
got the gain of all that preceded. Let us too, beloved brethren, get the gain of exercises, and not lose them. The devil is out to rob us of the full result of any exercise. So when these testings come we should not say, God has allowed them; it is preferable to say that He *orders* them; He means something to accrue to us through them, as it says, "All things work together for good to those who love God". It is seen palpably in Enoch. It is the heavenly side; he walked with God. I mention that to show the great result of this exercise; it says that after Enoch's son was born he walked with God three hundred years. The birth of his son is the moral reason for his walking with God. There is now a son in his house; maybe there had been a little selfishness previously, a little indifference, but now a son is born for this exercise and he realises that he must look to God as never before. But there is another reason for this exercise and that is to dignify and glorify Enoch. Walking with God became characteristic of him; he did it three hundred years! No doubt he prayed the day his son was born, but what a difference at the end, after the scourgings and the discipline, for that is the significance of his name. He would realise that divine scourgings are the scourgings of love, for God scourges every son whom He receives. Let us not shrink from it, dear brethren; it is all to bring us into the gain of the seventh from Adam. We scarcely know what our hearts are capable of. But the tests, year after year, bring out the depths of our hearts. We thus get to know ourselves and to judge ourselves aright.
Jude also tells us that Enoch had the light of another world, and as he prophesied of that world and of God's coming with his holy myriads. Enoch would no doubt think of coming with Him. How he would shine in view of this. The light of this came, I believe, at the end of his life. God would open up the world to come to him as he walked with Him. Alas, how few are in
{414}
the good of that world! But as Enoch walked with God, the reality of it would lay hold of his soul, and he would see the Lord coming. What encouragement it would be to him! But I am thinking of the result in its heavenly character. Being the seventh and caught up, he would be equal to the place into which he was introduced, for God placed him there. Were we left to ourselves we would never be equal to such a change, but we may be sure Enoch was completely restful in that heavenly place, for he would have the sense that God was sufficiently pleased with him to translate him. I believe the present discipline of God is to make us equal to this; for His discipline in the wilderness is as ordered as His counsels in eternity. Paul helps as to what is before us. He says, "Whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows; such a one caught up to the third heaven". His was no mixed condition, nor was he conscious of any unsuitability as caught up into that holy spiritual altitude. I wish for myself not to miss anything of these exercises from Adam to Enoch, for I do not believe that God will translate to heaven what does not suit Him down here.
In @Acts 9 we have another end reached. It says, "The assemblies then throughout the whole of Judaea and Galilee and Samaria had peace". This alludes to the end of a period of exercise, and marks a division in the book. Following the suffering of the twelve, the death of Stephen, the conversion of Saul and his reception by the brethren at Jerusalem, we are reminded that God had reached an end, which affected all the assemblies. Some here may remember conflict of twenty-five years or more ago, but what was the culmination? This scripture in @Acts 9 is the first allusion to assemblies over a wide area being affected for good. No ground was lost! It says they had peace and were edified. One might ask the question, Are we being edified? Edification is a characteristic of local
{415}
companies. Are we able to edify one another in our local gatherings even though they be small or isolated? The power for this lies in the Spirit. Edification is never wanting if love is present and active. In a wider sense the body is self-edifying in love. It is not a question of gift. The smallest and most isolated company may be self sustaining if these features are found in it. And then, walking in the fear of the Lord is an important matter also. It is a certain deliverance from the fear of man and the world. The fear of man brings a snare, we are told. And then they were comforted too. This word is from the same root as Comforter: it brings out the thought of a divine Person spreading comfort. What qualities are these, as seen in the local company, rendering it independent as divinely constituted, having peace, being edified, walking in the fear of the Lord, and then multiplied through the comfort of the Holy Spirit. You would hesitate to add to any company except on these lines, for what is added must be of a piece with what is there.
In @Acts 15 it is a question of doctrine. There was a great danger of cleavage. Judaism had been introduced at Antioch, and now at the end of chapter 15 we find two brothers alienated, two great servants of God, Paul and Barnabas, and what is recorded is not by mere formal mention but because of the results that accrued. Paul chose Silas and together they go forth committed by the brethren to the grace of God. This is not said of Barnabas. Paul may have had warm feeling but he is, in principle, commended by the brethren. He will not take a man like John Mark with him; he will not partake in others sins, nor will he take with him one who would weaken the service, but a brother like Silas and later, Timotheus, brothers who adorned the path. He passed through Syria and Cilicia confirming the assemblies. He was not on party lines -- he confirmed the *assemblies*. It says they instructed them to observe the decrees determined on by the
{416}
apostles and elders who were in Jerusalem. Think of the apostle Paul, the greatest servant on earth, yet he carries out the results of the service of others, and in this sinks his own importance. How delightful it was to heaven to see him distributing those decrees. It was the best thing he could distribute. It was not the 'latest ministry', but it had its place in binding the brethren all over the world. How Paul would surrender his own importance to do this! so that nothing is lost as the result of this exercise. The assemblies were confirmed in the faith, and increased in number every day.
Let us not miss, beloved brethren, what God has for us today. He would look for more heavenly mindedness with us, affording him pleasure in view of translation; and then peace and comfort and then multiplication, and then confirmation in the faith.
{417}
POURED-OUT WATER
@2 Samuel 14: 14; @1 Samuel 7: 5 - 10
What I have in mind is bound up in the reference to the poured-out water. The first passage is part of the speech of a woman lured by Joab, David's captain, with the object of securing the return of Absalom, who had been banished as a murderer. It is obvious that, while the speech contains in type the truth and a large measure of the gospel, it was truth misused, and employed to restore a murderer without repentance. There is much in the way of gospel service of this kind. The words were put into the mouth of the speaker, not by God, but by a shrewd politician. Joab had no love for Absalom or for David; he loved himself, like many who ostensibly serve Christ at the present time. He thought only of his own exaltation and so would ingratiate himself with the king. He would stand in high favour with David, and, like most men of the world, cared little for the means, provided his end was attained. So he employed this wise woman of Tekoah, and in her address to the king she used the truth to accomplish his purpose.
We may be thankful today for the truth, in whosesoever mouth it may be found, even in a Balaam's, who was forced to convey the mind of God about His people. So today the truth is the truth, though it be announced by an unconverted man or by one converted and yet in alliance with the world. The truth is the truth and is unalterable. God sends forth His light and truth, as the sun's rays shine forth, and as His rain falls on the just and the unjust, to bring conviction into the consciences of men and to remind them that, even as a Creator, God has a claim
{418}
on men, and how infinitely more as a Saviour God! He commands *all men everywhere* to repent, whatever vessels He may use, a Nebuchadnezzar, or a Jonah, or even a Balaam. Whatever mouth He may employ, even as ass's, He has but one end in view, to assert His claims in men's consciences. So this wise woman of Tekoah, in the garb of a mourner, conveys in her speech some of the most wholesome truth, though in the service of a schemer; and in it we have a type of what is current at the present time, the use of the truth to bring back men who are hostile to Christ, yet clothed in a Christian garb. They deny His divinity, deny the atonement, deny the foundations of the truth, and yet are clothed in the garb of ministers of Christ.
Absalom was brought back without repentance. There can be no saving relationship without repentance. David yielded and accepted Absalom, and the result was disastrous. Joab suffered first: his barley field was burnt. If any here are supporting the ministry of Absalom today, you are an enemy of Christ. The barley field refers to the ministry of our Lord Jesus Christ, and today the whole truth of christianity is being destroyed by these returned murderers. Christendom is being swept by destructive power by these opponents of Christ, men set up in clerical garb as ministers of Christ. They would kiss the king, but hate him, they are preparing for Antichrist and the fabric of christianity is being destroyed. The present-day christianity will be overthrown and Antichrist will have his day, as Absalom superseded David for a while, for a period long enough to show what man is. Absalom is a fine figure, a man of great ability, attractiveness, and beauty; he knew how to flatter people, to kiss! Scientists are investigating what man is; every branch of science is employed at the present time
{419}
to find out what man is. It is all futile. Man is not able to contend with a mightier than he. And Christ knew what was in man and did not trust Himself to men. This woman knew more than the scientists. She says, "We ... are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again". The cemetery, the undertaker's wagon, do they not show what man is? Flesh and brain and heart, all that is connected with that person, gone for ever as having died in this world! Men prick up their ears when they hear of the discovery of some ancient fossil, but the Lord Jesus Christ said, "We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen". He is the last word, the whole mind of God is revealed in Him, "He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him", "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life". Man naturally is but water spilt on the ground which cannot be gathered up, but that is not all the truth.
In the other chapter there is water poured out before the Lord -- that is a very different thing -- and there is a man who can intercede for men, who can judge men. There is a different position here. There is also a whole burnt-offering of a sucking lamb, not a man dissolved by water, but a Man in perfection and entirety before God. Old Testament history is like water poured upon the ground; one generation upon another disappears, there is no recovery. "Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return", God said to Adam. The New Testament is water poured out before the Lord. A Man indeed, our Lord Jesus died. He died a real death, a death as real as any
{420}
other man's. His life was given up, poured out vicariously, a sacrifice to God, and He rose again on the third day. The gospel, says Paul, which I preached unto you: "How that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures; and that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day ... seen of Cephas, then of the twelve ... of above five hundred brethren at once". Is He not gathered up? Yes, indeed, a real Man, never to die again! "Handle me and see", He said to His disciples. It is that which we preach in the gospel: Christ who died, Christ gathered up in resurrection, exalted to God's right hand, and in Him God presents every divine thought for man. Israel acknowledged, "We have sinned against the Lord". In the light of Christ presented, true confession is made. It is in the light of Christ presented in the gospel that true repentance is brought to pass; there must be confession -- genuine conscience work, "We have sinned against the Lord". Have you made that confession?
"Through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins", @Acts 13: 38. Are you prepared to come forward as Israel did at Mizpah? Our Mizpah is where we find our God; the place of confession is the place of blessing, and we invite you to our Mizpah -- to say as Israel did, "We have sinned against the Lord".
So Samuel prayed for them, and our High Priest prays for us, "We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous", One who intercedes for us. He stands by us and brings about the sense of sin and guilt in our souls at the first. If there is one here exercised as to his sins, then the Lord is interceding for you and the saints are praying for you. I am not averse to after-meetings. If there is one here under exercise, I would invite you to pray to God, and there are
{421}
those here who would gladly pray with you, and to God for you.
Samuel took a sucking lamb and offered it a whole burnt-offering to the Lord. It is in type Christ in His completeness, risen from the dead, appearing before God for us. How wonderful is our position! The sucking lamb is the intrinsic preciousness and attractiveness of Christ; it is not large. Though small outwardly, it refers to Christ, the One who upholds the universe. In that sucking lamb is presented what God delights in, for it represents the Son of God. God saw in it His beloved Son, the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world, a whole burnt-offering, small but complete and acceptable to God. The believer is accepted in Him.
So there was an answer to Samuel's prayer; the Lord thundered and Israel was saved. We do not want an Absalom, or a Joab, or a disguised widow, or a parrot repeating words, even though they are words of truth. A preacher is one impressed of God and as so impressed he presents the truth. We have the truth presented here in its proper setting: Samuel as the blessed representative of Christ, as intercessor, the water, speaking of His death, and the sucking lamb, speaking of Christ as wholly acceptable to God; and in answer to this the thunder of heaven. We are seeking to present Christ as the sucking lamb tonight, but God is coming out in His thunder, and these great Philistines, the opposers of the truth, will come down. When God comes in to judge this world, man's armies and navies and aeroplanes will all be like burnt flax. We are content now to suffer in order to present Christ in His present attitude as the sucking lamb, the only ground on which man is accepted and forgiven.
{422}
COVENANT RELATIONSHIP
@2 Corinthians 3: 1 - 18; @John 17: 26
We might be helped by considering the Lord's service in making the love of God known, that is the new covenant, and in making the Father's name known. There is a distinction between the love of God made known in the death of Christ and "the love wherewith thou hast loved me" in @John 17: 26. The one has to do with covenant relationship and the other with family relationship.
The glory referred to in 2 Corinthians is the ministry of Christ bringing in what "excelleth", the love of God made known in our hearts; and His service makes it effective. "The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God". The covenant has come in on account of sin, "A people" is a provisional thought, since sin came in God called out a people. The national thought is not primary, but the family thought is. The covenant is in regard of "a people", a people brought out of Egypt (@Exodus 19), and then He makes known to them what a place they had in His heart.
Those marked off by baptism and the gift of the Spirit form a people in direct relation to God. There was a distinct difference between such and the world at the outset, but it is beclouded now by the condition of Christendom. 2 Corinthians deals with the love of God, and Christ's administration in making it known. In verse 18 to behold, to look on, is to ponder the way Christ took to make the love of God known, and the result of pondering on it will bring about correspondence. We become vessels of the love of God and so are changed. A
{423}
vessel takes colour from what it contains. We are glorious in the measure in which we are expressive of love.
The glory of the Lord is that He has made the love of God effective in the believer's heart. The *Lord* makes known covenant relationships, the *Son* makes known family relationships, and the latter abide. The covenant belongs to time down here, and we are to take account of His service in making the love known, and so we shall be transformed, a very strong word which means metamorphosed, changed to correspondence. @Romans 5: 5 is when we touch the covenant, but we have to look on it -- behold it, and so be transformed to the same image.
The love of God shed abroad in our hearts, the hearts of those that love God, is the answer to the covenant. Christ had in mind in giving the Spirit that the love of God should fill all hearts; the gift of the Spirit is part of His administration. "By the Lord the Spirit". The question is, Are we beholding and being changed? The correspondence here is not the same as the conformity referred to in @Romans 8: 29. This in 2 Corinthians is down here, love expressed on the line of administration, of the spirit of giving and the absence of selfishness. As the Lord gets His place with us in the supper, we come into the good of His administration, the supper brings Christ before us. "Drink of one Spirit" has reference to the cup of the new covenant. The supper is on the line of the covenant, what God is to us, the 'coming down' line; the assembly or family line is the 'up-line'. The tribes go up, "Go to my brethren and say ... I ascend". The supper brings the love of Christ and the love of God to us, and thus brings about an atmosphere that will lead us to the up-line. @Psalm 122 begins, "Let us go into the house of the Lord", and then develops the way there, "Whither the tribes go up" (verse 4). David is made king in Hebron. And then he and all Israel go up to Jerusalem.
{424}
ADDRESSING DIVINE PERSONS IN PRAYER
(Extracts from Correspondence)
Would you kindly give me your thoughts as to addressing divine Persons in prayer? I recognise the suitability of prayer to the Lord, as, e.g.. Paul in regard to the thorn (@2 Corinthians 12: 8), but Scripture generally emphasises our place with God -- "That your faith and hope might be in God", @1 Peter 1: 21, "Christ ... suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God", @1 Peter 3: 18, "We also joy in God" (@Romans 5: 11); "Let your requests be made known unto God", @Philippians 4: 6, "Our Father which art in heaven", @Matthew 6: 9. Then the two prayers in Ephesians are addressed to God and to the Father.
October 4th, 1938 A.S.L.
I am quite sympathetic with the exercise conveyed in your letter ... and I hope the Lord will enable you to help the brethren as to this important matter.
For myself, I usually address God or the Father in prayer, both in meetings for prayer and those for readings, addresses and so on. I address the Lord Jesus also.
The passages you quote support this practice, and I am thankful the matter is on your mind. In teaching the disciples to pray the Lord directs them to say, "Father, thy name be hallowed" (@Luke 11: 2), and this is confirmed in the epistles, as the passages you mention show. That the Lord Jesus should be addressed in prayer and thanksgiving is also warranted by Scripture, as you show -- also in @Acts 7: 59, 60, and @John 14: 13, 14. The general position in the divine economy is seen in @1 Corinthians 8: 6, the Father being the one God, and this should surely give character to the
{425}
public service of His people. The passages you refer to, and indeed the whole tenor of the epistles, show that God the Father should be addressed in a *leading way* in prayer, both privately and in public.
Peter says, "If ye invoke as Father" (@1 Peter 1: 17); and Paul says, "I bow my knees to the Father", @Ephesians 3: 14. James says, "Let him ask of God", @James 1: 5. "Prayer was made by the assembly to God". @Acts 12: 5.
Of course the Son is to be honoured as the Father is honoured, and there is no question, as you point out, but that the Lord should be addressed in prayer; but Scripture is most definite that, in the economy into which God has come, the Father retains formally the position of Deity, and this should be always recognised in the assembly.
The Lord's supper, being so designated in Scripture, has to be regarded as distinct in relation to what is said above. Being *His* supper, the Lord should be addressed in regard of it.
THE RESURRECTIONS COMPARED
@Luke 7: 11 - 17; @Mark 5: 35 - 43; @John 11: 36 - 44
@Luke 7: This was specially a public affair. It stands connected with the gospel -- the Lord had compassion on the widow. As to publicity -- many of His disciples and a *great crowd* went with Him. With the widow was a *very considerable crowd* of the city; the awakening of the youth was *at the gate*. The Lord touched the bier evidently as it was moving; "the bearers stopped", "Youth, I say to thee, Wake up". "I say to thee ...". It is *authority*, power acting in *compassion*. There is no looking up to heaven. It is authority in a Man. The testimony apprehended, a great Prophet risen up, God has visited His people. The young man is given to his
{426}
mother -- not let go. But as awakened he began to speak. This is in keeping with Luke; the priesthood is in view. The *Lord's* speaking is emphasised in this gospel (chapter 4).
@Mark 5: The raising of Jairus daughter is *private*. The Lord put those who made a tumult, "weeping and wailing greatly", out, and took with Him Peter, James and John and the father and mother of the child. "The child has not died, but sleeps". It is the believer viewed in female youthfulness, capable of great development, such as His touch and words would indicate. The age of the girl and the environment into which she was awakened by the Lord's touch and words point to what is under His hand for growth, development such as He wishes; it leads to the assembly. The intelligence in the man out of whom the demons were cast, and the transparency of the woman healed of the issue, enter into what the damsel represents; all is under the Lord's hand. There will be growth in constitution as she receives "something ... to eat".
Note that the damsel *walks*. This is a special feature here: the man of Nain *talked* as awakened. Walking brings out the grace of life; this marks the feminine side and will be fully expressed in the church, "coming down ... as a bride adorned for her husband".
@John 11: The dignity of the raised person is in view. We have the name (Lazarus) and he was one of a *loved* family. The Lord's *feelings* are much in evidence. It is not simply compassion, as in Luke, but *love*: "Behold how he loved him!". The Lord tells others to do what they can do: "Take away the stone", "Loose him and let him go". He speaks to the Father -- that the crowd who stand by "may believe". "Lazarus, come forth" -- a loud voice; it was the voice of love and power. Lazarus represents the saints -- those of the family of God, loved and dignified.
{427}
The glory of God is seen. His power, exercised in love in the Son, shines. The *dead* came forth, bound feet and hands with grave-clothes. It was all divine power; but others loose him and let him go. In chapter 12 Lazarus sits at the table with Christ. It is dignity. Others believe on the Lord on account of Lazarus. Thus resurrection seen here goes further in result than in the other two instances.
THE PSALMS
The Psalms are full of personal knowledge of things, which is very important in Scripture, personal knowledge, and the knowledge of persons. The psalm writers are persons of great importance, and God gives a great place to them in the epistle to the Hebrews. He cites what they say. They excelled in the way they spoke about Christ, and one of them, in @Psalm 45, spoke about a queen. It is a beautiful psalm; in fact, there is hardly a more beautiful. We turn to it with pleasure. It is a love song, and it is a Maschil, teaching psalm for the sons of Korah. It has a great place in that sense. We have the Lord Jesus spoken of as the Messiah, and in verse 9 it is said, "Upon thy right hand doth stand the queen in gold of Ophir". She stands there. The queen in @Nehemiah 2 sat by the king as if to support him without saying anything. That is a very blessed thought for a sister, silently supporting her head, but everyone sees that she is supporting what he is saying. She is not at variance with him; she is not interfering with him. She is sitting by him and hence the request of Nehemiah, the servant of God is granted and Jerusalem is rebuilt. That was the point in God's mind and the queen supported it.
{428}
So, as I said, this psalm furnishes us with a beautiful word about the Messiah's queen, you will understand. "Kings daughters are among thine honourable women". And "Upon thy right hand doth stand the queen in gold of Ophir". The very best gold adorned her. She is there clothed in that way and she is standing there without saying anything. She is standing there. That is a great matter for the king, that he is supported by her in that dignity, in that attire; as suitable. So later it is said of the assembly, the Lamb's wife, "And it was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure", @Revelation 19: 8. Not gold, but linen bright and pure, suitable to the dispensation and the end of it, the idea of being clean, of being purified. "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city", @Revelation 22: 14. We are to be in keeping with that now.
COMMITTAL TO THE FELLOWSHIP
@Psalm 16: 1 - 11
And then He spoke of His inheritance. What an inheritance He had! I was speaking of young people here. Some may be just asking for fellowship, as we say, but you see the thing becomes hackneyed. What do you mean when you say, 'I want to break bread'? What are the saints to you? What the saints are must come into your mind. You are going to be with them, you are casting in your lot with them for time and for eternity. As you go on you will say, 'I would not go to heaven without them'. That is in principle what the epistle to the Ephesians teaches: we are
{429}
raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus. There is no such thought, as far as I see, of one saint going to heaven by himself. I know Elijah and Enoch were taken up, but the idea of going to heaven is for God's satisfaction. It is for our blessing, of course, for our exaltation, but we go up together; have been made to sit down together in the heavenlies. Now we have to learn, in coming in amongst the saints, to value them in that way. You are committing yourself to them for time and for eternity, and the more you know them, the better you love them. God loves them; the Lord Jesus said, "In them is all my delight". Then He says, "The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage" -- He is alluding to the book of Joshua: that is what any christian, any believer, should expect, that God apportions him something. You want what God apportions you. With the Lord Jesus, as a Man of faith here, it was a question of what was allotted to Him. Think of the Lord Jesus limiting Himself, so as to be, as a Man, an example to us. "The lines are fallen" -- where have they fallen? They fell "unto me". The book of Micah teaches us that when God is dealing governmentally with His people in judgment there are no lines, no apportionment. In christendom there is no apportionment, there is no apportionment for people who take their own way. The Lord apportions things to people who love Him, who take the place of dependence, and is it not better to leave the matter in His hands? "The lines are fallen unto me"; it is better to take the Father's apportionment. How humble and simple this makes us! It keeps us from treading on other people's paths and territories; it is a question of what comes to us, and God makes it known; He says, 'That is for you', and it is measured, mind you, it is no accident; "the lines" means it is measured. God is a God of measure (@1 Corinthians 10: 13); I love that!
{430}
That is for me; God sees to it that that will not be taken away from me. As the Lord said of Mary of Bethany, she "has chosen the good part" -- that was to minister to Him; and, He says, it "shall not be taken from her". He accorded to her a portion in what she did.
DEFENCE OF THE TRUTH
The book of Leviticus refers to our access to God; it refers to approach. Before we can be right outwardly, we must be right inwardly: before we can be *for* God publicly, we must know what it is to be *with* God. God spoke to Moses from out of the tabernacle; it was there that the light found its dwelling place.
In Hebrews we read: "Christ being come an high priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building". It is not a tabernacle of material things; it is not of this creation; it is a moral idea. There is a vessel for the testimony, a home for the light.
When the tabernacle was set up we read, "A cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle"; that is, God was there, and desired to be approached. So today, He has provided everything so that we might draw near. There is nothing to keep us away except our own wills; everything is provided that we may draw near.
Paul went to Corinth, and announced the testimony of God, and the consequence was that there was an assembly formed; the testimony was to find a place
{431}
there, and the light was to be defended. Every true believer is called upon to defend the testimony. In his daily avocations he is to be ever ready to defend the truth. We must not lower the standard at any time.
It may be said, This is not the time for that, or this is not the place or this is not the company; but at all times you are to be ready for the defence of the truth. You confess it, and then you have all that is necessary to support you, because "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved". There is support in *the name*, and you have the consciousness that the Holy Spirit is with you.
It is often said that your *life* should confess Him, but Scripture says, "Confess with thy mouth"; your life is to be in accord with your mouth. In conflict you get confirmation as to the reality of things. When you are in contact with the world you come under reproach for your confession, but you are confirmed of the Lord in it.
We have to know approach first: what it is to go in to God; because if we do not go in, we do not know what we have to defend. Light comes in by the Spirit, and the gift of the Spirit connects us with what is within. A man who has the Spirit is justified, and then he confesses the Lord Jesus, and he is saved.
God does not put upon us burdens which we are not able to bear. In the power of the Spirit you are able to defend the truth. You never lower the standard; you stand by it.
{432}
FOLLOWING THE LORD
It should have a great effect upon us to see others following the Lord. The gospel of John begins with the two disciples of John the baptist who followed Jesus, and ends with a devoted follower who could be trusted to continue in the path until the Lord comes. John the baptist was the one who set things in motion; he is not said to have followed Jesus himself, but he inspired others to follow, for "looking at Jesus as he walked, he says, Behold the Lamb of God"; and the two disciples left John and followed Jesus. They were impressed by John's testimony, which was so different from what could be said of every other man.
John the baptist may be likened to the setting sun, for he recognised that he had been eclipsed by Jesus when he said, "He must increase, but I must decrease"; he also said, "He that has the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices in heart". He left the Sun high in the heavens, gladly going out of sight himself, that Christ might be magnified.
The other gospels also refer to the thought of following, but there it is in connection with things that are left behind. Peter said, for instance, "*We* have left all things and have followed thee". The Lord did not say, What have you left? He will give you credit for what you have left; He can afford to do that. But in the gospel of John, nothing is said about anything that has been left; the Lord is presented in this gospel in such a way that nothing could possibly be of any account at all compared with Himself.
Peter was introduced to the Lord by a follower in the person of his brother Andrew. The Lord said, as it were, to Peter, Your brother Andrew is a
{433}
follower; now *you* follow! In @Luke 5, the Lord came into close contact with Peter, getting into his boat. The Lord loves close quarters, for acquaintance with Him is developed in such conditions. Later on, Peter fell at Jesus knees, saying: "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord". When a person says, 'I am a poor, feeble thing', there is hope; but when people say disparaging things about others, they are not fit for the congregation of the just. The Lord then said to Peter, "Fear not". There were others there who heard Him say it, but the word was addressed directly to Peter, for the Lord was bent on making him into a trustworthy follower.
On another occasion we read of a man who said, without counting the cost, "Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest". How rash he was! The Lord tested him by setting before him what the path involved, and he did not pursue the matter; yet we find in the next chapter, in spite of the difficulties of the path, that Jesus had disciples who were prepared to follow Him.
The apostle Paul, once the Lord had secured him, became the greatest, most devoted follower of Jesus. There are only two people in the New Testament who speak of the Lord as "my Lord" -- Mary Magdalene is one, and Paul the other. Paul would be the strongest in upholding Him as "Lord of all"; but his acquaintance with Him personally had gone on until he was able to speak of Him in this intimate way, "my Lord".
At the end of John's gospel, it is recorded that Peter, after turning round and seeing John following, enquired, "What shall this man do?". The Lord said, in effect, There is no need for you to be anxious about a follower: see to it that *you* follow; a follower can take care of himself! It is a very poor thing if we continually need to be looked after, though caring for one another is a very blessed thing, where would
{434}
any of us be without it? Nevertheless the word says, "Keep yourselves in the love of God", @Jude 21.
It is to be noted that the one who leaned on Jesus breast at supper was the one who is seen following right on to the end. John chose that place, and the Lord signally honoured him, but there is room in that bosom for every one of us! May we all be found following the Lamb "whithersoever he goeth"!
OUR GREAT HIGH PRIEST
It is of first importance for every believer to discover the place he has in the heart of Christ -- to read the breastplate. As he discovers his name there, he begins to see that all the official power vested in Christ is for the moment active on his behalf. Can anything be greater than that? -- all His official power for the moment active on behalf of the loved ones!
Paul could say, "The life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me". He knew the place that he had in the breastplate, and never doubted that the love of Christ pursued him from the outset of his spiritual career until the time came for him to depart and be with Christ.
Have you discovered in your spiritual history that there is One in heaven who is caring for you constantly? If you are sick, He is the Physician. If you are in trouble, He is the Sympathiser. No ill can befall you, no sorrow can arise, that He cannot meet.
It is in this way that you become acquainted with Him, so that presently you can say, "It is the Lord": you trace Him in everything. Not one thing can happen without Him, and as you accustom yourself
{435}
to connecting everything with Him, you gradually see the wisdom of every movement, of every occurrence, and you see the love that is in it, for wisdom is but the handmaid of love; and as you see the love, you see the glory of the Lord, the One who is watching over every saint on earth.
The Lord goes before and follows after, and what comes in between is the High Priest, One capable, as it says, of being "touched with the feeling of our infirmities". So you see how the Lord takes account of us in His administration, and ultimately, as we become acquainted with Him, we begin to behold the glory of the Lord.
In every experience, whatever it may be, you may see the Lord. Look for Him! Faith looks for the bow in the cloud, to see the Lord in the cloud. Directly the cloud arises, the sorrow, or whatever it may be, faith looks for the Lord in it; and as you look for the Lord in it, and as you see Him, you will see the glory.
Stephen looked steadfastly into the heavens. In face of Israel's final rejection of Christ, in face of his own stoning at the hands of those who gnashed on him with their teeth, in spite of the cloud of judgment about to fall upon the guilty nation, in presence of all this, Stephen looked steadfastly up into heaven and "saw the glory of God, and Jesus".
We may be assured that, whatever the sorrow of our circumstances, it has not come without His knowledge, and His love is behind all His dealings with us. "*We* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory".
{436}
THE GLORY OF THE LORD
Some christians have little or no knowledge of the Lord in His present service. Indeed, many could, if questioned, hardly give an account of Him at all; and where ignorance in regard to His present place exists, there is great danger, for saints in such ignorance become exposed to the enemy and to the awful sin of idolatry. It was so with the Israelites of old; they said of Moses, "We do not know what is become of him!". By way of contrast, the Song of Solomon portrays the desires of one who is typical of a lover of Christ. The Lord alone knows our desires and He knows also the diverse elements in us, even though having love for Him. If there be love in us, He has set it there, but He knows what, alas! is there within us which accompanies it and what discipline is necessary in order to bring that love to light in its own brilliancy and purity.
This is seen in John's writings, for he presents things exactly as they are. Everything must be of its own kind: there can be no admixture. The divine nature must be brought to light, and so the discipline is necessary in order that all contrary to it may go. Hence Peter said to the Lord, "Thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee", @John 21: 17. The Lord *did* know, but in order that it should come into evidence the process of discipline had to be introduced.
The feminine speaker in the Song of Songs had to go through discipline, but she was a lover of Christ. It is a song of loves, of reciprocal affections. That is what the Lord is looking for. He would bring us to join Him, and if you read that book, you will see how it is brought about. The bride comes to the point of describing the Object of her affections; she knows Him so well that she can delineate His
{437}
Person in His absence. She is so absorbed with Him that she can fully describe Him, and so impress others, that they ask, "Whither is thy beloved gone ... ?". Can you tell, Christian, where He now is? "Whither is thy beloved gone ... ? ... we will seek him with thee". If we know the Lord and can speak of Him rightly, as she could, others with whom we come in contact, will wish to know Him too, and seek Him with us. She can describe Him, and then tell where He is. "My beloved", she says, "is gone down into his garden".
It is as apprehending the Lord thus that we come to understand rightly His present service, the ministry of His love; and that is in view in the glory of the Lord, which we behold. His glory is to make the love of God effective in our hearts. The Lord Jesus knows the love of God perfectly. He has given the fullest expression of it in dying, but He seeks to give present effect to it in our hearts. It is a work delightful to Him to bring the love of God into our hearts and set it there, so that it becomes active God-ward and man-ward, and that is His glory. He garnished the heavens; He upholds all things by the word of His power; but the ministry He is exercising now is peculiarly "the glory of the Lord".
{438}
DIVINE APPEARINGS
@Numbers 12. The servant is envied and spoken against by those *immediately* connected with him, Aaron and Miriam. "Has Jehovah indeed spoken only to Moses? has he not spoken also to us?". The Cushite wife was but a pretext; there were pride and envy, especially in Miriam, for she is mentioned *first*. This is often seen in the endeavour either to elevate myself to the level of others greater in stature and gift, or to reduce them to my level, ignoring the sovereignty of God and increase of devotedness and spirituality in others.
"Jehovah heard it". This should be enough for any servant thus persecuted. God will see to the matter, and so it can be left with him. But the Spirit would have us know the character of the *man* thus spoken against. "Moses was very meek, above all men that were upon the face of the earth".
"Then Jehovah spoke suddenly to Moses, and to Aaron, and to Miriam, Come out ye three unto the tent of meeting ... . And Jehovah came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood at the entrance of the tent, and called Aaron and Miriam; and they both came forth". Moses is honoured again. Aaron and Miriam are called apart and rebuked, the latter made leprous. How solemn! She was shut outside the camp seven days.
"Not so my servant Moses: he is faithful in all my house. Mouth to mouth do I speak to him openly, and not in riddles, and the form of Jehovah doth he behold". What a tribute! Thus as we please Him in our walk and service we can leave our defence in the hands of God.
{439}
A WARNING
The Lord Jesus warns us against covetousness in @Luke 12. A man wished Him to speak to his brother so that he should divide the inheritance with him. The Lord's reply involved His rejection; to be set for earthly possessions now is covetousness, and this is idolatry. Not apprehending Christ's rejection, many believers go in for the earth, but they have it *without Christ*, and this is, in principle, idolatry. The bearing of this teaching is elucidated by comparing Barnabas's course as recorded in the Acts. He sold his possessions and laid the money at the feet of the apostles. He had regard for the testimony and would support it. Barnabas had falsified his calling in having lands, for he was a Levite, and a Levite should not own such property; but a new and heavenly order of things was in view, and he embraced it. Henceforth he was a true Levite, having a heavenly inheritance.
As to the earth literally, it has to be remembered that it is "the Lord's, and the fulness thereof". We thank God for its products, as the means of our bodily sustenance. In this sense a christian may own land as he owns a cow or a sheep, but his heart is not in it; his life is not in such possessions. The *spirit* of christianity in this respect is to "sell what ye possess and give alms" (verse 33). The Lord goes on to inculcate this; it is to mark a heavenly people on earth. Luke ever leads on to the heavenly position, "A treasure which does not fail in the heavens". If the treasure is in heaven, the heart will be there also. The great danger is the desire for earthly property while Christ is rejected. The point is that God has been here in Christ, and He has been rejected, and now if you seek possessions here you seek them and have them without God, and this is idolatry. Christ is in
{440}
glory now. He is rejected here, and we seek the things that are above. It is to be noted that covetousness is more likely to be found among the poor than among the rich. The man referred to in verse 13, *wanted* the inheritance. But the poor man, because of his poverty, has no treasure, whereas the rich man *has* a treasure on earth, and the danger is that his heart may be in it. Paul told the Colossians to set their minds on things above where Christ is sitting, and Luke supports this from the Lord's ministry.
Scripture recognises that a Christian may have means, and it affords special instruction for those who have, saying, "Charge them that are rich in this world ... that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate", @1 Timothy 6: 17, 18. The future is in view; "Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come". In @Luke 12 it is a treasure in the heavens that faileth not. Wealth is of great value if used in a godly way. The New Testament makes a great deal of it as a means of expressing divine love. And even in working with our hands, it is that we "may have to give to him that needeth", @Ephesians 4: 28. Then those specially engaged in the service of the testimony are to be cared for, and this is of great interest to the Lord. But it must be remembered that money given in this way is not credited to us according to its face value, as in a bank! God values what we give according to the *total* of our means, as well as the motive in giving it. We read of the Lord beholding *how* people cast money into the treasury. The rich cast in *much*, but He said the poor widow, who cast in two mites, cast in more than all. The Lord reckoned according to what each *had left*, and the widow had nothing left; she cast in all her living.
{441}
THE SHINING WAY
@Luke 24: 4 - 7; @Acts 1: 10 - 14; @Luke 9: 28 - 36
Two men are seen in each of these scriptures, and taken together they may serve to bring before us what we may call the shining way, the way up. Luke, pointing to the resurrection, shows that the testimony to it is borne by "two men" in "shining raiment". In @Acts 1 two men stood by them in white clothing. Speaking of the Lord's going into heaven, and that He should come "in like manner" as they had seen Him going into heaven. Then @Luke 9, pointing on to what is infinite, shows us two men in glory with Him, men suitable to be there; they are attired suitably to the place; they are in glory with Him, in conscious liberty and dignity, talking with Him. "And lo, two men talked with him, who were Moses and Elias, who, appearing in glory, spoke of his departure". They are in perfect liberty speaking to the Lord, not now in humiliation, but there in His condition of glory. It says that "As he prayed the fashion of his countenance became different and his raiment white and effulgent".
It is all education in view of our place in the assembly now, but reaching on to what is eternal, and, indeed, infinite. So these two men in shining raiment, and the two in white clothing, and then the two in glory, would give us substance for our place with Him, the two men appearing, with Him in glory showing us the end of the way up and into heaven, for heaven itself comes into view on the mount of transfiguration.
{442}
A FRIEND OF JESUS
Lazarus was the Lord's immediate product. He raised him. He was the Lord's friend. Is it not lovely to be the Lord's friend? "Our friend Lazarus", He said. Moses called his firstborn Gershom, "I have been a stranger in a strange land". That is what the world was to Jesus. He made it: "The world was made by him, and the world knew him not". How strange it must have been that there was no response -- but He had a friend in it! Lazarus was a friend of Jesus in this strange place that He had to do with. I believe that the conditions that He found in the world caused the Lord constant sorrow; the whole scene was blighted and opposed. Every step He took caused strange opposition. It was most unfair and uncalled for, as He said, "They hated me without a cause", @John 15: 25. How valuable was a friend in it! That is what Lazarus was, and what the disciples were according to John, "I call you not servants ... but I have called you friends", @John 15: 15. Wonderful, indeed, to be a friend to Jesus in a strange place like this!
I wonder if all our dear young brothers and sisters look upon this world as strange, or is it just what you like and where you aspire to be? When Jesus came into it, it was a strange place to Him. Ah! it was very strange, but He found a friend in it and He *finds* friends *now*.
{443}
KNOWING THE SCRIPTURES
I would earnestly commend the precious Scriptures, especially to the children and young men and women. How many of us regret with all our hearts that we have not given more time to the Scriptures, that we do not know them better! The apostle Paul said to Timothy, "From a child thou hast known the holy scriptures", @2 Timothy 3: 15.
Let me earnestly entreat the young under no circumstances to neglect the Scriptures; even if you do not understand them, know them. Timothy knew them, if he did not fully understand them, from his childhood.
GOD'S GOVERNMENT
The government of God goes on, but what is to be observed in regard to the present position of Christ in heaven is that all the dispositions of God in connection with the nations have reference to the testimony. There is no other concern with God now. There is the gospel and there is the assembly, and these are the chief interests of God today, and all His dispositions on the earth (and He is in supreme control of everything) have the furtherance of the testimony in view. Evil is allowed to go on, and it is coming to a head, but it is allowed on God's terms, within the divine limitations.
The kingdom of the heavens implies that God is in supreme control of things and that He carries them to an issue. Hence we see in the parables in @Matthew 22, not only the destruction of Jerusalem,
{444}
but that the one unsuited to the marriage scene is cast out into outer darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth; that is, what is unsuitable in christendom is dealt with finally. The parables pursue things to their final issue, so the more we understand the gospel of Matthew, the more stayed and restful we can be, knowing that everything reaches its issue under God's hand. Then we see the thought of government in regard to the nations, carried right to the end in chapter 25: the goats go away into everlasting punishment and the righteous into life eternal.
THE GOSPELS
The gospels seem simple but they are understood only by those who understand the epistles. God begins at the top; He presents what is final from the outset. The gospels are really the explanation of this -- "the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance". What a field for your soul in that!
{445}
SYMPATHY IN SUFFERING
One would not essay to speak to the Lord's people unless one was in sympathy with them in what they were passing through. One might not be in the exact circumstances of the saints, for our circumstances are all varied, yet one would seek to maintain in the soul a sympathy and companionship in spirit, at least, with all sufferers for Christ's sake; not that one would encourage in any who are suffering peculiarly, any pride in martyrdom; for any glory that accrues from suffering here is not for us; it is for God. We come into the gain of it, but it is not to minister to anything of the flesh in us. All the fat is for God. Even the possession of the Holy Spirit might be boasted of by the flesh to exalt itself, whereas any greatness or dignity which the Holy Spirit produces in us is alone for God. All the fat, as we read, is for God; so one would deprecate any development of the spirit of martyrdom with which the flesh would clothe itself in the people of God; and one would be reminded of what the apostle Peter says, "The same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world", @1 Peter 5: 9. Peter intimates to those to whom he wrote that their sufferings were not exclusive to them, but general.
The people of God in this world suffer characteristically, as true to Christ, as it is said, "Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution".
{446}
THE BURIAL OF CHRIST
Burial is a necessary part of our Lord's vicarious work. The gospel includes it, as we see in @1 Corinthians 15. It is practically applied in @Romans 6. Adam being guilty, the judgment of God required that he should return to the earth whence he came. The burning outside the camp of the sin offering when its blood was taken inside the veil points to this. Slaying was not enough. Christ was made sin -- a thought but poorly taken in by us. The forsaking expressed God's wrath, but this would not be a public matter had the Lord not uttered the cry. His death and burial were public, answering as a testimony to God's judgment against sin which was required from the outset.
IMAGE AND LIKENESS
We get the principle of representation at the outset in Scripture. Image comes before likeness. God said, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness", but after sin came into the world, likeness must be seen before representation; hence in @Genesis 5 we read, "Adam ... begot a son in his likeness, after his image". After sin comes in we must have likeness first, because likeness is a moral feature. Before that statement is made, we read that men began to call on the name of the Lord; that agrees with what we are speaking of, that in Christ we have the likeness of God absolutely; it was God Himself, but there was likeness in the moral features, and hence the representation.
{447}
THE DEATH OF JESUS
How real was the death of Jesus! It was no ordinary death. Elihu, in speaking to Job, says, "By the breath of God frost is given: and the breadth of the waters is straitened", @Job 37: 10. The death of Jesus stands alone; He was straitened in it; it was the Prince of life who lay there. "The sorrows of death", we read, "compassed me, and the pains of hell [Sheol] gat hold upon me"; He was straitened. Such is the figure the Spirit of God employs to convey to us what Jesus endured in order that the blessing of God might come to man. He "gave himself", we are told, "a ransom for all", @1 Timothy 2: 6. He gave Himself unto death; not death of the ordinary kind, but death involving the bearing of judgment. The blast of God was there; by the breath of God the frost comes, it says, and the waters are frozen. The north wind of divine wrath beat upon Him and the waters of death were, as it were, straitened, and there He was -- and why? That I should never come into it.
THE LOWLINESS OF JESUS
I would remark as to the young, that the work of God in them will always show itself in outward smallness, the Lord Himself being the example for us, from the outset of our spiritual history. We are told that in youthfulness He was in the midst of the doctors, not seeking out persons of His own age, but in the midst of the doctors He both heard and asked questions. The young would do well to follow that as an example. It is well that the young people should learn how to sit in the midst of those who know more than they. I speak to the young that you may see how you are to be brought to this, and learn how to be at the Lord's disposal at all times.
{448}
THE WAYS OF GOD
It would not be intelligent to assume that the saints should be exempt from damage in such circumstances as now exist. The government of God is often inscrutable. Abel was a saint, standing out at the beginning, as indicating what God may permit ... . In his death he was a witness to the truth. Death in this sense brings out what God's work is in us.
REPENTANCE
The more spiritual you are as a believer in Christ, the more you repent. It is a *continuous* thing, and history is made in heaven every moment by repenting sinners. There is joy made there. Heaven has delight in repentance as a moral quality down here where sin is. And the more we repent the more we come into the light and the blessedness of the gospel, and love it.
AN UNTROUBLED HEART
The Lord assures His feeble disciples, saying, "Let not your heart be troubled". A troubled heart prevents the working out of divine thoughts, and the Lord had in His mind to unfold divine thoughts at that time, as indeed always. He would induce a suitable receptive state, an untroubled heart, among those present. "Let not your heart be troubled", He says, "ye believe
{449}
in God" -- they had gone that far, He had induced that in them, faith in God; He had indeed said to them, "Have faith in God".
It is a great point as to our general position here below that everything comes under God. Many things arise daily to trouble our hearts, international matters, business matters, matters in connection with our professions, illness and so forth, all tending to rob the Lord of material He wishes to use to work out the divine thought. So He says, "Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe on God, believe also on me".
BELIEVING THE GOSPEL
The Lord stands up and says, "The time is fulfilled ... repent and believe in the glad tidings". It is not simply believe it, but believe *in* it, that is, take it on and search it out, and see how much there is in it. If you believe in it, you will find that you love the truth more and more. A lover of the truth is a person who has looked into the great gospel epistle -- Romans; it is the truth set out in the most orderly way to meet the conscience and heart of a repentant sinner, and every page of it induces love of the truth.
PERFECTION
It is wonderful to see how human perfection shines in Christ in every temptation. He is tested in regard to *food*, as Adam was; and He is tested in regard to *government*, as Noah was; and lastly in regard to the *house of God*, as Israel was, but in all, infinite perfection is seen in Man. It is complete triumph! And Satan, completing every temptation, departs from Him for a season. The strong man is bound, and now the Stronger than he goes about to spoil his goods.
{450}
THE OBEDIENCE OF JESUS
The peculiar glory of Christ viewed as man is that He maintained man's place in infinite exactness in every detail under God's eye. He had maintained it throughout, but now the final test, the final crisis, was about to appear.
He was to be face to face with Satan, who held the power of death in his hand; and he was about to bring that to bear upon the Lord so as to turn Him out of man's place. That was the whole aim of the enemy, to divert the Lord from man's true position of obedience to God. He had sought to do it at the outset in the wilderness, and now he returns in Gethsemane with the power of death in his hand to turn the Lord out of the path of obedience; and at that moment the thought of His victory arose in the heart of Christ. He saw the opportunity, as it were, in which He would show in the presence of all, in the presence of the universe, His unswerving obedience to the will of God. He said: "Not my will, but thine be done".
He could not but recoil from the cross, for it was the forsaking of God. It was the essence of His perfection to recoil from it; and on the other hand it was the essence of His perfection as man to take it up, to drink the cup; and hence His glory shines under God's eye. There never has been such a shining of moral glory as there was in Gethsemane, and upon the cross when the Lord maintained, in infinite perfection, man's place under God's eye.
{451}
PRAYER
@Acts 4: 31
Prayer can obtain everything. It can open the windows of heaven, and shut the gates of hell; it can put restraint upon God, and detain an angel until he leaves a blessing. It can open the treasures of rain, and soften the iron ribs of rock till they melt into a flowing river. It can unclasp the girdles of the north; it can arrest the sun in its course and the winds upon their errand.
What may not the saints have for asking?
DIVINE WORDS
The Lord Jesus spoke from heaven to Paul in the language that is called Hebrew. There is a meaning in that; it was suited to his past; he should have His thoughts in that language out of heaven. The Spirit employs language to suit us, but selects His own words, and sets them in order, "That which was written was upright, even words of truth", @Ecclesiastes 12: 10.
Nothing can veil the beauty of the Scriptures -- they nourish the soul and regulate the mind. "The words of the wise are as goads". They are not smooth words that never touch the conscience. Where the Holy Spirit has His place, as He has in measure, thank God, there is a form of words that affects the conscience -- "and as nails fastened". They are words that are unalterable: you can rest in them; you can hang your thoughts on them; they convey the mind of God unalterably. They are "given from one shepherd". It was the Shepherd's heart that had devised them, in order that the saints might be held together in the unity of the Spirit. Woe be to him who would have it otherwise, who has not a shepherd's heart! The one Shepherd has the one flock before Him.
