{1}
"WHOM SHALL I SEND, AND WHO WILL GO FOR US?"
*Address at a meeting to commend brothers undertaking an extended service*,
@Acts 16:6 - 18.
I wish to dwell a little on what is commonly called missionary service, which signifies the idea of one being sent. All Paul's missionary journeys imply that he was divinely sent. Persons may be sent by men, but we are concerned with work growing out of a divine commission; as Scripture says, "how shall they preach unless they have been sent?" @Romans 10:15. Thus the inquiry, "Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?" @Isaiah 6:8.
Gifts, we read in Corinthians, are 'set' in the assembly. This, I apprehend, involves the right and means in God's hand of the control of His servants, which sometimes means restriction. God, in setting gifts in the assembly, has them under His hand, and no one who is with God in His service would wish it otherwise. To be set in the assembly is to be in that in which divine order is seen and where divine authority is recognised and asserted. This is an important matter, for the servant is given a commission with a definite end in view, and the saints, as we see in @Acts 13, have part in this. There must be an objective, both as to where the potential results of the mission are to be found, and the results themselves as fully secured. For instance, if Solomon is to have gold the mariners are not to go to sea whither they will (@2 Chronicles 8:17,18), there is no such thought as that. They had a knowledge of the sea, but were necessarily under royal control. All the expenses would be borne by the king, whose right was obvious. And so it is, dear brethren, in the service of God; the field is His and He knows where the results He
{2}
seeks are to be found. It is a matter of God's knowledge and direction. Going back into the history of the testimony we see that the government of God enters into everything. He has a perfect knowledge of the field in which He operates. He said of Corinth, "I have much people in this city". @Acts 18:10. The Lord bade the disciples to "cast their net on the right side of the ship" @John 21:6 -- that was where the fish were and the Lord knew it. Had they cast the net on the left side probably they would have caught no fish. So you see that the area for the desired result is known to the Lord; He knows where they are to be found. Divine movements in testimony in Paul's day were in a westerly direction; He seeks the assembly now; by and by He will seek for something else and will probably go east. What we see here is a movement westward and that by one who has prospered in the work and who is concerned about the assemblies already existing, that they should be confirmed; @Acts 15:41; @Acts 16:5. Thus the assemblies were established in the faith and increased in number every day. This is surely an important side of the ministry.
I wish now to point out that in this happy service under the blessing of God, Paul and those with him not only came under the authority of the Lord, but the guidance of the Spirit. He speaks twice here in a forbidding way and I think it implies that a gift moving in the dignity of his commission is given to understand that the Holy Spirit is here in that connection. As set in the assembly the servant may come under the criticism of his brethren. In the epistles we get the principle of the saints judging, and that is an important matter. A servant has to expect the faithful counsel and criticism of his brethren. It is his salvation to do so; if he is not amenable to his brethren, he is in independency. Here, according to @Ephesians 4, Paul is in the liberty of one sent by an ascended Christ as provision for the assembly
{3}
rather than one set in it. He is thus under the direct control of the Spirit. To respond to the Spirit requires a state of spiritual sensitiveness, so that one quickly *feels* His touch. Paul's motive was right and he was so sensitive that the Holy Spirit could denote that the regions he proposed to visit were not to be his sphere of labour at that time. He wrought in these places later and had great results, but for the moment the Spirit does not suffer him to go there. Still the Spirit does not tell the apostle and those with him where they are to go, but Paul has a vision.
"A vision appeared to Paul" (verse 9), and who was in the vision? A *man* of Macedonia. This man signifies the *potential* result. God is not occupying the apostle with man in the sense in which the Greeks represented man. The Greek world stood for human development. You have that man in @Romans 2 in the instructed Greek. *That* man is not asking a despised disciple of Jesus to help him, he is resourceful on his own account. Paul says there, "O man"! and the Athenians say of him, "What would this chatterer say?" they mocked Paul. It is not that man which is in view here -- it is potentially a man according to God. Why should we go to Jamaica, or anywhere else, unless we had that man before us? There is "one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus", @1 Timothy 2:5 and the testimony is to bring about other men after His order. That is what we should have in view in our service. Paul heard a man's voice. There is suggested one in the intelligent sense of responsibility, but in felt need. It was intended to impress the minister as to need in the west, and it did impress him, for he proceeds to Macedonia, "assuredly gathering", Luke says, "that the Lord had called us for to preach the gospel unto them". Paul, as a true servant, takes a "straight course" (verse 11). There were no second thoughts, no selfish motives. It is a question of "assuredly gathering" that the Lord is calling him,
{4}
and answering immediately and definitely to that call. Then Luke comes in for the first time. On this line we may look for *divinely given companionship*. So we have "they" in verse 6 and "we" in verse 10. What an acquisition Luke must have been! He is in the company now. May we not hope that our dear brethren going forth from us will have some sort of companionship to encourage them in their service -- companionship in the spirit of service? The Lord Himself valued it, and Paul also valued it. From the manner of the apostle's reference to him later it is evident that Luke was sympathetic, and sympathy is a great thing in the service of God. Luke was a "beloved physician". @Colossians 4:14. He was a dear man, being heartily with the apostle. How he would minister to Paul and Silas in their physical sufferings!
Then what follows is that the apostle and his companions, having arrived at Philippi, "were in that city abiding certain days". That is another thing. To arrive in a place is one thing, to *remain* there is another. They found something of God there. "And on the sabbath we went out of the city by a river side, where prayer was wont to be made; and we sat down, and spake unto the women which resorted thither". A fine position! They were only women, but they were *praying* women. "Where prayer was wont to be made". The servants of Christ identified themselves with what was of God there. It is a fine thing, as finding something of God in a place, to ally ourselves with it. We honour God as thus recognising His work, however small it may seem. Nothing is inaugurated as yet at Philippi. And now the enemy attacks through a woman. It is a sorrowful matter that the enemy has a foothold there. He does not limit his attack to Paul -- "followed Paul and *us*". Luke puts Paul forward as the special object of attack, but he and the others with Paul were not excluded, for the enemy attacks as
{5}
widely as possible. She says, "These men are the servants of the most high God". It was an attempt at flattery, and diversion from the present character of the testimony, which if accepted means ruin. Many a servant of God has been damaged, if not ruined, through this kind of opposition. The Scriptures put us on our guard against it.
I would dwell briefly on the manner of meeting this attack. Paul was "grieved" -- if we do not *feel* such things as before God, He may allow them to continue. Here the attack was for "many days, But Paul being *grieved* ...". 'What is there in me that this thing should continue?' he would perhaps say. It was most harassing, as from a female slave possessed with a spirit of Python. Why does God allow these dear men to be followed day by day? Do you not think Paul challenged his own heart as to this effort of Satan? I am sure he did. It is as we *feel* things that God comes in. All the consequences have to be accepted and anything upon which God may wish to put His finger owned. Paul's deep feelings about this matter brought in divine help. By the power of the Spirit he says to the demon, "I command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And he came out the same hour".
I trust these remarks will be comforting to our dear brethren as they set out on their service. Paul was confirmed in his course by the results at Philippi. The 'man' was there; the Philippian epistle denotes from the divine viewpoint the man whom God had in His mind. The mind that is in Christ Jesus was reflected in the Philippian saints, and Paul wrote to perfect them in Him. Paul met with most severe suffering and imprisonment at Philippi, but in the prison he found a man -- the jailer -- who, as believing on the Lord Jesus, showed by the treatment he accorded to His servants that he had drunk into His Spirit.
{6}
THE REMNANT
@Isaiah 51:18
I am thinking, dear brethren, of the remnant. It is a leading subject in this book. You will all remember how that in chapter 7 the prophet is directed to meet Ahaz with his son Shear-jashub at the aqueduct on the highway of the fuller's field. Shear-jashub signifies, "A remnant shall return". In a large measure this is the key to this book. So that, applying it to our own times, and it *does* apply, the question is, Am I of that remnant? The remnant may be very small and despised, but when Sennacherib attacked it under Hezekiah, the virgin daughter of Zion is alluded to as 'unconquered', @2 Kings 19:21, (see note). So that it is a great honour to be in that remnant, and no believer in Christ can afford to be apart from it. It is unconquerable -- corresponding in large measure to the first epistle of John, in which we are told that, "This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith" @1 John 5:4 -- that which true, devoted followers of Christ hold on the principle of faith.
In speaking of the remnant, I wish to bring in what is in this chapter prominently -- the idea of father and mother. You will observe that as following righteousness and seeking the Lord the saints are reminded of the 'rock' whence they were hewn, and of the 'pit' whence they were digged. The reference to hewing and digging is remarkable, the one not involving anything less honourable than the other, for they both allude to the great parents of the household of faith. I am not alluding to the fatherhood of God, but the fatherly element that is so essential to the promotion of faith proper to the remnant; for, as I hope to show, today it comes in for divine recognition as of the assembly, that which has the greatest place
{7}
in relation to Christ. Where the assembly is left out in ministry, a great void is apparent and a great lack of power, too, for in the ministry of the Holy Spirit Christ in relation to the assembly has a great place. It is said of Him, "gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". @Ephesians 1:22,23.
To make the subject simple, the idea of father in Abraham may be connected with Corinthians; the idea of the mother belongs to Galatians. We shall not be in the remnant nor of it, according to God, save as we understand these epistles and they affect us. One leading idea of the father in the family is authority. Authority, of course, is vested in Christ in heaven, but then He has revested it down here. We are told that He gave His servants the authority; @Mark 13:34. It works out in the way of authority in a family sense. Authority in a father is where it is least irksome; and nowhere is authority less irksome, normally, than in the assembly. It is not harsh, it is not arbitrary. What it is in Christ, it is in the assembly. It is there so much that it says that if a refractory one does not hear the assembly he is to be regarded as a heathen man and a publican; @Matthew 18:17.
Refusing to listen to two brothers is serious, but refusing to hear the assembly is most grave. The assembly neither teaches nor preaches, but authority is exercised there. Teaching and preaching are by persons who have gift, but authority is vested in the assembly. So that one refusing to hear the assembly, or indeed those who are walking humbly in the light of it, is regarded as outside the pale, practically, of christian fellowship. The apostle Paul, in writing to the Corinthians, asserts the paternal principle as to himself. He says, "What will ye? Shall I come unto you with a rod?" @1 Corinthians 4:21. That is a father's prerogative. And in verse 15 he says, "For though ye have ten thousand instructors, in Christ ... I have begotten you through the gospel".
@1 Corinthians 4:15.
{8}
He was their spiritual father.
You will understand I am not referring to the fatherhood of God. It is a question of fatherly authority down here in the saints. Who had a better right with the Corinthians to take that attitude than the one through whom they had been converted, through whom they had been begotten in Christ Jesus through the gospel? "As my beloved sons", he says, "I admonish you". @1 Corinthians 4:14. No one can fully take that ground today, but; it will not do to assume that there is no such authority. I am afraid some young people do. The drift of things, even in a natural way, is to set aside authority altogether.
Then in the second epistle he intimates confidence in them. His first letter of fatherly authority had been effective. It had brought about mourning, etc., on account of the wickedness that had existed among them. And he says, "for an answering recompense, (I speak as to children,) let *your* heart also expand itself". @2 Corinthians 6:13. Do you ever think of that, "Let your heart also expand itself", as answering to the injunction of a father? As I said, no one could take that place exactly today, but let no one assume that there is no such thing as the fatherly element among the people of God. John says, "I write unto you, fathers". @1 John 2:13. They would, because of their experience, have moral authority and would use it against evil among the people of God. God will not tolerate evil. It pains Him more in the christian than in any; it is more sorrowful there than elsewhere, and He "is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints". @Psalm 89:7.
So that we do well to take account of those in whom God has vested authority. It is not a question of officialism but of moral power and fatherly affection in those who, by experience, have come to love the saints, and correspondingly to hate what is of the world in them. "What fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness? And what concord hath Christ with Belial?" @2 Corinthians 6:14,15.
{9}
So that whilst there is the tenderest affection of a father in those marked by divine authority, there is the most stern refusal of the spirit of the world in the saints.
The world is an abhorrent thing in the saints, and God has vested authority in certain here to rebuke it. Abraham represents the thought of father. His name signifies 'father of a multitude'. Names in Scripture mean something, the idea of father of the household of faith was represented in this man. Think of belonging to that household! Two belonging to it outwardly had to be cast out of it. A solemn thing! Hagar and Ishmael were cast out.
That brings me to Sarah, by whom the order to cast out Hagar and her son was given. That is Galatians. The honour given to her in the New Testament is remarkable, and I speak for a moment to sisters, young and old. The apostle Peter refers to holy women of old who hoped in God. I do not suppose that faith shines anywhere so beautifully as it does in a woman. Sarah is the first woman who is said to have faith. She was in the household of faith, she enjoyed being in it surely, it radiated in the household. You can understand how the great father, though he was childless for a long time, as soon as he had a family, would have the fatherly faith radiate from him in that household. But Sarah had faith all her own. I speak of this that the wives, the sisters, may cultivate faith of their own, so as to be true daughters of Sarah. There were holy women of old, who hoped in God, and among these Sarah is specially mentioned. How pleasing it must have been to God, that there was a link between Sarah's own soul and Himself! It would coalesce with Abraham's faith, of course, but she had her own faith in God. She is the one example given of the holy women of old.
{10}
There can be no mother according to God without faith in Him. Sarah is the true mother, and that comes to light in the confused state of things in the household. One does grieve for persons in a divided household. It is most difficult and testing, even if one wishes to be right in it. In the same house was Sarah with Isaac, the child of promise, and Ishmael, a boy of thirteen or fourteen years, and his mother, the bondmaid, and Abraham with his natural affections for Ishmael. The scene was darkened by nature in Abraham intruding itself where faith should have shone. We are reminded that the most spiritual of us may darken his house by allowing the natural where there should be the spiritual. But in these circumstances in Abraham's house the light radiated, not through Abraham, but through Sarah, and so her words to her husband on that memorable occasion are regarded in Galatians as *Scripture*. How beautiful that is. God honoured her in that way. "Cast out this bondwoman and her son". @Genesis 21:10. These are the words of Sarah and they grieved Abraham; I do not like to dwell on what is discreditable to Abraham, but this is noted in Scripture. Were it not for Sarah the household would have continued in disunity and darkness. Think of Ishmael mocking the little babe of promise there! In type there was persecution of Christ. But Sarah expresses the mind of God and she says to Abraham, 'Let it not grieve thee;' How tender God is with the great patriarch! He would be so with anyone of us who may be darkening his household. 'Hearken to all that Sarah thy wife hath said'.
That is what comes out in Galatians. The apostle Paul, changing the relationship, presents himself as a mother. The Galatians were slipping away from christianity, and he presents the maternal element. It is that love and care in those who would rescue saints from the legality which marks the so-called
{11}
christian religions of this world -- what the apostle calls "beggarly elements". @Galatians 4:9. He triumphantly says, "We are ... children of the free woman". @Galatians 4:31. Hagar answers to "Jerusalem which now is". @Galatians 4:25. Today this would include the accepted religions of this world around us. I would urge upon you, if there is one here who is in bondage to those systems, to take up your heritage -- Jerusalem which is *above*. Thus you will be lifted out of the beggarly elements of human organisation and set up in what is above -- what is morally elevated.
Here the saints are addressed as seeking righteousness. That is the first feature. You may not have it yet, but you are pursuing it, as we are enjoined to do in @2 Timothy 2:22. Being "clothed with righteousness" @Psalm 132:9 means that I am a priest. And in conflict there can be no possibility of victory without "the breastplate of righteousness". @Ephesians 6:14. Well, that is the first thing, and then after Abraham and Sarah the great things that God has in view for us are brought in. Look at verse 3, "Jehovah shall comfort Zion, he shall comfort all her waste places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of Jehovah: gladness and joy shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of song". @Isaiah 51:3. Look at those promises, dear brethren!
The next thing is, "Listen unto me, my people". @Isaiah 51:4. God has something to say to us as in this relation. It is not like the book of Esther, where He hides His face. Here He is addressing the saints as *His people* and as *His nation*. That is because the traits of the remnant have come into evidence, answering to Christ. The Lord says to Philadelphia, "I also will keep thee ..." @Revelation 3:10. That is very beautiful and comforting. It is the Lord's recognition of the remnant, not simply as a remnant, but as the assembly. "I will make them to know that *I* have loved thee", @Revelation 3:9. And then He says here that He will give us a law (verse 4). The vast majority of christians are in organisations in
{12}
which the law of God's house has no place. It is man's law, Here it speaks of *His* law. Of old the law was called a heritage, and so it is today. Those who love the Lord Jesus keep His commandments. They have discarded all others, which are largely the traditions of men. Here God says, "a law shall proceed from me, and I will establish my judgment for a light of the peoples". @Isaiah 51:4. Thus the people of God are furnished with regulation and light in their position in testimony in this dark world.
In verse 7 Jehovah says, "Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness". @Isaiah 51:7. Now you have another thing -- the *knowledge* of righteousness. There are those that follow it and seek the Lord, and they are owned as a people and a nation; and then there are those who *know* it. There is thus an advance. God is watching the souls of His people and knows what progress they are making, and every bit of progress they make He owns; thus He says here, "Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness". @Isaiah 51:7. Do I know righteousness? That is a challenge! Practical righteousness is perhaps the scarcest thing in the world. It is valued of God. Of those who know righteousness, God says, "the people in whose heart is my law". There is further progress owned here. They have been following righteousness, now they know it; also God's law is in their hearts.
These things are very practical, dear brethren. Of the Lord it was said, "thy law is within my heart". @Psalm 40:8. He "loved righteousness and hast hated lawlessness". @Hebrews 1:9. What is said of the saints here corresponds with Him. That is what God seeks. As I said, righteousness is scarce, but there has never been a period in this world in which righteousness did not exist. Like the gold referred to in connection with the river which flowed from Eden, it is "good". It is said, "the gold of that land is good". @Genesis 2:12. So is righteousness. Beginning with Abel it came down in the line of faith. As to
{13}
moral things, righteousness is the standard of God. He speaks here of *His* righteousness. He says, "My righteousness is near". @Isaiah 51:5. It is an interesting thing to notice the difference between righteousness itself and God's righteousness; the latter is like gold of the most precious kind. This afternoon we read about a certain amount of gold that David provided for the house, out of his *affliction*. But he also says that because of his *affection* for the house he provided of the gold of Ophir -- evidently that was gold of the very best kind. God would impress the great value of righteousness upon us.
In verse 7 those that know righteousness, in whose heart is God's law, are urged, "fear not the reproach of men, and be not afraid of their revilings". @Isaiah 51:7. Now you see, dear brethren, the order of the progress. Knowing righteousness and as maintaining the commandments of Christ we are under *reproach*. You will not find a company of God's people who are governed by the commandments of Christ who are popular in their locality. They do not fit in at all. People will go a long way with you on the *family* line (and we should be prepared to go on the family line with them), but as we see with Jacob and Laban, as soon as Laban showed that he was under obligation, Jacob brought in the thought of Rachel, in type the assembly. As we serve believers near us as our *relatives* and they begin to recognise obligation, we may safely bring up the subject of the assembly, involving fellowship. Alas, this often means a break, for if they are not ready for the path of separation they turn away from you!
Those of us who seek to serve the Lord and the saints know the heart-burnings that follow upon bringing in the assembly. People cease to come to the meetings. But they are thus forfeiting what involves their greatest blessing and privilege. The assembly is dear to the heart of Christ, and those who
{14}
are set for it come under His eye as of it and so draw out His deepest love and care. To them He says, "my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished". @Isaiah 51:8. Thus, dear brethren, we all need to maintain this by "the law of the house" @Ezekiel 43:12, that is, the commandments of Christ as governing us in our fellowship.
How is it with all here? Some of us enjoy ministry, and the Lord is pleased to give it; but it has to be followed up, or it may be just something that pleases for the moment and is soon forgotten. You may say, 'The path is too narrow'. But Christ is in it. He spoke of it Himself as narrow: "narrow is the way". @Matthew 7:14. Generally, "the way" stands for fellowship in Scripture. "They spake evil of that way". @Acts 19:9. What way was that? The broad way? No! The world does not speak evil of *its* own way. What was the way that was evil spoken of? The narrow way -- that is the one that is hated and traduced everywhere; but it is the way of righteousness, the way of God. Fellowship is in it, the love of the saints is in it; it is a holy sphere for your affections in which to let themselves loose. Do not despise it. Go in for it.
So verse 7 says, "fear not the reproach of men, and be not afraid of their revilings". @Isaiah 51:7. Let us all face these things; they are *the* issue for the moment. One thinks with sorrow of the thousands of God's people who are not in the fellowship of God's Son and of His death. It is evil spoken of, as of old, but it was the way of God. Apollos came into it. Priscilla and Aquila "expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly". @Acts 18:26. Many of the saints need that service; indeed, we may be in the way, but understand it very poorly, and so need to be taught it more perfectly. If anyone is not in it, may he come into it at once! It is a way that is evil spoken of, but it is "the way of God".
{15}
HOW GOD APPROACHES MEN IN HIGH PLACES
@Acts 18:14 - 17; @Acts 24:24 - 27; @Acts 26:24 - 32; @Acts 13:12
I thought it well to select these scriptures for this service for various reasons, as I hope to show as I proceed, but primarily that we may see how God approaches men in high places, for He is "no respecter of persons", @Acts 10:34. Christ having become Man is the "mediator between God and *men*" @1 Timothy 2:5, whether these be kings or governors, or whether they be paupers, and these scriptures speak of five men occupying leading positions in the world, one of them occupying a throne, being a royal personage; but God in spite of the distinction or distinctions caused His testimony in Christ to be presented to them, and out of the five He got one -- a fair percentage as gospel results go. If I could hope to get one out of every five unconverted persons here tonight, I should feel that the meeting was worth while and so would heaven feel that, for, as you all know, "there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth" @Luke 15:10 -- how much more if it be one out of every five. I am not assuming that there are five unconverted people here tonight -- it may be there are more; I hope not, for I have no difficulty at all in preaching to converted people, in fact I find more liberty in preaching to them than to unconverted people. So that I hope from the bottom of my heart that there is not an unconverted person in this audience, I hope you are all saved. Did I know you were all saved I should not be in the least hampered in speaking to you, but the rather helped; but if there be five here and I get one, as I said, I shall be more than thankful. But these are five distinguished men, the leading men of the world, as if it were King George or the President of France, the
{16}
President of the United States, the Governor-General of Canada, and so on; were there five such persons here tonight, if five such persons attended a gospel meeting together, I suppose it would be heralded abroad in the newspapers tomorrow; heaven would not herald it abroad specially, for there is no respect of persons there -- it is a question of their being men. But still heaven would be pleased were they to hear, to attend, to listen to the gospel, and if one of them were saved, what joy; what a brand plucked from the burning is a royal personage converted, or a great person of this world of any kind. And yet we find one deputy actually converted, indeed, as far as we can see, he was Paul's first convert after he was commissioned, after he was sent out on his first great missionary journey.
Gallio is the first one who is in my mind, and he represents just myself or yourself in his circumstances, for, generally speaking, a man is just what his circumstances make him. We are all in general of the same kind, "I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me", @Psalm 51:5 only our circumstances alter us, make us different externally. Gallio was a distinguished man, a governor, a proconsul of Rome in the province of Achaia, and Paul is brought before him. These things are not recorded as mere historical matters, they are put down here as material for gospel preachers; the Holy Spirit has narrated these things so that they could be used in after years in the service of the gospel. Therefore Gallio is just one of us in his circumstances. That is to say, he represents some young man here tonight who has no interest really in what I am saying, he is here maybe because he is obliging somebody. Gallio was there because he was the governor, the deputy -- that was all, he had no interest beyond that. And it may be you are here tonight, some young man, without any interest save to oblige somebody, to
{17}
please somebody. It may be you will be glad when the time comes for me to stop speaking. Now that is Gallio -- a heartless kind of a man, and yet not a man full of hate or feeling against anybody. You may pride yourself in that, that you do not hate people, nor indeed that you oppose the servants of God or the preaching; you have nothing special in regard of that. There is not an atom of opposition to what I am saying in you, that is what you would say of yourself. You are just indifferent. But what is to be noticed in this man's case is that when Paul was about to open his mouth Gallio intervened. Not that he meant to shut up Paul, I do not think he did, but he did it. It is results we have to take account of and that God takes account of. He prevented Paul from speaking; he shut the door, as it were, against the voice of heaven, not meaningly -- it is not so put; it is just to bring out what a careless person is and what the result may be of his carelessness, not his wickedness or his hatred of God, but just his carelessness -- he shut up Paul's mouth. As far as the narrative goes, he does not say one word at all. He turns against the Jews. 'Well', you say, 'there is something in that. Apparently he thought less of the Jews than he did of Paul, apparently he had a certain resentment of them'. Well, there is no virtue in resentment of the Jews. The Jews are a peculiar people; although they have rejected and crucified Christ, they have a mark put on them like Cain by God, and anyone who interferes with them will come under divine retribution. Gallio therefore did not incur any favour from heaven in his resentment of the Jews. You may say, 'He was more favourable to the christians' -- but that is no virtue. You might have a certain respect for me, because I am speaking of the Lord Jesus here -- well, of course, I am thankful -- but you go out of that door and that is the last of it; you would not turn a finger to help me. There is not a single bit of
{18}
evidence that Gallio did a thing to help Paul, it was just that he was careless and being careless, he intervened when Paul was about to speak, and, as far as we know, he never heard Paul. And so it may be that you will leave this room tonight, and you will never hear again the voice of the Spirit of God speaking to your soul about Christ. You may go outside the door and light your cigarette and walk off, and that is the end of this matter. "Gallio cared for none of those things". Here is a poor man beaten in his presence; he is an utterly unfeeling man; if he had any feeling in him he would resent a man being taken and beaten before his judgment-seat, but he did not care -- he "cared for none of those things". That is the point, you see -- he did not care. Whether it was Paul speaking or a man being beaten because of the truth, he "troubled himself about none of these things". Not that he did not care for other things, we are not told what he did care for; were we to know the man much could be said of what he did care for. You may be sure he had his likes and his appetites; we may be sure he was not behind his day in worldliness and sinfulness, but he cared for none of *these* things -- that is what the Holy Spirit tells us.
Well now, passing on to the next governor, Felix, he is a different sort of man, he had some interest. I am going over ground familiar to most of you no doubt, but some points may not be familiar, and these are the points the Holy Spirit may use. Felix was a man of some interest, but he was an unconverted man of double motives. You are not here it may be to please somebody, you have a motive in being here different from that, and you would fain make belief that you are interested. It may be there is some pecuniary matter in it, it may be that you wish to incur some favour from some person who has invited you, and people begin to say, 'I have not seen such interest before with this young man'. Had we known
{19}
Felix before and had we heard him send for Paul, we might have been apt to say, 'Felix is converted'. A great man sending for a prisoner, surely there is something behind this! But is there? "The heart is deceitful above all things, and *desperately wicked*", @Jeremiah 17:9. That one should come to a gospel meeting with ulterior motives, to gain some pecuniary advantage! I have known that. Heaven resents that, there is no joy in heaven over that move. But in spite of this, the apostle Paul was faithful and he reasoned with Felix "of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come". Doubtless the apostle with his usual power of perception knew his man. The Holy Spirit here tonight knows just where you are, and He may use what I am saying to pierce your armour so that you do not get off, you do not go out of that door just as you came in. Oh, may God grant it! Even if you are not saved I would earnestly hope you will be made to tremble. Felix trembled, but then that was all. He did not get off free. The Holy Spirit tonight would seize the opportunity to pierce your armour and make you tremble even if you are not converted, Felix trembled, we are told, but then the Spirit of God does not leave him there. He sent for Paul the oftener, we are told, In spite of the faithfulness of the apostle, the servant of Christ, this man with a steel conscience sent for him, and sent for him, You say, 'Surely something is going on with Felix! Whatever is Felix communing with this prisoner Paul, this christian, this ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes, for? Is Felix exercised about his soul?' Not a bit: O, the deceitfulness of the heart! What was he after? He was after a bribe, as I was saying before. "The love of money" the Spirit of God tells us, "is the root of all evil", @1 Timothy 6:10. A remarkable statement! The love of money -- as I said before, someone may be here tonight with that in view, with some pecuniary gain in view. Oh, heaven hates it!
{20}
And with all, as you will notice here, the apparent interest of Felix, he does nothing for Paul, he left him bound. That is the way you will treat us. Coming to these meetings Sunday after Sunday with some ulterior motive, as I said, but you will leave us bound, so to speak, you will not do anything for us, you will not raise a finger. It is not that you hate the servants of Christ, but you will not raise a finger to help them. That marks a selfish person, a covetous person -- that is what Felix was -- not only covetous, but unlawfully covetous, he would get a bribe from the servants of Christ. The servants of Christ do not give bribes, you will be disappointed if you are looking for anything like that from those who are serving the Lord Jesus, they will not give that, you may as well give up at once and commune with them no more on those lines. And as soon as you discover that, you will leave us bound, you will not help us -- nor are we looking for help from you. Felix might have helped the people of God, but he would not. The Spirit of God paints the picture for us: it is a man in a certain position exposed by the testimony of God.
Now Festus is another distinguished man. He is a man taking a second place. Agrippa was the king and Festus is the official governor, but he is a man who can take a second place. A good sort of man, he makes a very good politician, he can pander to other people, and even show that he is more or less fair, a man who would pride himself on not looking for a bribe, he is fair. He said, I have no charge to lay against this man. I do not know what to do, I want to be right. How many there are like that, and men of that kind, you know, are popular men. I suppose one of the most deceptive positions is the desire for popularity, to be a good mixer, as they say -- many are like that. No politician can be successful if he has not the ability to take a second place. He has the desire for the first place, if possible, everyone has
{21}
that in mind, but a politician is a time-server and he takes a second place. So he invites Agrippa, and there is a woman, Bernice, sister of the king, she is there with pomp -- it is a show day. Oh, how we do like show! It may be you are making a show here tonight, a show of religion, a show of interest in religious things. Well, that is not of any interest to heaven either. But the servant of God is there, and we have the most wonderful address, one of the finest addresses in Scripture is this one before this august company sitting there in their royal robes and pomp. And here is a poor man -- as far as outward appearances went -- a chain on his hand, he is a prisoner, and he is preaching. Would to God I could preach like Paul! He is not a bit dismayed by the character of his audience, he unfolds the truth in wonderful terms, it was in the power of the Spirit of God. Agrippa and Festus never heard such speaking, I am sure. Not in the Forum of Rome could such speaking be heard; there can be no speaking like that which is energised by the Spirit of God, and such was Paul's address in the ears of these sinners, and Festus would say something, and in saying something he disclosed how utterly hardened his heart was. So, it may be you are sitting here tonight listening to what I am saying, and your heart is adamant. Were you to say anything in the way of comment or criticism, you would expose the state of your heart. He says, "Thou art mad, Paul; much learning turns thee to madness". He could hardly have said anything more out of place. Think of the hardness of his heart, unaffected by the wonderful address in the power of the Spirit of God by the great apostle Paul. And Paul said, "I am not mad, most excellent Festus". How beautifully he answers, how seemly his answer is as is befitting in the vessels that serve Christ, not to provoke any irritation, the gospel is not for that, the gospel is that you might be saved. "I am not mad, most excellent Festus, but utter words of truth and soberness".
{22}
That man has finished. Will he ever hear the gospel? I do not think so.
The apostle now turns to Agrippa. Will he get Agrippa? You see, I am speaking of different characteristics in men. Agrippa is a royal personage, a man with some knowledge of the gospel and not indifferent. He did not say Paul was mad. Another kind of man is listening to me here tonight from Festus. Maybe you have read the Bible from the outset and heard the gospel, and heard of conversions, heard of the power of God working here and there, and you are not indifferent exactly. "King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest". How near the Spirit of God is coming to that man and what credit He is giving him. So it is the Holy Spirit would accredit you with every bit of knowledge you have of God and of Christ, so that you might be saved; He will give you all the credit possible. If you have been listening to things about Christ and of the work of God and reading the Bible, the Holy Spirit will give you credit. "I know that thou believest". What are you going to say in your inmost heart, friend, to this? Are you going to say what Agrippa said, "Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian". Is this the first time he had used the word 'christian'? I do not think so, that word had been in vogue for some time, and Agrippa had used it before. It is a beautiful term, an appellation referring to a certain class of people, no longer the sect of the Nazarenes, but dignified by the name of christian, a noble name corresponding with Christ, a derivative of Christ, involving a certain distinction practically. Persons who are anointed, who have part in the anointing, who have part in heavenly dignity here on earth, a dignity far excelling anything that Agrippa ever knew as to the significance of it. And so he says, "Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian".
{23}
If some emissary from Rome had come to offer him imperial dignity, what would he have said? Almost thou persuadest me to be emperor? Is that what he would have said? No, he would have grasped at the dignity at once. But here is a dignity far superior to any dignity ever known in this world, the name of christian. It may be there are those here who are looking for earthly honours: there is no greater honour than that you should belong to the noble band of christians. We shall have other titles in heaven -- indeed we have them here, too -- but this name of 'christian' is a glorious title. But it is one that incurs suffering, and Agrippa was not ready to suffer for Christ. "If any man suffer as a Christian", says Peter, "let him glorify God on this behalf", @1 Peter 4:16. Let him glory in the name -- as we christians do. And so when Agrippa says, "Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian", he is implying that he is not going to be persuaded. Is that your decision? Is that your resolve? You may say, 'That man influences me, but I am resolved never to be a christian'. I do not believe Agrippa ever became one, "Almost thou persuadest me ..." -- but he lost the dignity. Are you prepared to lose it, and all that goes with it? It is not only the dignity, but all that goes with it, it is rich with the accompaniments. The accompaniments of a christian are great and glorious. Are you prepared to forfeit them here tonight? The Spirit of God is here as really as He was in that court at Caesarea, and He speaks to you as He spoke to Agrippa. What are you saying in your inmost heart? Are you resolved to refuse ever to be a christian? God forbid. You will notice that at this point Paul said, "I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds". I suppose words were never uttered with more feeling in the testimony of Christ than those words. Out of
{24}
the depths of a feeling heart, the great apostle, the minister of Christ, spoke of what *he was*, the enjoyment that he had in the energy and power of the Spirit of God operating in him. He would that Agrippa should share it. And so here tonight those of us who are christians with myself can say with all truthfulness, that we would to God you were like us; poor though we are, we are infinitely better off than you, unconverted one here tonight: we would to God you had what we have, that you enjoyed what we enjoy, and we offer it to you in the Lord's name. It is for you, as it has been for us. Will you not share it with us? Did Agrippa? No. He stood up and those who were with him (all these things are mentioned) and they conferred; they conferred without Paul, they conferred without God, they conferred without the Spirit of God: what is the good of conferring like that? No good at all; the result was that Paul was left, bound. 'Oh, but', you say, 'They say, "This man might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed unto Caesar"'. But is there not a way to set him at liberty? If Agrippa were touched divinely Agrippa would have found a way to release Paul. Well, you see, that is the position of persons who resist the gospel, they are indifferent to Christ and His interests, and the time is coming when He will be indifferent to them and their interests, when He will say, "I never knew you: depart, from me". @Matthew 7:23.
Well now, the fifth man is Paul's first convert, in this great missionary enterprise. I reserved him for the last, although he comes first in the narrative. They went from Antioch and took boat across to Cyprus, and it is noticeable they are not told where to go, as far as the record shows, they were sent forth by the Spirit, but they went to Cyprus and went the whole length of the island, and the first person they met is a man called Bar-jesus, the son of Jesus. A remarkable thing that they should meet a man
{25}
like that: surely a son of Jesus would be an interesting subject for the gospel -- but is he? The most damnatory statement you can get in the whole history of the gospel is applied to this man by Paul -- son of the devil, enemy of all righteousness: he is made blind for a season. But look, beloved friends; this man, Bar-jesus, is with the deputy, he is with the man whom God has singled out to be saved. There is somebody here tonight it may be whom heaven has singled out to be saved, and there is some son of the devil interfering with him. I am not charging anybody with being a son of the devil, but I mean there is someone with whom you keep company who has influence with you, who is keeping you away from the faith. Now, you are entirely different from anyone else, you are singled out by the eye of heaven for salvation, for there are the elect, and he is doing all he can to divert this man from the faith. Now look round among your acquaintances and see if there is anyone with whom you have to do who is interfering with your soul's salvation, who is hindering you. This matter is most important, for you are being hindered, and it is by some companionship. He was with the deputy; it does not say he had any official place, he was just with him, and he was darkening his soul. Oh, I would warn you against such companionship, the devil uses it to darken your soul and keep you away from Christ, and the apostle Paul, full of the Holy Spirit, meets this man and causes him to be blind for a season. It is the power of God against evil. Thank God for that! Here is concentrated power of evil in one man, Bar-jesus -- his name by interpretation means a sorcerer. You have to interpret names to see what they really mean, he is a son of the devil and he is set for the destruction of your soul -- keep away from him. Here the servant of God relieved the deputy from that influence, and the result was he was saved. As far as we know, he
{26}
was the only one saved in the island, though I quite believe there were others; but there he is, the governor is a converted man. Is that not like God! What an advantage for the island for the governor to be a converted man. We may assume he is really converted and that he is a christian and in fellowship, and there is no evidence that anybody was left to look after him. Think of the eunuch going down to Ethiopia, a converted man, with the Holy Spirit in him, rejoicing, with the Bible in his hand. That is like God, that is how God worked at the beginning, He saved the great men of this world, and what a thing for Cyprus that the deputy was converted. It was the power of God. And what does it say about him? He was amazed, we are told, when he saw what had happened. The man was stricken blind, and the deputy was amazed, we are told, "at the teaching of the Lord". Now this is the kind of convert that I believe corresponds with much that is going on today. Persons need teaching; the greatest need in christendom, I believe today is teaching. This man was said to be an intelligent man; it is not merely that he had a good intellect and a good education, but undoubtedly the work of God was there in the man, he was intelligent, and the point that struck him was the teaching. I do not know whether there are those here tonight who just come to the gospel meeting -- I thank God if you do -- but I would urge you to come to the Bible reading. If there is a work of God going on in your soul, you will be struck with the teaching; it is different from what is current abroad in denominational circles -- it is the teaching of the Lord. That is the kind of teaching to get. Many are like this deputy, they are exposed to bad companionships, evil associations, but they need teaching, and this man got the teaching. No doubt much more was said by Paul and Barnabas than is recorded, but he was amazed at the teaching. I
{27}
would urge christians here -- I do not know what associations you may be in, but I would urge you to consider the teaching, what teaching you are under. This man was "amazed at the teaching of the Lord", not the catechism or the creed of christians, but the teaching of the Lord, it is a question of the authority of the Lord asserted in the teaching, and the deputy was saved. May God grant that some of our brethren who may be here tonight who are in evil associations or evil companionships, may be amazed at the teaching, may recognise the authority of Scripture, and may believe. The next verse tells us that Paul had a company -- "Paul and his company" -- it is a remarkable thing, it is brought in early. Would you not like to belong to that company? It is not a sect, you know. If anyone there were to say, "I am of Paul", @1 Corinthians 3:4. Paul would say, 'Do not say that, that is sectarian', yet the Holy Spirit says, "Paul and his company": that is to say, it is another companionship. Would you not like companionship with Paul? -- that is the one I have. It is companionship with Christ, of course, but think of the companionship of Paul, and contrast that with Bar-jesus. Do you not want to make a change? I think you should. It is "Paul and his company"; that is, the Holy Spirit would suggest to us the wonderful companionship there is for christians, the circle where Paul's teaching is, the teaching of the Lord through Paul.
{28}
DIVINE QUALITY IN THE SAINTS
@Acts 2:41 - 47
My desire in proposing this scripture was that we might consider the thought of quality in the things of God. Verse 41 says, "there were added in that day about three thousand souls". But God's people have to prove their genuineness, and so in what follows we find that "they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles". @Acts 1:15 says, "the crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty"; these, however, were the result of the Lord's own work, and the occurrences in the interval between His going up from them, and the coming of the Holy Spirit, proved their suitability to receive Him. Chapter 2 records that the Holy Spirit descended upon them, and as a result of the preaching three thousand souls were added. It does not say by whom or to what they were added, as at the end of the chapter, evidently intimating that they had not yet proved the reality of their profession.
In @Luke 14 we read that the house is to be filled; but it will be filled with what is suitable to it; all that is extraneous will be excluded; thus in chapter 15 the prodigal is brought in as a *Son;* he is set up in entire suitability to the house. There is nothing said as to repentance in chapter 14, but the prodigal (chapter 15) repented in the far country, and he rose up and went "to his own father", @Luke 15:20 and "while he was yet a long way off, his father saw him, and was moved with compassion, and ran, and fell upon his neck, and covered him with kisses", @Luke 15:20 showing that the prodigal was delightful to him. Every step in the return journey of a repenting sinner is pleasurable to heaven. Some think of repentance as one act, but here we read, "there shall be joy in heaven for one repenting sinner" @Luke 15:7
{29}
-- repentance is evidently an element in his mind from beginning to end. Besides the father's loving reception, the prodigal gets the best robe, and the ring, and the shoes; he is made in *every way* suitable to God's house. As we draw near to the end, the Lord is aiming at *quality* in His saints, and we are challenged as to it. Paul, in writing to the Philippian assembly, indicates that it was marked by quality. He does not take the ground of an apostle, but coupling Timothy with himself, writes as "bondmen of Jesus Christ". @Philippians 1:1. Their practical state is evidently noted in this; for where there is spirituality and consequent humility, there is no need to emphasise authority. So he prays that their "love may abound yet more and more", @Philippians 1:9 and that they may "judge of and approve the things that are *more excellent"*, @Philippians 1:10 in view of Christ's day. Those who were convicted by Peter's word as he stood up with the eleven were prepared to be persecuted by their own people, for as baptised "in the name of Jesus Christ", @Acts 2:38 they would be hated. It was no private matter, but a public confession of faith in Him whom the Jews slew; and they were "added". Then verses 42 - 47 give us the Spirit's description of them; it is in a way a continuation of the teaching of @Luke 15. Their repentance was proving itself in their continuance; "they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles". The apostles were upstarts in the eyes of Jerusalem, for they were Galilaeans with no social or religious status at all; but the three thousand persevered in *their* teaching and fellowship. Then there was the beautiful spirit of subjection and love among the brethren; they "had all things common" and were all together. This spirit was seen in perfection in the Lord, and it is specially attractive to Him in His own. Subjection will be seen in Him eternally, for we read "then the Son also himself shall be placed in subjection, ... that God may be all in all". @1 Corinthians 15:28.
{30}
A subject spirit is delightful to heaven, for it reflects Christ. In @Philippians 2 the apostle says, "let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus". @Philippians 2:5. The apostles denote the authority of Christ; they were "sent" by Him; so these believers continued in their teaching and fellowship, and in the breaking of bread and in prayers; these features expressed their subjection to Christ, affection for Him, and dependence on Him. We have to ask ourselves, where are we in regard to them?
In @Acts 8, though there were great results from the preaching of Philip in Samaria, the believers did not get the Holy Spirit until Peter and John went down to them and laid their hands upon them. In this way the authority of the apostles would be impressed on them. We cannot make the gift of the Spirit automatic on our believing on Christ. We have to leave it with God; it is *His* gift, and as we desire it and ask for it, He is pleased to give it to us. The Holy Spirit coming in makes an impression. There are evidences of His indwelling the believer. I would like to hear such a believer pray; for there are certain indications of the presence of the Spirit in a man's prayer. Now with some who might profess to have the Spirit because they believe on Christ there may not be those indications; but if not, why not? There is nothing said in @John 3 about *receiving* the Holy Spirit. New birth is spoken of, and then the Lord says, "that which is born of the Spirit is spirit" @John 3:6 -- that is to show the quality, the character of what is born, it is "spirit". The Lord says in @John 3 that unless you are born anew you will not even see, much less enter into, the kingdom of God. Many think that when one believes the gospel he immediately receives the Holy Spirit, but I see no ground for such a thought in Scripture. The apostle comes to Ephesus (@Acts 19), and finds certain believers there,
{31}
and says to them, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" @Acts 19:2. They were genuine believers, but they had not even heard that the Holy Spirit was come. Then they are "baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus", @Acts 19:5 and it is only when Paul lays his hands upon them that they receive the Holy Spirit. So that when the apostle says, "in whom also, having believed, ye have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise" @Ephesians 1:13, he is not speaking of anything automatic, but of something subsequent to a state of faith. God is the giver of the Holy Spirit. It is the question of a certain state of soul; He gives the Holy Spirit to those that ask Him (@Luke 11:13); He gives Him also to those that obey Him; @Acts 5:32. We must not deny Him His pleasure in giving the Spirit, nor seek to make it an automatic thing apart from our state as suited to receive Him. It is the dispensation of God's pleasure, and He gives the Spirit as He pleases. It would help us if we studied the two chapters to which we have referred; @Acts 8 and @Acts 19. In the first we are told that the Spirit did not come upon the Samaritans until Peter and John laid their hands upon them; and in chapter 19 it needed baptism to the name of the Lord Jesus, and the laying on of Paul's hands before He was received.
There are evidences when any one has received the Spirit. As was said, one's manner of praying would give an indication; then in @1 Corinthians 12:3 it is stated that no one can call Jesus Lord except by the Holy Spirit; then in @Romans 8 we see that "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God" @Romans 8:14; and in @Galatians 5:22 there are nine fruits of the Spirit enumerated -- distinctive fruits not to be mistaken. We take too much for granted, but at the first it was a *heart* matter; they said in @Acts 2: "What shall we do, brethren?" @Acts 2:37. They were in deep earnest, and Peter said, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit". @Acts 2:38.
{32}
Things have broken down publicly today, but God has not lowered His standard, and persons taking the place of believers in baptism must prove they are genuine. So in verse 47 the Lord recognises the features spoken of in the verses immediately preceding, and adds to those who had them. These qualities seen, whether in an individual or in a company, testify to the fact that they have the Spirit. If these features are present, then the Lord will add to us. "And fear was upon every soul" -- that was not slavish fear, but holy fear.
The breaking of bread (verse 42), is our response to the Lord; we testify our love to the Lord Jesus as we break bread in remembrance of Him; and we need to pray, by which we testify to our dependence on God. The result of this is that believers learn to stand on their own feet, and moving on this line they get confirmation. "Many wonders and signs took place through the apostles means". This would maintain their authority and show that God was with His people. This is how christianity was inaugurated -- "Together" (verse 44), would imply that they were together in heart and soul, and where that is so, we shall not want to keep away from the meetings. We shall soon find ourselves gathered together in assembly, and we shall realise the great disadvantages of being absent. We ought to be together whenever possible that we may enjoy the love of the christian circle. We are exhorted to love one another; it is His commandment. And "we know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren", @1 John 3:14. Jesus is not here, but His people are here, they are our loved brethren, and we would be with them on every opportunity of coming together. We cannot afford to miss the precious experiences of being together. In chapter 4, when they had prayed, "the place in which they were assembled shook, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit". @Acts 4:31.
{33}
Where there is this dwelling together in unity, there is blessing -- "There the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore". @Psalm 133 speaks of the "precious oil" that ran down upon Aaron's beard, to "the hem of his garments". @Psalm 133:2. The "hem" would suggest a *finished* thing -- something complete; not loose principles, but divine things held in order and completeness. Oil is one figure of the Spirit, and then the dew is another: "As the dew of Hermon that descendeth on the mountains of Zion". @Psalm 133:3. The mountains would speak of strength, and "there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore". @Psalm 133:3. The features of Zion are seen here; what Zion will be by and by as the centre for God, is seen here, and the Lord added to *that*. Salvation is in Christ, but then it is realised in these conditions. These early saints were governed by the light that governed the moment; they were breaking bread, and also "constantly in the temple". They were a testimony to God in it, for He was still waiting on Israel. So chapter 3 opens with Peter and John going up "together into the temple at the hour of prayer". @Acts 3:1. It was the most beautiful sight that the temple had seen since Jesus Himself had been there; it was a testimony to Him. Later on the temple doors were shut (@Acts 21:30), but at this point God was waiting upon Israel in grace and patience.
Everyone converted today comes into what exists; the Holy Spirit is here in the assembly, and my concern should be to receive Him, "for also in the power of one Spirit we have all been baptised into one body ... and have all been given to drink of one Spirit", @1 Corinthians 12:13. You drink for satisfaction. So that as merged among the saints one is not irksome but in happy liberty there.
{34}
SPIRITUAL PROPORTION IN THE SERVICE OF GOD
@Numbers 15:1 - 21,37 - 41
I had in mind to speak about balance and proportion in the saints, especially in their part in the sanctuary, but also in their general relations. God is the God of measure, we are told, a remarkable thing! He is said to be the God of things as He is the God of persons. This thought of measure is to be reflected in His people; it is to be according to the sanctuary, as we learn in types, it is never left to ourselves. Otherwise we shall be measuring ourselves with ourselves, and prove ourselves foolish. God has His measure for man, He has set it out in Christ. There is that which is measurable in Christ, and there is that which is immeasurable. We are to arrive in the unity of the faith at the knowledge of the Son of God, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ. There is that therefore which is within our range, which is a clear link with that which is beyond our range -- that which is immeasurable, that which is infinite in Christ. In speaking of His Person, He asserts His unknowableness to all save the Father. That is to keep us within our limits, and yet to remind us of what is unlimited in Him, quite beyond the creature's range, but known to the Father.
We have therefore to be concerned about measure as set out in Christ, and which will appear in the heavenly city. The city is very large, but measurable, it is finite; it is not square measure, but cubic or solid measure. It is a substantial product of the handiwork of God, to be only understood spiritually. It would be folly to make it literal in the sense of what is material, but it is nevertheless a great substantial thought into which each one of us is to fit
{35}
according to the God of measure; that is to be reflected now -- each is to know his place and fit into it. The great lesson of time is to fit in according to divine thoughts. This is the work of the "stone squarer", who has to be concerned about measure. That element is active in the power of the Spirit.
What I have been remarking fits into this chapter, which it will be observed comes between those chapters which speak of the most disastrous outbreaks of the flesh in the people of God. When these things happen, God comes in with His quieting, confirmatory thoughts of measurement. Although such sorrows are to be felt and owned by the saints, God's thoughts are not at all disturbed by them; nor are His measurements disturbed. The enemy in times of difficulty such as we have depicted in chapters 11 - 14 of this book finds an area of operations to bring in disturbances and discouragements, but God would interpose His thoughts in one way and another by ministry, to quieten the saints, assuring them that the foundation of God stands -- it cannot be overthrown. This quietens and forms us.
What formation went on in Caleb and Joshua, for instance! They are outstanding men, but we are not to be limited to such in the great congregation of God. According to His own word at Sinai, there were thousands who loved Him, not merely who should love Him, but who *did*. Every one of them would be formed; their formation would proceed in the face of the enemy and of the conflict. God can build in the midst of a storm; His building goes on. So in this chapter, which, as I said, comes between great disturbances, He would calm us; He reminds us that He has His measurements, and the greatest hurricane cannot alter them or upset them.
One finds in chapter 11 that even Moses was drawn into the discontent, but he soon righted himself by the grace of God. Then Miriam and Aaron, the other
{36}
two great vessels sent by God to lead Israel, were drawn into the whirlpool, so there is not flattery for any of us in these chapters. You may say chapter 10 reads well, for Israel did everything they were told to do; they moved and encamped according to the command of the Lord. God saw to that, He teaches the believer to walk, and whilst the teaching goes on, the walking goes on. He took them by the hand, but when He let the hand go, they turned to complaint and rebellion. The great manifestation of the will of the flesh in chapter 11 is complaint. First it was nothing specific, but they complained, and God was displeased. You may say, Why did He release His hold on them? Well, He would bring out what is in our hearts, a very solemn thing. I may be doing well since I was converted, but there is something in me which is essentially against God which I have not discerned and it has to be dealt with, and it must be manifested to be dealt with. The judgment of God fell on those who were in the *extremity of the camp*, showing that He discriminates in His dealings, but later all Israel wept and complained @Numbers 11:4. Tears and feelings of that kind are utterly valueless in the sight of God! The weeping shows how *deep* the spirit of complaint was amongst them. It represents an unjudged condition, and even Moses was affected, he really calls in question the accuracy of divine measurement, he assumed that God had put too much upon him. I mention this to show how the spirit of complaint spreads abroad. Moses recovered himself quickly, his beautiful spirit comes to light when Joshua says to him, "My lord Moses, forbid them!" @Numbers 11:28. When the men prophesied in the camp, Joshua was a party man for the moment -- how easily we may drop into that! "Would God", says the great servant, "that all the Lord's people were prophets". @Numbers 11:29. He was not affected by jealousy, he was thinking of the saints.
The spirit of complaint is further seen in Miriam
{37}
and Aaron. Miriam is mentioned first, but they both complained against Moses. The Spirit of God tells us what kind of man Moses was; he was very meek, "above all men that were upon the face of the earth". @Numbers 12:3. What a tribute to a man! And yet he is the object of complaint which shows us what our hearts are. God had used Moses above all others, none knew that better than Miriam and Aaron. They knew him from his beginnings, and they knew of the great change that had come over him when he took his place amongst the saints of God. What a sacrifice he had made! What a man he was! He had renounced the greatest prospects in this world to suffer affliction with the people of God. They knew all that, and much more; times without number they had heard his voice as the voice of God. Indeed, he had been made "for God" to Aaron; so that Aaron must have known him in that peculiar capacity as a man of great weight and authority, and so did Miriam. They were both capable, too, of discerning through whom God was working, for they themselves were vessels in His service. They knew what it was to be actuated by the Spirit of God, and hence all the more serious was their attack on Moses.
So Jehovah says, "Come out ye three unto the tent of meeting". @Numbers 1:4 And later, "Why then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant, against Moses?" @Numbers 12:8. He spoke suddenly, it was a most serious matter. The result was that "Miriam was leprous as snow". @Numbers 12:10. Typically, the complaint was against Christ; that is chapter 12.
Then there is the great uprising recorded in chapters 13 and 14, which is complaint against the heavenly land. This was the more serious because the twelve spies give a good report of the land, that it was good, "a land which floweth with milk and honey". @Numbers 13:27. But ten of the spies proceeded to speak in unbelief of the strength of the inhabitants, and the complaint
{38}
becomes worse. Then Caleb stilled the people, saying, "Let us go up boldly and possess it, for we are well able to do it". @Numbers 13:30. As he and Joshua spoke in this noble strain the opposition became intense, and they became the objects of murderous intent on the part of the people. This shows what we are capable of; the spirit of murder may arise on the part of the people of God; hence the importance of judging the flesh radically at the beginning. God proposes to destroy the people and make a nation of Moses. If He brings out the evil, He loves to bring out the good that He has put in our hearts so we see God honours Moses by bringing out the good that was in his heart. Moses prayer is beautiful and God heard him and says, "I have pardoned according to thy word". @Numbers 14:20. God asserts, I will do it on My own terms. But terrible judgment fell immediately on the ten spies, and later the rest of those "numbered" fell in the wilderness. It is most sorrowful.
Still God says, "When ye come into the land". He comes in, as it were, in the midst of the storm of self-will on man's part and says, "When ye come into the land of your dwellings, which I give unto you", chapter 15:2. It does not say a word about their despising it here; in truth there were those who loved Him, and He thought of *them*. There will be none in heaven who do not love God. Abstractly, His people are characteristically those who love Him, and there is no question about their coming into the land.
In the first section of our chapter we get the thought of bringing a lamb, or a ram, or a bullock "to make a sweet odour to Jehovah". Whichever I bring, I must remember to bring the *proportionate* amount of flour and oil mingled with it, and of wine. The measurements are very exact. God would have us in the land that He has given to us, He would have us in nearness to Himself, and if we love Him we shall desire to be in nearness to Him, we shall be thinking of Him all
{39}
the time. The world was made by Christ, but they put Him on the cross. He is an outcast from this world but chosen of God and precious, and exalted in heaven. Through the redemption which He accomplished God has those here who are thinking of Him and who offer spiritual sacrifices to Him; that is the import of this scripture. He assumes that in this chapter in saying, "and will make an offering". Every lover of God offers to Him. How great it is to be among the lovers of God! The lovers of God as in His land will always worship Him, they will have something to offer. They will think of the sensibilities of God -- for that is how God speaks of Himself -- of His "nostrils". People complain of great numbers coming together, but if they are lovers of God, how wonderful! The more the better! But our worship has to be properly proportioned. Saul the son of Kish was a fine-looking man, "he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and upward", @1 Samuel 10:23 but what we want is from the shoulders down, we want the affections brought in. I am afraid our meetings are often largely from the shoulders up, whereas Scripture would bring in the range of the affections. In the description of the bride in Canticles, the whole person is described as beautiful; and in that book the whole Person of Christ is in perfect proportion, and that is what the Spirit of God is aiming at in the chapter before us, that there should be proper proportions.
So, when a lamb was brought, small but precious typically, a tenth part of fine flour was required; that speaks of the humanity of Christ, but reflected in each of us; it will be there when I give my note of thanks to God, I give out a hymn and God is pleased with me, as I am in accord with it. The flour is in right proportion. God is looking at me when I am sitting quietly as well as when I am participating audibly in His service.
{40}
Then, another offers a ram. The offerer is mature. He may have children in the faith, for a ram is a progenitive idea; but he is not a man who pushes with his horns -- he has more flour than the man who brought the lamb -- more flour and more oil and more wine. God is pleased with him as proportionate spiritually to the formal offering he has made.
Then another man offers a bullock; that is a large offering, but it has also a sweet savour to Jehovah. It may be a burnt-offering, or a sacrifice for the performance of a vow. The latter means that I have ability to make resolutions and *keep* them. You may addict yourself, commit yourself definitely, to God's service. This is morally very great and acceptable to God. Offering thus, one is like Christ in His unqualified committal to the will of God, saying, "Lo, I come ... to do, O God, thy will". @Hebrews 10:9. This offerer is on those lines. He has the peace-offering in mind, too, in the bullock, he is "a son of peace", @Luke 10:6 one who promotes holy, happy conditions among the *saints*, conditions in which God can have part. This offerer was required, as in the other two cases, to bring proportionate quantities of flour, oil, and wine (verse 9).
These instructions apply to every person, stranger or otherwise. God will have regularity in His land. If there be any divergence from regularity He is displeased with it, and that is not all, He has His own way of dealing with it eventually.
A further thought follows, that of a cake (verses 17 - 21). "Of the first of your dough ye shall give to Jehovah a heave-offering". This points to spiritual *exercise*. If I want a cake I must have dough; the wheat must be threshed and ground into flour, and the flour kneaded into dough -- it is a process. But I have a *whole* thought in my mind. This implies the assembly. God had the assembly in His mind when He sent His beloved Son into this world, and now He looks for the corresponding thought from us. "We, being many, are one loaf, one body"; @1 Corinthians 10:17.
{41}
"in the power of one Spirit we have all been baptised into one body". @1 Corinthians 12:13. We are to steadily maintain these great facts in our souls, otherwise we cannot be "in assembly" according to God. *All* the saints are in view, I am but one of them. Can I be intelligently and consciously part of the whole? That is the assembly; I have that in mind in the process of sowing, reaping, threshing, milling, and kneading so as to have a cake. God always has the whole thought in view, and He loves to see it come out in the saints. It is brought to God as a cake, but He says, "Of the first of your dough ye shall give to Jehovah". It is a heave-offering. How God works to have these great thoughts brought in and maintained in the midst of the storm of self-will and opposition to Him that is current today! The worst outbreak of sin in this book is seen in chapter 16.
The closing verses of chapter 15, which are the top stone, present the heavenly side of the truth. Although Israel had despised the land of promise, and although those who did so fell in the wilderness, Canaan was still in prospect and would be entered into by those for whom it was prepared. No true lover of God -- represented in Caleb and Joshua -- has any other thought than that, and we are not to stop short. Hebrews says, "we which have believed do enter into rest": we are to labour to do so; @Hebrews 4:3,11. Viewed thus heaven is to be reflected in us. Hence Israel was commanded to "make them tassels on the corners of their garments"; and to "attach to the tassel of the corners a lace of blue". Garments spiritually correspond with external circumstances or surroundings. Hence "corners" would refer to turns or changes from one position to another. In the assembly we are in heavenly circumstances, but we are not there always; we turn and go back to our houses, and there is a tassel on the turn or corner. I am in different surroundings when I leave the assembly and
{42}
go back to my house. The conditions are different, and in turning to them I do not forget to have the tassel and the lace of blue on the corner. It is a reminder of the need of constant obedience to the commandments of God. It is a piece of fine work, it is a *lace* on the tassel. It shows that there is nothing spiritually coarse about me; I have been using fine language in the assembly, now all my language must be in keeping with that, and all my ways must also be in keeping with that. Then I come out from my house to go to business on Monday, that is another corner, but the tassel is there and the lace of blue is there. I am not different morally in my business from what I am in the assembly. There is nothing more practical than christianity; it is from *heaven*, and is superior, at every turn, over circumstances. The lace of blue is heavenly, the tassel no doubt implies strength. Both would be ornamental in a heavenly sense. As I said before, it is the divine thought interposed to keep us heavenly, whatever the storms may be, however serious the outbreaks of the flesh. What triumph!
{43}
PAULINE FEATURES
@Acts 14:8 - 10; @Numbers 15:1 - 21
J.T. In our reading at Wellesley Hall last evening we had these scriptures read. @Numbers 15 forms a link as helping us in right proportions in the assembly, balance first and then the proportions suited to our service Godward, there is rising measure of the oil and wine according to the size of the offering made to God. The passage in Acts affords instruction for the assembly viewed in its Pauline feature. The metropolitan relation was directly under apostolic control. Nations maintain catholicity but with local furnishings and service Godward. The kind of material indicated in this man is one who has intelligence. He heard Paul *speaking* -- *this* arrested him. Paul, "fixing his eyes on him, and seeing that he had faith to be healed, said with a loud voice, Rise up straight upon thy feet". The apostle saw there was something there, the root of the matter, assembly material from the Pauline standpoint. He stood on his own feet by faith, in intelligence and faith, he had balance, he was able to stand on his own feet, the power of God bringing in this material. In type the development of this is in the offerer (verse 3), "a burnt-offering ... a sweet odour to Jehovah". This is what is contemplated -- how to offer in a balanced proportionate way.
Ques. What are Pauline features?
J.T. Non-metropolitan, the gospel is preached in localities, churches formed, each with its own hands and feet. It is important not to be insular, or isolated in thought and unduly local. "Thus I ordain in all the assemblies" @1 Corinthians 7:17 universally. The Thessalonians became imitators of the assemblies of God in Judaea.
Ques. According to the size of your offering?
J.T. Your offering is your measure -- if a lamb let
{44}
the accompanying elements be in proportion. A brother speaks eloquently of the Lord Jesus but has he got the proportion of fine flour with him, the beautiful humanity of Christ? Is there spiritual dignity in the man? Is the wine in proportion that appeals to God? We might not be offering these accompaniments. God is not pleased with that. All sweet savour offerings are assumed to be rich, voluntary offerings, vows, set feasts, etc., this is not a wilderness matter but in the land. We should be exercised that these should come into evidence. A man who can stand on his own feet is not a party man, he thinks of God. "I speak as to intelligent persons", @1 Corinthians 10:15 initially of that type. There is faith there, can we discern it? Paul fixed his eyes on him.
F.I. Though the man stands on his own feet that which is available for offering is found in the inheritance.
J.T. The land is given, "whither I bring you" (verse 18). It is here a principle of gift like the inheritance in the saints. Materials for the oblation were not obtainable in the wilderness.
Ques. What is the heave-offering?
J.T. Something spontaneous, it waves, moves, catches entirely the eye of God. The heave-offering is from the heart going spontaneously up to God. This chapter was written for us, it is one of the instances where the Old Testament becomes New Testament, so that our service Godward should become proportionate -- not learn from others. I may speak eloquently in the assembly and yet be minus the nature of our Lord Jesus Christ. What I speak in the assembly I must be always. "Let the word of the Christ dwell in you richly ... . And everything, whatever ye may do in word or in deed, do all things in the name of the Lord Jesus". @Colossians 3:17. We have much more than that. It would never do for a man to speak intelligently in the meeting and outside assume a natural man's ways. It is not
{45}
proportionate. We get material for the assembly from Paul's ministry. He "heard *Paul* speaking". Paul saw something in him that would qualify him for the assembly. He had faith. "Thou art Peter". @Matthew 16:18. The Lord saw that in him. The question is whether you are able to profit by the speaking of a spiritual person. We learn from one another. Paul was peculiarly well worth listening to, this man valued spiritual speaking. He would take character from that.
F.I. The man in @Acts 3 -- Peter had to take hold of him.
J.T. Apostolic support was in evidence there, this man stands up himself, we hear no more of him. The epistle to the Romans teaches this. A man thinks of himself so as to be wise, an initial thought. A christian takes his own measure and does not go beyond it, not to think highly -- God is the God of measure, this applies in the universe and in all God's operations, the tabernacle, etc., the assembly should be marked by this. Your estimate of yourself should be just. You may be raised beyond this in the assembly. It was never intended the service of God should be ready-made, e.g., the hymn-book, phraseology -- I use it as it fits me. Better not speak at all if I have not proportion. In the large number of people in the wilderness the models would be the lovers of God. Caleb and Joshua would be representative of those. "Aaron ... I know that he can speak well". @Exodus 4:14. Not only that but a brother beloved. He goes to meet you, his speaking will be attractive. Aaron spoke to them and they looked towards the wilderness, showing the power of his speaking. It is remarkable how God leaves all the rebellion (the conditions of christendom) and inserts this chapter as His own thoughts about the people. The assembly is something different. God introduces this beautiful thought which should take form in the assembly. Fine flour
{46}
in proportion, oil and wine, not a sentimentalist, not a religionist. It is all in proportion.
Ques. What did you mean by ready-made?
J.T. The hymn-book is ready-made, a provision for the saints, to be used by spiritual people. You ought to be in the thing that is expressed in the hymn, a sweet savour to God. He is quick to see if you are out of proportion. What you have taken in by exercise of what has been presented to you of Christ, and "the sojourner" likewise -- as ye do so shall he do -- no difference. One rule prevails in the assembly. It is a great matter to see what the rule is, a spiritual matter, governed by the light that governs any phase of it, whether the Lord is worshipped or the Father, i.e., the phase of the assembly referring to the Father -- there is to be no deviation from that. Irregularity robs of the sweet savour. If you are addressing the Father you are governed by the light which governs that. Christ is the Minister of the sanctuary, He has the Father in mind (verses 14,15), "As ye do, so shall he do ... one statute for you, and for the stranger that sojourneth with you, an everlasting statute ... before Jehovah. One law and one ordinance".
Ques. Who is the stranger?
J.T. That would cover the material brought in by the apostle Paul. There was the universal custom, and strangers became merged in Israel's customs. No longer strangers and foreigners but fellow-citizens with the saints. One observes great irregularity in the meeting, saints are robbed, and God is robbed of what the assembly should yield to Him. As the gifts are listened to we arrive at "the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ" @Ephesians 4:13, that comes out in the assembly. The fulness of the Christ is what He is as Man before God. There is spiritual confusion if we have different
{47}
laws or standards. Observe the rule, the ordinance and the law that is the ground of the assembly. If Christward we are speaking to the Lord, but if it is the time for the Father the great feature of the assembly is speaking to the Father. The Lord is in the midst alongside of us. Christward would be a question of the state of the saints. The covenant is a closing thought with the saints, let it have its full force with us, give it scope, the Lord is the Mediator of it. There is a difference between that and the Minister of the sanctuary. The Mediator links on with the Apostle, makes the truth effective. Moses is always the mediator, the minister is Aaron -- he carries the thing on and sustains what is set up. The worship of God is sustained by the Minister of the sanctuary. @Deuteronomy 26 merges in the idea of the priest himself.
Ques. Is He Minister of the sanctuary to the Lord or to the Father?
J.T. Hebrews is very initial as to the saints, God and His people, not the Father. "Not ashamed to call them brethren" @Hebrews 2:11 comes near it. The point in Hebrews is to get you to go in at all. "I will declare thy name to my brethren". @Hebrews 2:12. This is on the ground of the relation to the Father although not mentioned. Hebrews contemplates the wilderness, Ephesians the land. The ark is a military thought in that relation. An Israel goes over first. It is the power of Christ holding back the force of death. "The old corn". @Joshua 5:11. Christ is indigenous to the land -- a humanity which never left heaven -- stored corn hardly understood amongst us -- the Father and Son. The Minister of the sanctuary is official, things must be done holily to make room for love -- ability to be quiet and to stand spiritually on new ground. David and Solomon, Father and Son. Link on Joshua with Chronicles -- we bridge all that distance by the Spirit and reach the Father and the Son. Not only risen but exalted.
{48}
the assembly is on heavenly ground. The gospel in Romans is on resurrection ground, in Ephesians it is quite different. The Father's house is a future thing and the land is a present thing. The holiest is a wilderness thought, properly of individual application. You understand the Minister of the sanctuary and follow His guidance. As you enter once you never forget it -- you are intelligently free before God. The Father's house is a wider thought and has many abodes. The Father's house is a future thought but we touch His presence now. It is a hard thing to be quiet spiritually, not naturally, to sit still and see what God has in the company. We are naturally restless. Some are quiet by disposition but this is of no value to God. We must learn to be quiet spiritually, all the faculties under control, then governed by principles which govern the position.
Verse 20, "dough" is something unusual in Scripture. In the heave-offering the first of your *dough*, this word is to call attention to something merging in a cake -- a whole thing, not a slice, seen here before it is baked, it is wrought, ground, kneaded. All alludes to what *we* have. We arrive at a peaceful, restful state of one whole, one church, one body. Three-tenth parts of flour, half a hin of oil, etc., for a bullock, and so on. There is variation all round, they are proportionate right through.
Ques. In the assembly should we be exclusively occupied with the Lord Himself?
J.T. If we are, it shows we have not risen to the full thought of the assembly, there is irregularity, a want of seeing we are on new ground. We need instruction. The apostle said, "For this cause I bow my knees", @Ephesians 3:14 etc.
F.I. We should always have the Lord before us but should speak of Him as well as to Him.
J.T. It is very sweet to hear a person with a keen
{49}
appreciation of Christ as the Lamb, His intrinsic value.
Ques. What about worship by the Spirit?
J.T. The Spirit of God is the power for worship, not outward form or human sentimentality or religious feeling. In @John 4 the Spirit is in contrast to the letter -- the spirit of worship -- not the letter, or the place or building, or choir -- all these are shut out by the thought of the Spirit. Hannah's song is called a prayer and there is not a word of prayer in it, Mary drew from her remarks. The Old Testament scriptures furnish the spirit of worship, that you present to God after the breaking of bread, what is within your soul and spirit. Being beside yourself is over against sobriety, in @2 Corinthians 5 it is not out of order, it is abstraction from natural conditions -- filled to all the fulness of God, a divine thought of manhood, which we are all to arrive at.
{50}
"THE PRECIOUS THINGS OF THE ANCIENT MOUNTAINS"
@1 Peter 2:4,6,7 (1st clause); @Deuteronomy 33:13 - 16
You will observe the occurrence of the word 'precious' in these scriptures, and I have that word in mind as denoting, in these settings, what is peculiarly valuable as attached to Christ's Person, and the things that come to Him as Man; The first scripture from the apostle Peter is characteristic of one who led in the way of appraisement of Christ, giving us a lead in this connection. The apostles are intended to lead us in regard to valuation or appraisement of what is more excellent. There are the great general foundational truths, the knowledge of which is required for the deliverance, peace and blessing of our souls. These truths acquired in their true relations, both in regard of God and ourselves, set us free for exploration and appraisement of what is more excellent. As we progress on this line we become ranged in regard of quality, for there are persons and persons. The heavenly city contains only one street according to the Scriptures, suggesting equality in dignity of all of us, yet there are gradations of quality and development. These gradations are reached now, but remain and mark us for ever.
That being so we do well to pay attention to the lead given to us by the apostles, and particularly Peter, although Paul is not behind in his ability to appraise, and attached to this appraisement is spiritual feeling, a quality that is rare but much to be sought after, for spiritual feeling marked the apostles. Amongst the twelve Peter is first in this as in other things. Paul stands by himself and carries out among the gentiles all that the twelve had, and I would venture to say adding to what they had, as to feeling
{51}
and affection. I believe Paul stands without a peer in all these respects. He thus freely speaks of himself as an example for us, so that we are to follow his epistles, noting his superlatives and comparatives, that we may become accustomed to comparison and appraisement, and be able to name what is more excellent, as we see it and come into contact with it. Peter, as I said, leading the twelve or being first amongst them in this and in other respects, had great opportunities of proving what he speaks of as precious. He uses the word in his epistles characteristically, and shows in this quotation which he cites from @Isaiah 28:16 that his appreciation of Christ in this respect was according to the spirit of prophecy. It is a great thing to see that things are cumulative in the course of God's ways and testimony, so that the spirit of prophecy extending back and looking forward had the same feature of appreciation of Christ; what was more excellent. Peter had peculiar advantages, and was impressed by the opportunities that he had of observing what Christ was. His first interviews and contact with the Lord impressed him in a way at the outset that remained and entered into his ministry, for the divine intent is not only that one is to be a minister but he is to exemplify and adorn what he ministers. Peter is not behind in that. It was the beaten work of which we have read today, the beaten gold of the candlestick. In referring to the gold one might note that it stands in Scripture for what is excellent. You will recall that what came out in the recovery in Nehemiah's time was the prominence of goldsmiths. They were engaged in rather rough, but most important work, that is the building of the wall, which refers to fellowship, and which occasions the greatest and bitterest opposition. There were those in Nehemiah's time who *would* oppose; that is they were opposers characteristically. They would oppose by their flattering words and invitations to
{52}
meet in the plains of Ono, and they would oppose by direct attacks against the brethren. These are not wanting today, beloved, but we are not to be deterred from the building of the wall, nor is a refined workman like a goldsmith to let his hands hang down, even if gold be not the material that he is called upon to use. The refined workmanship amongst the people of God will not be damaged, nor degenerate in the building of the wall -- the goldsmiths retained their cunning -- and as soon as the time came for the use of gold they would not be wanting in skill. They were there, and they would be amongst those who would appraise and who understood values. This is most important, for the principle of generalisation is a damaging principle in the things of God; we must learn to exercise the power of discrimination and to put up the separating veil when it comes to the Person of Christ. Unless we guard against generalisation we are likely, in our minds at least if not in our words, to reduce the Lord to the level of man.
Now the apostle Peter was a skilled workman. He was a servant who could retain things for months and years, it may be, without speaking of them, and he would retain their quality, which would not diminish but rather become enhanced. You recall for instance that the Lord recognised him because of the revelation he received from the Father about Himself; the Lord recognised him as material, for he had in his soul an understanding of the Lord's Person. He understood something about the ark of the covenant; he would put the covering veil upon it. Notice his first great address at Jerusalem, how beautifully, how respectfully, how reverentially he speaks of Christ. Perhaps in no address do you find the covering veil so beautifully spread over the ark; but then he knows what to say, he does not say everything he knows; it is a great mistake in ministry to say everything one knows. If Peter were to say everything
{53}
he knew he would tell his audience about Christ as the Son of God, but he did not. We have not a word, or reference to the sonship of Christ in his ordinary oral ministry as recorded in the Acts, and yet he had it in his soul. No doubt it would give body to what he was saying, his hearers would be impressed with the fact that there was more behind than what was spoken; but it was unspoken. In service, beloved, let us gather up all possible, let us fill our souls with the precious truth about Christ, about the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, the whole range of truth, but see to it that what is spoken is from the Lord. The Lord did not say to Peter that he should announce him as the Son of God; but God revealed His Son in Paul that he might announce Him as Son of God, and he did not fail to do so. Let us therefore be careful that what we say we have authority for saying, for after all, the ministry is Christ's. The levites are all given to Him for the work is His and it is for the levites to get their orders from Him. The apostle Paul immediately "in the synagogues ... preached Jesus that *he* is the Son of God", @Acts 9:20. He had authority for that, but then Peter knew and held the thing in his soul, and as he was about to put off his tabernacle he would stir up the pure minds of the saints, and he refers to the mount of transfiguration in the most beautiful, powerful and holy language. "Such a voice being uttered to him by the excellent glory: This is my beloved Son, in whom *I* have found my delight; and this voice we heard uttered from heaven, being with him on the holy mountain", @2 Peter 1:17,18. With what feeling he would write that. How the scene would come back to his soul as he referred to the holy mount when he was with Jesus, when Jesus was transfigured and when a voice out of the cloud said, "This is my beloved Son; hear him". @Mark 9:7, @Luke 9:7. You see from all this how evidently these jewels that are found in these verses fit in in Peter's
{54}
ministry. He reminds us that Jesus was a living Stone. What memories that would recall to his heart, as he himself had said to the Lord, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God". @Matthew 16:16. How all that would come back to him as he wrote, and then he says, "chosen of God, and precious". Can we not see the feelings, the holy sentiments of the apostle entering into this word 'precious' as he wrote of the preciousness of Jesus. The Holy Spirit would bring this up, beloved, as to what Jesus is to us. The preciousness of Jesus, elect of God, and precious. Then he goes on to say, quoting from Isaiah, that God had laid in Zion a corner stone, elect, precious. Then further, "To you therefore who believe is the preciousness", @1 Peter 2:7. All that which was so in his soul, was intended as it were to extend toward us, to cover us, to bring us in that respect into accord with Jesus, so that divine pleasure rests upon us. As was said at the beginning at the baptism of our Lord, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight" @Matthew 3:17, @Matthew 17:5 -- not 'all my delight' -- because there is room made for us to come in, that divine complacency should rest on all.
We now come to Deuteronomy, where Christ appears typically in Joseph. We are to learn what He is by the covering veil, the separating veil, that is "holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens" @Hebrews 7:26 as Man. There is no one like Him in that sense, He is unique, "higher than the heavens", but then He shines among His brethren. How beautiful the thought! How it should enlist our deepest interest as we think of what Jesus is among the brethren! This fairly well-known chapter is the blessing of Moses the man of God, wherewith he blessed the children of Israel before he died. The blessing is not like that of Jacob which was almost entirely prophetic, the good and the bad mentioned. Moses is engaged with the good here. He is engaged
{55}
with it as the man of God, and the man of God will think for God, and if he speaks of the saints in this abstract way, as having spent forty years with them in the most contrary circumstances, he is speaking of the work of God; he is speaking of what he had observed as the work of God; a matter of the deepest and greatest importance for us, that we should look at the saints, however contrary or wanting they may be, and seek to see something of the work of God in them. If I can see something of the work of God in a man or woman, that man or woman is potential material not only for the assembly, but for eternity. God has taken that person up for a place in His own scheme. The number in the counsels of God is known to God, and there will not be one more nor one less, and everyone will be a subject of divine workmanship so that even Balaam has to say, "What hath God wrought!" @Numbers 23:23. That is really the safest way in dealing with the Lord's people; that is the safest enquiry, 'what has God wrought?' for what God has done is done for ever, and there can be no possibility of the destruction of it. It gives great leverage in dealing with the people of God to know as a certainty, as Moses did, that God had wrought in the tribes, that God had wrought in this one or that one; that is what comes out in this chapter. It is a chapter of twelve features of the people of God, wonderful features rising up to Christ, for however you look at the people of God you must see Christ towering up, whether it be a question of His deity, or of His moral worth or beauty, He must tower up above all, and so when Moses comes to Joseph he has the occasion by the Spirit of God to bring out what I have been speaking of, the precious features that attached to Christ. "Of Joseph he said, Blessed of the Lord be his land, for the precious things of heaven". It is His land -- ours to be sure in due course, but it is His first. Applying it to Christ, He was the old corn of
{56}
the land. When Israel entered the land the ark was not in view, they were in before it, really what is in view is Christ in another way, that is as indigenous to heaven; that is a word we have to understand, that His very humanity is heavenly, that the Son of man has come from heaven, that the Son of man while here upon earth was in heaven, and that He is not in it as having gone into it merely. The preposition in @John 3:13 does not mean that, it means that He was there, He belonged to the place. It is not new to Him; He ascended up far above all heavens, but in entering in, it is not at all new. He is there, the Son of man; so that as Israel crosses Jordan what comes into evidence is Christ in that relation, He is the old corn, or the store corn, of the land of Canaan. So that you can understand how Moses would speak thus by the Spirit, for these words have more significance than even Moses could understand personally. Let us remember that, that the things they minister, they minister to us: "Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify ... . Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister", @1 Peter 1:11,12. It is for us to understand, "Blessed of the Lord be his land". Oh, you say, 'I shall have a share in that!' Yes, but it is His. He would say to you, if you have gift and you have been used of the Lord in conversions and other things, He would say to you, 'Glory not in this, it may give you distinction among the brethren'; but He says, "rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven" @Luke 10:20 -- that you have a status there, your names are written there. In truth we are the levites of God, not as we had it today in Numbers, but as it is in Joshua; that is, our part is heavenly, not on the earth. Seeing that our names are written in heaven, and that is our place, how important, beloved, to become acquainted with the place. Ephesians gives you the gospel of the land -- it
{57}
is the gospel of place. We have another place, raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ; so that the testimony of the Holy Spirit of what Christ is in heaven is to be mixed with faith; if we mix it with faith then we shall understand and become accustomed to another place.
Then there are "the precious things of heaven", that is to say, the refreshing influences of heaven and "the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath", "the precious fruits brought forth by the sun and for the precious things put forth by the moon". It would take many addresses to open up what the precious things are, and the features in relation to all these. It is a matter for enquiry as to what they are, for they are precious things. Looking into it the soul will be nourished as it traces what is meant by the heavens and by the sun, and by the moon or months, by the dew and the deep that coucheth beneath. As we trace what these things mean, what precious results accrue; and how all come to pass in Christ and attach to Him. Then there is the blessing for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the everlasting hills. Think of the stretch of mind back to the ancient mountains and forward to the everlasting hills, and the precious things of them, all coming on the head of Christ, on the "top of the head of him that was separated from his brethren". If we take these verses up and follow them we shall have to read the Scriptures from the beginning to the end with this in view. We shall become wonderfully enriched, because our minds stretch backwards and then forwards, learning that all that accrues of the precious fruits of these things is to come on Christ, and (insomuch as this is a tribal chapter) it is Christ in relation to the saints. It presents His greatness towering above us, but nevertheless in relation to us, so that we share in all these things and learn how to value them, and see their
{58}
working out. Take, for instance, the ancient mountains, who can tell what was alluded to? You may say that must be Ararat; that must be the mountain of Jehovah. Genesis is full of the idea from chapter 7 onwards, of a mountain or mountains in a literal sense; but the significance is spiritual; however far back you go in the ways and testimony of God there were outstanding features from God that stood the test of time and weather and Satan's power; and they stand now. It would be a fruitful examination, beloved, if I may commend it to you, to examine what these ancient mountains are. Take one of the literal mountains, take Ararat; what lessons there are to be learned, spiritually. The tops of all the mountains, we are told, were covered by the flood, God let nothing escape, but the mountains reappeared, they went through; they reappeared, and the ark rested, we are told, on Ararat. What lessons were to be learned on that mountain, the beginning of another world, as if God were to say from the very outset, 'man spoiled this world, that I made with such detail and skill, thorns have come up on it on account of sin, but there is another world'. Those words, I might say, are written right down Scripture, 'there is another world' -- a world that goes through death, and all that is living in it carried through in a vessel; so that God smells a sweet savour as Noah comes out of the ark on Ararat; worship begins, as you might say, for he built an altar. Are there not precious things to be gathered up in these chapters in Genesis, the great thought of something outstanding that goes through, standing against time and weather and Satan's power, yielding to God the precious savour of Christ; and all that returning upon the "head of him that was separated from his brethren"?
I just refer to two other mountains, to illustrate -- the mountain in @Genesis 22, upon which Isaac was offered up. It is an ancient one, but containing the
{59}
most precious thoughts. It is the mountain of God, it refers to His resources, His provision, to the death and resurrection of Christ, yielding the most precious thoughts by which Scripture is filled; they have all reverted back, glorifying Him, resting upon His head as a diadem, on the top of the head of Him that was separated from His brethren.
So, too, Moses comes to the mountain of God; Moses led the flock to Horeb the mountain of God, and God sends Aaron and meets him there, and he is glad in his heart. What is it, beloved, but the love of the brethren at that ancient mountain? And Moses unfolds all the thoughts of God on it, and all that comes down on the top of the head of Him that was separated from His brethren.
Then there are the mountains running into eternity, the everlasting hills. Think of the sweet savour and preciousness that comes on the head of Christ, accruing from Him, and all must revert back to Him, coming upon the top of the head of Him who was separated from His brethren.
I might remark, dear brethren, as to the wonderful link of these mountains with the mount of transfiguration; we have the writer of the Pentateuch, and the representative of the prophets, carrying down all the ancient things that spoke of Christ, every precious thing would be in their minds, how they would speak of Christ; they spoke of His decease which He should accomplish at Jerusalem. We can understand that aside from that decease at Jerusalem there could be no precious things, no ancient mountains of value, yielding such precious thoughts of glory and dignity; all is based on that wonderful act of Christ, the laying down of His life at Jerusalem. Then the stretch forward from that mount as Peter speaks of it. He does not refer to it as an ancient mountain, but as a holy mountain; its sides were beaten by the blessed footsteps of Jesus, its top was
{60}
trodden by Him, it was holy. It was enshrined in holiness, the feet of the heavenly saints were there, and the feet of the earthly saints were there, linked up with them; and the cloud was there, and the voice out of the cloud was there, denoting the Father's voice, stretching on into an eternal state of things where Christ will be all and in all, and where we shall be like Him. Dear brethren, that was what I was thinking of, that the saints might be led on to the better things, to the excellent things, to the precious things, and to see how they are toward us and how God clothes us with them, that we might be fit companions with Christ in all these relations. May God bless the word to us!
{61}
HOUSEHOLDS
@1 Corinthians 1:16,17; @1 Corinthians 16:15,16,19; @Galatians 6:10; @Ephesians 2:19
In these scriptures, as you will all observe, we have the thought of households; first in Corinthians, the household of the believer; second in Galatians, the household of faith; and third in Ephesians, the household of God. The first leads into the second and the second into the third. They may indeed be collateral one with the other, but the two first empty, as it were, into the household of God; so that the subject, I hope, will become practical in the unfolding of it.
These three features appear in the Old Testament. The first is in @Genesis 7:6 - 9, indeed; that is the household of the believer. The second is in @Genesis 15 -- the household of faith, for Abraham is more in Scripture than Noah, in that he is said to be the father of all believers. By the convenience afforded by the Spirit of God, he is regarded, to make the matter simple, as the progenitor of all believers -- the father of all believers -- so that he represents the household of faith. In Jacob we have the household of God; @Genesis 35. Great as Abraham was, it is not with him that the household of God is commenced, but with Jacob. But the three features are there, firstly in Noah, secondly in Abraham, and thirdly in Jacob.
Now it is worthy of note that Noah is said to be righteous in his generation, and that he had found grace with Jehovah in the midst of a world which had forgotten Him. He towers up like one of the ancient mountains mid the lowlands of corruption, depicted in @Genesis 6. He found grace with God. God saw to it that there was a man in those days who stood out. All was not lost, all is never lost; and in this man,
{62}
who in the midst of corruption rises up, as I said, as we look back, like one of the ancient mountains, the blessings come down to the children. He found grace with Jehovah, and that before Jehovah entered into a covenant. That is to say, whoever knew him, whether related in the flesh or otherwise, would know there was one righteous man. One was rarely found, as it is today. In the circumstances a righteous man is one of the rarest of persons, and one of the most valuable in God's house, in relation to His testimony. There cannot be any testimony apart from righteousness. It is said of him that he walked with God. What dreadful currents were against that man in his day! It is said of him, "By faith Noah ... prepared an ark for the saving of his house". @Hebrews 11:7. The preparation was of long duration; the need for the ark was entirely out of view, except to faith. Possibly he was the only one who had any conception of its need. He was warned of God. The pattern, too, was wholly unique, they had no such pattern as this. It is wholly unlikely that there was -- it was a new thing. There was nothing at all in view, there is nothing said about rain until after the flood. Also there was no evidence of any need for such a structure and it therefore taxed his faith to the utmost, day after day, for one hundred and twenty years. You can understand what the walk with God meant for him. What ridicule! How they would aim their gibes at him and ridicule at his folly! It was the foolishness of God, one day proved wiser than man, as the ark rose and rose abreast the flood, as poor, weak man succumbed, engulfed in the ditch. What a triumph for his faith! And then how glorious the testimony is in one man; the thought runs through Scripture, what one man can do, while walking with God. What strength of faith he would need as those boards of gopher-wood were laid out and placed together, with the skill greater than that of any man; and with that pitch, pitched within and
{63}
without, made staunch, made impervious to all the influences without. As we may say, God was with him in every nail he drove, every wood he planed, every storey he finished. It was a three-storied affair; not three decks, but three stories. Every one was a triumph, one after the other. He prepared an ark for the saving of his house. There is not a word as to whether his wife or his sons were to build it, possibly his sons, Shem, Ham and Japheth helped. They were all blessed, but their salvation was with their parents. It was his doing, he prepared an ark for the saving of his house and he saved his house and brought them through. That corresponds with what I have read from 1 Corinthians.
The break-up of christendom is in view in this epistle. It was checked. Those same principles were needed in those circumstances, and never was there a time when these principles were more needed than in our own time. The enemy is not only endeavouring to effect a great general apostasy but has long succeeded. The great work of apostasy has been going on, as the apostle has said, but there is that which hinders, and it hindered at Corinth; and not the least through the influence of a household. I am speaking to parents, as also to children, many of whom are here. The checking of apostasy and the maintenance of what is of God until the end is seen in Scripture in certain households. The family thought must stand in the mind of God. It is a primary thought, everyone in a family. At Corinth it was seen in this distinguished brother, Stephanas. The apostle, in speaking about baptising, said he had not baptised generally amongst the Corinthians (although they were all baptised) owing to the state of things that prevailed, in case he would appear to baptise in his own name. He baptised Gaius and another. He says he did that. I am sure he said it with zeal -- he turned out well. But then it was not that he was speaking about, he was speaking
{64}
about results. He did turn out well, as the last chapter shows that in a divided state of things, such as we have to do with today, how one man can stem the tide. His house can become a rendezvous for the faithful. The household of a godly, spiritual man is sure to stand against all partisan workings. There is another household, the household of Chloe. She was a person in her day who would abhor such wickedness as was in Corinth. The doors are not guarded and the enemy gets in and he did get in in a terrible way at Corinth, so that there was seething evil in the assembly at Corinth; chapter 5. The household is honoured, is brought forward as a bulwark ... so that he says that there are those of the house of Chloe who told me that there are divisions among you. But Chloe was concerned about the divided state among the saints, and Stephanas acquired a moral influence. I apprehend the house of Chloe had little power in itself, but it was of sufficient use to convey the sad tidings to the apostle. Moral power is what is needed today, it is not simply what one says, it is what one is. And so the apostle says, "the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power". @1 Corinthians 4:20. He appeals to the Corinthians. He says, "ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is the first-fruits of Achaia, and they have devoted themselves to the saints for service". What a service for the household, Stephanas and his house! Those who have acquired moral weight among us in the household, become of immense value in stemming the tide and the saints are gradually led to recognise what is of God. It is a saving element. As soon as I discern what is of God, it is to be respected; it is a moral quality; it is representative of God. Hence you will find, for instance in 2 Kings, how great a stress is laid on the "man of God". He embodies the qualities of God. Divine qualities are to be recognised and respected. Submit to it! You will never lose by submitting to what is of God. You
{65}
will perhaps say, 'I have got as much ability as So-and-so and as much experience; I am older'. But nevertheless there is something there in that brother that is of God. It is not there for nothing; it is there for a purpose; it is an outstanding thing; it is a moral quality; it is representative of God. If you discern, respect; and if you respect it, submit to it. We are enjoined to be subject one to another; the younger are enjoined to be subject to the elder. That is simple. I can respect what is of God in a younger man than I. He may know better than I do on certain questions. Why should I let my experience stand in the way? He is to be respected. God has set old and young together in this way in the household so that we may submit, that we might live in the atmosphere of submission -- be subject to such. I have no doubt that Stephanas would be under the reproach of the great men of Corinth; there were great men there, men who spoke of the apostle with disdain; they were false apostles. I am speaking thus in leading up to the apostasy. As the spirit of subjection discerns what is of God, it stems the tide of apostasy.
Then there is further in the chapter the thought of an assembly in a house. We have difficulty in finding suitable halls for our meetings -- the halls of this world were not built for the followers of the Nazaraean. They were not intended for us. But households are different. Within the four walls of the household of a christian, how different! The cherubim of glory are there. Aquila and Priscilla had an assembly in their house. Incidentally it points to the smallness of the christian companies in that day, although there were many saints in these places -- at Philippi and at Corinth. Christians were content to meet in believers houses. We cannot assume that Aquila and Priscilla had a house of very great dimensions or that it would be finely furnished as men speak. There would be
{66}
nothing there to stumble a young christian. The book of Deuteronomy required that such households of the saints should be carefully guarded against any mishap. Young people coming in and imitating; there was nothing of that kind in the household of Aquila and Priscilla. Aquila and Priscilla are never mentioned except together, sometimes the one first, sometimes the other. They represent an ideal husband and wife, spiritually, and daily together. They earn their living together, and they had the great honour of earning it alongside of Paul; they lodged with him as workmen -- the same craft. What a view of the apostle they got! I should have liked a conversation with him as he said to Timothy, "thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life", @2 Timothy 3:10. It was such a house as the heavenly saints -- there were spiritual people in those assemblies -- could look upon with complacency. How much might be in one's house that one would seek to hide from the spiritual eye, but not so with Aquila and Priscilla. They served the saints. So much for the idea of the house, and I wish you to link on the conditions in Corinth along with our own. The apostasy has come, it is full grown.
Assembly conditions have been restored. The most wonderful thing of modern times is the restoration of assembly conditions, and they are meant to last to the end. The Lord would lay it on His people to see to the house. If divided conditions arise, as they do, a spiritual house is a great instrument in the hand of the Lord for the rallying of the saints. It will neutralise; it will promote assembly conditions.
Turning to Galatians, you can readily see how fitting is the expression in this epistle, "the household of faith". It is in its proper setting, it is set over against loose conditions in christendom. I am turning to speak of legal conditions, and the expression of the household of faith rightly fits in where legal conditions
{67}
have a place. They had a place in the gatherings of Galatia. You will observe, it is the "assemblies of Galatia". @Galatians 1:2. *There is no such thing as an assembly in a district*. This was part of the apostasy, bringing in legality to replace grace by law, so that believers should fall from grace. If we fall from grace, as in the assemblies in Galatia, we are on the same level as fallen from love -- in the assemblies in Asia. Fallen from grace is one thing, fallen from love is another. Both are fallen. Indeed, if I have fallen from grace, you may be sure I have fallen from love. If I love the brethren, I love liberty, and so he brings in the beautiful expression, "specially ... the household of faith". The type of that is Abraham. You all remember the history. It begins in @Genesis 15, where it is said, "And he believed Jehovah; and he reckoned it to him as righteousness". @Genesis 15:6. What he believed God about was his family. He was to have a great household -- like the stars of heaven. He believed that. The time for numbers is coming, and that is the connection in which Abraham is said to have believed God, and he became the father of the faithful. So that we all have to range ourselves alongside of Abraham in that sense as the household of faith. And so you go through that chapter. Hagar and Ishmael appear in chapter 16. Hagar comes into that household, and she left it of her own accord; she fled. She really did not belong to it, and that was what the teaching in Galatia was effecting. The apostle would direct our view to genuine believers, and in chapter 17 Abraham has his name changed from Abram to Abraham, the first meaning. 'high father', the second 'father of a multitude'. It is a great thought of God, the family of faith, and God says, 'You have obtained "a good degree" @1 Timothy 3:13, I will change your name'. We belong to the multitude; chapter 17. God came down and spoke with him, beautiful, and He broke off speaking with
{68}
him and went up to heaven. In chapter 18 He comes back to Abraham. He is creating great atmosphere in the household of faith. There is room for God where there is faith, and so He comes to Abraham. Abraham circumcised all in his house, he carried out the thought fully, and God came back and said, 'Abraham, you have done well'. Faith takes hold of the commandment of God, the principles of God. God came back to Abraham; he was at his tent-door. He came back in company -- companionship in the household of faith. Do not company with anyone who has not faith! He will lead you into the world. There are three men, and one is Jehovah. How beautiful that God should come to us in that way! Three men, and one Jehovah, and Abraham discerns the difference between Jehovah and the other two -- the beautiful company. What companionship there is in the household of faith! Marry only in the Lord! It is a question of faith. Bring faith into it and, whatever your aspirations, God will be a Father to you. "I will be to you for a Father, and ye shall be to me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty", @2 Corinthians 6:18. He came in in company, and Abraham discerned Him and ministered to Him. Think of those three men resting themselves under the tree until Abraham brought the calf, milk and so forth. Think of the consideration of God to do that. Need we not look for great things in the household of faith? There is no need to go outside of it. He went after to Sodom. We come in for divine thoughts. We know what is going to happen. We know the end of things. The cleverest statesmen do not know. "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" @Genesis 18:17. The Lord God is there to do justice, to do righteousness. In the household of faith you get practical righteousness. If we know that He is righteous, we know that everyone practising righteousness is of the household of faith. That is Galatians.
{69}
You can see how the apostle stresses the expression, "the household of faith". Chapter 19 is the destruction of Sodom. Chapter 21, Isaac is born, and we get the thought fully expressed, not in Abraham himself, but in his house. It is expressed in Sarah. "The son of this handmaid shall not inherit with" @Genesis 21:10 the free. That is to say, those of the household of faith are born after the Spirit. Think of the dignity attaching to it. The "bondwoman and her son" @Genesis 21:10 must go. Sarah had right instincts; she would not bring up her son with a mocker. We should be careful to select our company, that they do not mock at Christ, that they do not despise Christ. How can you be a companion of one who does not love Jesus?
One word on the household of God. It is the great final company. It is a primary thought of God, and primary thoughts are eternal thoughts. Provisional thoughts will end. Primary thoughts -- that is the family. We are told in Ephesians, in its own setting, a jewel in its proper setting, "no longer strangers and foreigners". @Ephesians 2:19. It is not that I am an alien; no, I am there on the ground of sonship. "No longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God, being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the corner-stone". @Ephesians 2:19,20. One beautiful passage in @Isaiah 56 greatly amplifies this, where the alien is alluded to, "the eunuchs that keep" God's "sabbaths", and "the son of the alien" that take their place in the testimony of God, "unto them will I give in my house ... a place and a name better than of sons and daughters". @Isaiah 56:4,5. Greater than any natural household could be; and the stranger is to be made "joyful" in God's "house of prayer". @Isaiah 56:7. That is, when we come together, even for prayer, when we are supposed to be burdened with the cares of the testimony, even there we are made glad; such is the joy, such is the atmosphere of the place. As @Luke 15
{70}
testifies, "music and dancing". @Luke 15:26.
God comes down to such figures to attract the hearts of the young, to show there is joy in His house; and "the singers" and "the dancers", we learn in @Psalm 87, "shall say, All my springs are in thee". @Psalm 87:7. The meaning is that it is in Zion where all the divine thoughts are; where Christ is; where God is. We do not draw from the world; we do not learn to dance in the world; we do not learn to speak in the world. 'All our springs are in thee'. Everything is learned there; we do not need to go outside at all.
{71}
THE COVENANT OF GOD
@Ezekiel 20:33 - 37; @2 Chronicles 34:29 - 32; @Isaiah 56:6 - 8
These scriptures all speak of the covenant, the covenant of God. As many of us know, this subject has a great place in Scripture. On account of our limitations as creatures, He uses terms that are intelligible to us, terms already known amongst men, so that He might become intelligible to us, that we might know Him. For instance, we are told that the promises which He had made, He confirmed by an oath. God cannot lie, so there is no reason why He should swear, but He does, by Himself, there being no greater to swear by. He does it to assure our feeble hearts, for at best they are feeble and doubting. God entered into covenant, committed Himself to promises, and in order to assure those to whom the promises were made, He confirmed them by an oath, "that by two unchangeable things in which it was impossible that God should lie, we might have a strong encouragement", @Hebrews 6:18 not only encouragement, but a strong encouragement, that our hearts should be fortified by the promises and the oath. This is in keeping with the incarnation itself. God would come in in the lowest way to get near to us, to be beside us to be compassable by us. Not that the Lord Jesus, even as a Babe, was compassable. He was ever what He was, the Same, the unchanging One. But He took the form of a Babe which would assure every heart. So the angels said to the shepherds, "Unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord". @Luke 2:11
They might have said 'born unto God', but no, "unto you is born ... a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord". The sign was they should find a babe wrapped
{72}
in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger. He came into circumstances that were well known, a babe wrapped in swaddling clothes. Perhaps the position lying in a manger was not so common. But they were to see a sign and this was the sign -- a babe wrapped in swaddling clothes lying in a manger, nothing to terrify or repulse man, but rather everything to encourage him. These things were knowable, that which was unknowable would be now known, and lovable, too. 'The Creator' speaks of the eternal power and divinity of God, but that hardly suggests attraction or love. It might be said that love is spoken of before the incarnation but all had incarnation in view. The divine work of the Spirit had incarnation in view. When God came in in one way or another, it looked forward to Bethlehem's manger, and the Babe in it. He used human language to show that He was and is love. He would be loved, too, that is what He wanted -- that He should be loved. "We love him, because he first loved us". @1 John 4:19. That love is attested in Jesus become Man.
Now in the covenant God takes up a word that is intelligible to man. The covenant is one of the most important subjects in Scripture. There are several covenants, but I cannot enter into them all now. One is the covenant at Horeb, and then the new covenant of which the one at Horeb was in a certain sense the type. The new covenant into which we have come is made with Israel and Judah, but we all have part in it. There is a touching reference to it in @Haggai 2:4,5, "I am with you, saith Jehovah of hosts. The word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, and my Spirit, remain among you". As if God would say 'the covenant involves all that I am towards you in love and thoughtfulness, and My Spirit makes it good in your hearts, remaining in you' -- all that God is in Christ Jesus our Lord and it is in Him that it is available to us. All that is with
{73}
us here in this hall tonight, and the Holy Spirit as well by whom it is made a reality to us. "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us". @Romans 5:5. So that we do not need to fear, we are rendered independent of all the human religions around us, for these two things remain with us, the covenant and the Spirit. It is in the light of these things that we are here tonight. The Holy Spirit is present to touch our hearts as to the covenant of God, so that the thing might be clear to us.
The Lord after He had blessed the cup said, "This is my blood, that of the new covenant, that shed for many". @Matthew 26:28, @Mark 14:24. In Mark's gospel it says, "and they all drank out of it". @Mark 14:23. That may apply to most of us here. We have all drunk out of it. What a precious thought, "they all drank out of it". It is not 'cups', it is "the cup", so they all drank out of it. The Lord said, "This is my blood, that of the new covenant". Then He said, "I will no more drink at all of the fruit of the vine", alluding to the passover cup, "until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God". @Mark 14:25. He says 'in a new way' which we can now understand. The new covenant is different from the old. It is to be drunk, but in a new way in the kingdom of God. We understand that, that christianity is new, and we have been brought into it, but the Lord speaks of Himself, "I will no more drink at all of the fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God". @Mark 14:25. He gave up the earthly side in the last passover, and set up the new thing in keeping with the new covenant in which we have part.
I want to show how the prophet urges on us the bond of the covenant. I have spoken from Haggai, who with Zechariah is one of the latest of the prophets; they both laboured in the building of the house in Jerusalem after they returned from Babylon, so they have a peculiar place, they were peculiar men, they
{74}
not only unfolded the mind of God, but they worked with their hands to build the temple. So Haggai has a peculiar kind of right to speak to us and he tells us that the covenant remains with us. It is well to notice the place that the prophets have. In the main they refer to the patience of God, God's long suffering, the patience of His service to us, His perfect service to us. The Lord said, "The law and the prophets were until John". @Luke 16:16. But there are also the Psalms which have a great place, too, but the prophets generally represent the patience of God, particularly in His service to us, that He has the very best things for us. God comes into our way of speaking, because we know God. Ezekiel was one who was in the place to receive communications for he was one of the captives by the river Chebar in Babylon. This marked him, so he has a right to speak to us because he had a part in the captivity as we have. We cannot rightly understand Scripture without seeing the moral bearing these Old Testament scriptures have on us. They speak directly to us, they have a word for us, they appeal to all circumstances, to all times. In the passage I read in Ezekiel we have God's dealings with His people. He brings them to "the wilderness of the peoples". Though they are among the nations, the nations become just a wilderness to them, nothing can make it such to them apart from the work of God in them. I know something of the Jewish way of thought, for we have about two million Jews in New York. I know the peoples are not a wilderness to them, it is all a question of making money, of getting on in the world. So the change will be wrought by the work of God. The nations will never become a wilderness to us except as we become the subjects of the work of God. Naturally the world is not a wilderness to us. We are born into it, we love it, we hanker after it, we would like to get on in it, to find our enjoyment in it. But God works in us;
{75}
young people are the subjects of the work of God, worldly companionship ceases to be a pleasure to them, rather is it a wilderness out of which they would seek to go, and find their companions among those who, like themselves, are the subjects of the work of God. The circle of the saints is a sphere of life, of course it is limited, but still it is life. "*We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren". @1 John 3:14.
Then He says, "I will cause you to pass under the rod", but first He speaks of the wilderness of the land of Egypt. That is what Egypt becomes to them, because God wrought and pleaded with them, in His love for them. He would have them understand, He brings them to Himself, He enters into covenant with them. And now He says, "I will cause you to pass under the rod". These verses are progressive. He brings us into the wilderness of the peoples and how the Lord pleads with each one of us. In how many ways He brings Himself before us, as we see in the early chapters of Exodus, chapters 13,14,15,16,17,19. For instance He was in the cloud, the cloud went before them, and then it moved behind them so as to be between them and the Egyptians. What consideration of God for them that they might be free and restful. Then they come into the wilderness and He enters into covenant with them at Horeb. But here there is the thought of the rod which should be noticed. "I will cause you to pass under the rod". The rod may be found in those chapters in Exodus; certainly there was the rod of Moses, the rod of authority which they passed under. Today it is the rod of Christ. Paul speaks of coming to Corinth with a rod, it was necessary. He greatly modified that remark by sending Timotheus to them, his child, one who was a very much younger man, but he knew Paul and he knew Paul's ways. The apostle uses marvellous skill in changing from severity to meekness
{76}
and love, but the rod was there. Indeed it shows the Lord's way with each one of us. Troubles come, sickness, sorrow, and other things, they are all to be taken as the evidence of the Lord's disposition towards us, every bit is for the good of the saints. "Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth". @Proverbs 3:12. There is love in the rod, and there is sonship in it, too. It makes the rod a very different thing when we see sonship in it. The rod will surely be used of God, it is not a rod of iron. When we see these two great words are blazoned on it -- love and sonship -- that enables us to submit, and thus we become partakers of His holiness. The shepherd uses his rod to count his sheep, you are honoured by being taken notice of. He leads His people, and they know they are honoured by being taken notice of -- called out by God, so that we may come into the bond of the covenant, recognising that there is the bond. He is looking for some response, not only in love but in consideration, because it is this sort of thing that makes men of us. In 1 Corinthians we read, "Quit yourselves like men; be strong" @1 Corinthians 16:13 and thus become grown men. It is the bond of the covenant, that I am obligated to God, He has made a proposition to me and I have to take it on. "I will bring you into the bond of the covenant". That involves not only my obligation to God, but it includes my obligation to my brethren. In other words, it is fellowship. That is the bearing of things, that we should take account as to whether we are true to the bond, true to God, true to the brethren.
Now I want to show from Chronicles how it works out, how a king comes into it. We have been speaking of the rod of authority in Moses. In the case of Josiah we get his whole life portrayed from eight years of age when he began to reign. You cannot attach the thought of much officialism to a boy like that, he is a tender person. You will see in this chapter how
{77}
the Holy Spirit speaks of different stages of this boy's life. That is, Josiah represents life, but life in its development. The boy draws out your sympathy, almost pity, to be found in such an exalted position. You are not afraid of a boy of eight years. But there he is the king. The Lord would come into our hearts in that way. Hilkijah finds the book of the law, the law of God, and brings it to the king, he had great interest in that; that is very suggestive, he had great interest in the book of the law. He rent his clothes with shame that the law, the covenant, had been so little regarded, should indeed have been lost sight of. That is how this chapter presents Josiah to us. He appeals to the prophetess Huldah. She tells him of the covenant of the Lord and the terrible consequences of their disobedience. The rights of God have been disregarded. But the king is in his place and he gets the elders to the house of the Lord. That is what the Lord is doing. He is getting the responsible ones to the house of the Lord.
If anyone does not understand, how He appeals to us to come to the house. So here "the king went up into the house of Jehovah, and all the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the priests and the Levites, and all the people, great and small; and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant which had been found in the house of Jehovah;" That is a most important section. The thing is opened up to us, you are given to understand the need, you are responsible. Anyone who is not responsible is not worthy of the name of a christian. Responsibility marks christianity. That is the point here. The king gets the responsible ones to the house of the Lord and reads to them the words of the law. Then in verse 31 "the king stood in his place", he stands to it. Now that is what I want to press. The covenant was made that they should keep it, the covenant of God. It has been recovered, and he
{78}
brings the responsible ones there and reads the words of the covenant. Now He is calling us all to stand to it, that is what the Lord is doing. He calls us to stand to it. The way He has of doing it I cannot enter into now, but He has the means. He is the King. He can do things, we are not stronger than He. If He is bent on making us stand to the covenant He will do it and it may be a very serious matter in our histories. He is bent on making us stand to the covenant, not to be trifling with it, but to stand to it.
That is why I read the passage in Isaiah: "The sons of the alien, that join themselves to Jehovah". You see how the prophecy comes in and has a bearing on the present time. We were once aliens and strangers, but the work of God has changed all that and we are of those who have joined themselves to Jehovah, that is to God. I am not asking you to join yourself to any company, it is a question of joining Jehovah, joining the Lord to minister to Him and to love His name. Where will you get a finer statement of the position of one in whom God has worked? He has joined himself to Jehovah to minister to Him and to love His name, to be His servant. Is there anyone ready to come forward tonight for the first time? We gentiles were all aliens to God and to His covenant. What are you going to do? If there is a stranger among us, wishing to join himself to the Lord, to minister to Him and love His name and be His servant, this chapter is most encouraging to you. He goes on to say, "Every one that keepeth the sabbath from profaning it, and holdeth fast to my covenant; even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer". Now that, dear brethren, is a wonderful proposition for anyone tonight who has not taken his place as a stranger before God and joined himself to Jehovah. God shows us how He brings us to His holy mountain -- the term is full of spiritual
{79}
meaning, "My holy mountain" and "my house of prayer". Not the house of burden but the place of joy. The music and the dancing are there. God brings things down to the young that they may be encouraged as to what He has for them. The elder brother heard the music and the dancing. It is going on today and God is offering it to us. The Lord Jesus said, "We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced"; @Matthew 11:17, @Luke 7:32 the Lord is the Musician. In the Father's house there were both music and dancing. "The Lord Jehovah, who gathereth the outcasts of Israel, saith: Yet will I gather others to him, with those of his that are gathered". This verse is an encouragement to us at this moment. It is a question of the covenant. The keeping of the sabbath means to us our recognising the Lord's supper in the setting of the covenant to all those who keep it from pollution. He has recovered it for us and it is for us to keep it from pollution. Then there is to be positive gain, progress and addition. "I will gather others".
{80}
FELLOWSHIP -- GENERAL AND LOCAL
@1 Corinthians 1:1 - 3; @2 Corinthians 1:1,2; @Colossians 4: 16; @Deuteronomy 21:1 - 9
J.T. I was thinking of general fellowship and local fellowship, and the responsibility that attaches to each. I thought this subject would be one that would yield something for us at this meeting -- that is, the subject of fellowship in a general and local sense and particularly the responsibility attaching to each respectively, for we at times are unduly local and unduly general. So that a right balance is what the Lord would always lead to, and it occurred to me that the first scripture read links the two ideas together, or rather makes them one; for whilst the address is to the assembly of God which is at Corinth we read it is to the "sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints, with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours". It is not, of course, that the apostle would imply that his directions as to administration should be taken part in by all at one time, but certainly any act of administration at Corinth should not be of an independent nature, it should be such as would take account of "all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours". So that any question raised at Rome or in Jerusalem or in Africa as to an act in Corinth would be answered and would not be regarded as a matter belonging to Corinth exclusively, for the obvious teaching is that the same Lord is "both theirs and ours". It is His matter and the principle of universality would be maintained while wisdom would recognise "put away from among yourselves that wicked person" @1 Corinthians 5:13 alluded to Corinth, but as put away in Corinth he would be put away everywhere. It would be regarded as an act binding on the assembly
{81}
as a whole and the binding is necessarily the concern of all, subject to enquiry on the part of all.
I thought these remarks would cover the first part of our subject, and in the second letter the address is to the "assembly of God which is in Corinth, with all the saints who are in the whole of Achaia"; that is, the area is reduced, it is brought down to the province. Then in the epistle to the Colossians the thought is narrower still; that is, the letter addressed to Colosse was to be read to the assembly of Laodiceans, which was nearby, "and that *ye* also read that from Laodicea". The area is reduced to neighbouring assemblies, two assemblies, as if the exercises and needs would be somewhat alike, showing that as the area is reduced the current conditions are more nearly alike. I thought that this declining gradation of responsibility helps as to current matters amongst the saints, matters that are constantly arising in localities and the responsibility attaching to the difficulties arising.
A.N. Do you mean that the moral conditions in Colosse would possibly be true of Laodicea, so that the same epistle would apply to both?
J.T. That is what is intended to be conveyed; for example, characteristic conditions in London are likely to mark the suburbs. I think God considers for His people in that way. Adjacent meetings are likely to be suffering from nearby like conditions and therefore a word for one is a word for another.
A.N. I think that helps, that the special word which the epistle had would equally apply to the district.
J.T. That is right, and wisdom therefore as more extended to the distant meetings would take all this into account. The more adjacent meetings are more likely to be conversant with details and the Lord would use them. It seems to me that is the instruction in this declining gradation of responsibility. I
{82}
thought in suggesting these scriptures in relation to Deuteronomy that we find all these ideas condensed in this type in chapter 21. That is, we have the facts of an occurrence concerning which responsibility had to be determined. The determination was not by local people but by those that represent the general idea -- that is @1 Corinthians 1. "Thine elders", it says in verse 2, "thine elders and thy judges shall go forth, and they shall measure ...". That is, the determination of the responsibility is general, it is by those who represent the general fellowship. "Thine" is Israel's judges. And then we have the measuring and the local responsibility determined, and then the elders of the local city are brought in in verse 4; and then the priests, the sons of Levi, alluding to the spiritual condition -- that a spiritual condition is required.
A.S. Is it the spiritual condition of the local meeting or the district?
J.T. The spiritual condition is general, that is, the word is "the priests the sons of Levi". They are not regarded as local. They represent a state that God can approve, that is, a priestly condition. They are not mentioned after that, you will observe. Their office is determined in verse 5 "by their word shall every controversy and every stroke be tried". And then the local people act as priests and say, "Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it". Their solicitation is for the whole of Israel, they never lose sight of the general fellowship -- "Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel". That is the local people, but they are acting as priests.
R.G. How is the measuring done in a practical way?
J.T. Well now, before we get to that do you understand what was said in regard of 1 Corinthians and Colossians? It is important to get the basis in the New Testament. The first letter to Corinth is the
{83}
the great general fellowship merging in the local. The second epistle brings it down to the province -- the saints which are in Achaia; and the third scripture brings it down to the immediate locality, for Laodicea was very near to Colosse. They are viewed as having like exercises and yet their distinctiveness as assemblies is maintained -- they do not act together. Now if that be clear, we may consider how the elders and judges measured.
Rem. So that in that way any local company acting would have the whole fellowship in view in the acting.
J.T. Yes, that is how it stands in Corinthians. It is "to all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours". In the following address the apostle directs that certain persons be put away, delivered to Satan, and the like. Well, Corinth cannot assume that it is not the business of Rome.
Rem. So that that would be ever in view in anything that might come upon a local company, they would recognise the brethren in the district and elsewhere.
J.T. I think that it is important that we get the full bearing of the fellowship. The unity of the Spirit is a collateral thought, there is one body, one Spirit, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all -- that is the spiritual side, the fellowship is the working out of it.
Ques. Would you say that no assembly can act rightly in regard to the local fellowship unless they have the general fellowship in view?
J.T. Quite so. We act in relation to the general fellowship. Yet wisdom would leave it, of course, with the local assembly as to whatever is done.
Rem. And yet as to the result Mr. Darby speaks very strongly, the man that was put away was outside the assembly altogether.
{84}
Ques. Is there any instruction in the identification of Sosthenes with Paul?
J.T. Well, as has often been remarked, it is the brotherly element; the Spirit of God takes account of our way of looking at things, a brother would require a brother for brotherly consideration in all matters.
Rem. In chapter 5 there is the "within" and the "without", "*Ye*, do not ye judge them that are within? But those without God judges. Remove the wicked person from amongst yourselves" @1 Corinthians 5:12,13 -- there is the inclusive and the exclusive.
J.T. Those that are within are in the circle of the fellowship, the wicked man was to be outside of that.
Ques. Would the fact that chapter 5 opens with the thought that it is universally reported suggest the link, that is, the general and the local?
J.T. The state of division amongst them was reported by the house of Chloe but the state of corruption was generally reported, without it being said who reported it. There was universal feeling about it. There is no doubt that in the house of Chloe there was godly concern, that there were conditions such as are spoken of in the assembly.
Ques. Would you say a word as to the difference between priests, elders and the sons of Levi?
J.T. The first thing is "Thine elders and thy judges". Now the suggestion there, clearly, is persons who are responsible. Elders today are not general, the bearing of an elder in the assembly is local. "Thine elders" means the national elders of Israel, and what they represent in the type is persons who are responsible, they are distinct from the priests. The word denotes a person of experience, one who has grown up in the testimony and loving the Lord and His interests. They would have the experience which would lead them to be concerned about any and every matter which affects the testimony, so that they would denote today the element of responsibility
{85}
everywhere. If there is no element of responsibility there is nothing for God. Responsibility means that the things of God are being looked after and if we cannot do it directly we can pray about it. And then judges refers to ability to judge, if there be not that the same thing applies -- there is nothing for God. The same persons are alluded to, of course. The first is the responsibility and the second ability to judge. Then "the priests the sons of Levi" refers to the same persons, but it is looking at what is spiritual. The apostle says, "I think that *I* also have God's Spirit", @1 Corinthians 7:40 but he gives his judgment of himself as one who had had mercy shown him. Generally speaking, believers dealing with the things of God reckon on the Spirit and on spirituality, so that the word in Galatians is "Ye who are spiritual" @Galatians 6:1 -- that is what is alluded to. So that there are three things, the responsible element, the discerning element and the priestly element, that is the element that makes room for the Spirit of God, which applies to all christians -- all christians are priests -- hence all christians are brought into it. The priest always considers for God. The law was in his charge, he was custodian of the law and you can rely upon his word, and it says, "By their word shall every controversy and every stroke be tried". Hence we need the priestly element or there is no authority. The incident brings all this holy organism into action, a very wonderful thing in this world. Think of a holy organism of God set down here in this world and it is right in its results -- a great matter in God's account.
Rem. I wonder whether that would be exemplified in the Lord personally in regard of His judgment and the priestly character of it: "My judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me". @John 5:30.
J.T. There you have perfection of judgment. In the assembly, viewed as under the divine hand, governed
{86}
by the Spirit of God, you get a like result. We are not guessing at things. It is not haphazard, the thought is you reach a judgment according to God.
A.N. If I am looking at things in relation to myself or others my judgment will be flurried, but if I look at it in relation to God there will be a right judgment.
J.T. Very good. In @Deuteronomy 33 it says, "Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy holy one". @Deuteronomy 33:8. "Thy Thummim" is first (it is usually the Urim first), which means, I think, that the state was there before you get the light. If the spiritual state was there you can count upon the light from the Holy One. God had tested out Levi. It is interesting to compare the blessing of Moses, 'the man of God', and the blessing of 'Jacob the father'. Jacob gives the whole history of the tribes, good and bad. @Genesis 49 is not based on conduct. It is prophetic, because the tribes did not really exist yet, save in the sense of family, so that the tribal conduct had not yet taken place, it was purely prophetic. But when Moses blessed the people, tribal conduct had become historic, the tribes had been tested and the blessing was based on the result of the testing. It is an important matter, especially in regard of Levi; that is, God had tested him and God had found him worthy of the Urim and the Thummim. Levi in many instances sided with Moses. In regard to the golden calf he sided with Moses and in another instance he disregarded his father, "whom thou didst prove at Massah, and with whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah; Who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him". @Deuteronomy 33:8,9. Much is said about Levi, he is reliable, he entirely disregards natural relationships in dealing with the things of God. They are the most treacherous matters in dealing with the things of God.
A.N. I am sure that is important, that in local difficulties, where the question of natural relationships
{87}
come in, or if I have a bitter spirit towards another, I will not have a clear judgment.
J.T. So he is called, "Thy holy one" -- that expression applies absolutely to Christ -- "Thou art the holy one of God" @John 6:69 -- it is a great discovery. He is the true Levi and we are to get character from Christ.
Rem. There is a remarkable statement in @2 Chronicles 19:6, "And said to the judges, Take heed what ye do; for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment".
J.T. That is good. "Take heed what ye do". That scripture you quoted regarding Levi is very beautiful, "Who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children: for they have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant". @Deuteronomy 33:9 It is the father and the mother and the brother and the children that are set aside, natural relationships in the assembly; that was not prophetic, it had already come out. In Levi, God was dealing with what had already been proved. So that a person proved is reliable. God regards us as reliable and confides in us and counts on a right judgment. It is a question of what you will do tomorrow. You may succeed today but you may not tomorrow. God would have those that are reliable. So that Malachi brings out the priesthood in the end of the Old Testament. God sits as a refiner and tests us. God, as it were, puts up things to us; we may think ourselves spiritual and God says, Well, what are you going to do with this? and the testing goes on. If we are all clear about the general responsibility of "thine elders and thy judges", the next thing is the local persons -- "the city that is nearest". Measurement is made by "thine elders and thy judges", then the next thing is that the immediate responsibility is determined -- what will these do?
{88}
Ques. Before going on to that do you mind saying who is the man that is slain in the field?
J.T. Oh, it is just an occurrence; it may apply to Christ, it is just an occurrence which requires adjudication, whatever requires a solution is in view. It is just a type, it is not that we have the direct teaching in the scripture we read, it is a type. A coroner's inquest is what the law requires, whoever the man is or however it may be set.
Rem. Does it suggest a disordered state?
J.T. Yes, there is the murder, all that enters into the case. Now what is that city going to do? It is going to be tested. Is the murderer there? Do the elders of the city know anything about it? There are no loose ends in the Scriptures, things are taken up at once and we are provided with what we are to do.
Rem. So that in the beginning of Acts when Peter brings it home to them, they say, "Men and brethren, what shall we do?" @Acts 2:37.
J.T. That is right. The suggestion is that the city is here, there is no imputation laid on the city, but they are to clear themselves. The point is for us to see how quickly the matter is taken up, and how beautiful the result of the instructions being followed. We have the priests in the locality who are able to speak to God. They are not thinking of themselves but of 'all Israel'. It says in verse 6, "All the elders of that city, that are next unto the slain man, shall wash their hands over the heifer that is beheaded in the valley: And they shall answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it. Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel". They are able to act as priests and speak to God. But we have to take account of the "heifer ... which hath not drawn in the yoke", and "the valley which is neither eared nor sown", as it is said, "the city that is nearest unto him that is slain, even the elders of that city shall take a heifer that hath not been wrought with, that hath not drawn in the yoke; and the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto an ever-flowing watercourse, which is not tilled, nor is it sown, and shall break the heifer's neck there in the watercourse ... . And all the elders of that city that are nearest unto him that is slain, shall wash their hands over the heifer whose neck is broken in the watercourse", @Deuteronomy 21:3,4,6.
{89}
The heifer suggests the opposite to what might have brought about the murder. It represents one that has not been employed by man's will. The murder would have been the result of man's will. And there was to be no sowing in the valley. It is all the opposite of what would have brought about the murder. The scene of the murder is the scene of man's will, and where there has been sowing of some kind, wicked cultivation.
Rem. I was wondering if @Numbers 1 and 2 would support what we have been considering, first the whole host, that is the universal position, secondly the families, which might suggest the surrounding companies, and then the father's house, which might suggest the local aspect.
J.T. That is right, there were four sets of tribes, one on the east and one on the south and one on the west and one on the north representing the universal position, the universal element in the testimony. Then each set is subdivided into three and then the father's house is still a further subdivision. So that you can bring the thing down, as in the case of Achan, all the tribes were brought into it, it is a universal matter. Tribe after tribe is taken, then Judah is taken, then the father of Achan is taken and then Achan is taken. That is, the thing is worked out to the responsible person. As the Lord said, "One of you shall betray me", @Matthew 26:21, @Mark 14:18. @John 13:21 but the thing has to be determined -- each one says, "Is it I?"
Ques. Would you say a word as to the breaking of the neck?
{90}
J.T. It is a question of man's will. It is murder -- it is not a dead man, it is a slain man, and somebody did it and whoever did it had a stiff neck, he was a murderer. It all refers to conditions in this world finding a place amongst the people of God.
Ques. Do you think that this regarding the heifer is what is lacking in us, there must be the apprehension of the death of Christ in this character?
J.T. That is the idea, He is the opposite of all this. Here the point is "not drawn in the yoke". The Lord Jesus never came under the human yoke, man's yoke. Anyone that commits murder has done so. It is usually a planned thing -- the sowing in the valley. Now not being sown is the opposite of what was in those that perpetrated this wickedness. This is over against all that, and the elders of that city are to show that they are in accord with all this, and that is the point -- I am to be in accord with Christ if I am to have part in this. I think, too, that we would enter upon a local difficulty with subdued spirits if we were affected by the death of Christ in this aspect.
Ques. How does this aspect of the death of Christ work out in the breaking of the neck?
J.T. Well, the heifer's neck being broken is expiation. Christ entered into death for us and that is expiation. It says, "And the blood shall be expiated for them". That is, He became this for us. Look at Saul of Tarsus, an insolent, overbearing man he calls himself, an arrogant kind of man doing things legally and with a good conscience. A good conscience does not mean that I am right. "But", he says, "mercy was shewn me". @1 Timothy 1:13.
Ques. Why is the word 'field' used so much here?
J.T. It is to fill out the type, I think, when there is nobody to see what happened. If it had been in the city you probably would have had witnesses. Showing that, no matter what happens, it is covered;
{91}
you cannot say 'It is not in our city'. No matter where it is, it is covered. An inquest is required, the thing has to be solved. So that Israel is cleared. That is what the elders say, "Forgive thy people Israel". That is, the saints must be clear in all these matters. We cannot have the imputation of guilt upon us. We cannot be here for God if things are not solved. There is nothing left unsolved in the assembly. That is one great point. The apostle says, "in every way ye have proved yourselves to be pure in the matter". @2 Corinthians 7:11.
Ques. After they have established their innocence does their responsibility cease?
J.T. Well, they pray for all Israel. We are not concerned about our own meeting only, we pray for all Israel, as I have just read in verse 7, "Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it. Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel". That is what the Lord Jesus died for, to set up here a testimony free from guilt and He has put within us a means of solving things. This chapter has proved most helpful and has saved a great many brethren in these latter days, that is, whilst the approved might be made manifest. Well, we do not want to lose any. They do not want to lose any. They pray for all Israel, the expiation is for all Israel. It is well to keep that in mind. In the great battle with Midian it says that not a man was lost, and the greatest spoil you get in Scripture is, I think, in that battle. Phinehas, you know, proved the reality of the priesthood, the everlasting priesthood. He set to the war with the holy instruments of God, even with a trumpet, that is, the testimony of the Lord. He sounded it, and sounded it, and sounded it. Phinehas would keep on sounding out the truth.
Rem. It would seem that the responsibility is with the local city. In the Revelation it says, "The angel of the assembly" of a particular place.
{92}
J.T. Yes, then the next thing is, is the local city equal to the emergency? And that is why the priesthood is immediately brought in. Not the local priest, but "the priests the sons of Levi", that is, the holy condition amongst the people of God generally are brought into it. To my own mind that is important at the present time. God has used this scripture to save the brethren, not to cut any off, but to save them.
Ques. Have you in mind that in cases of difficulty we have been perhaps concentrated on circumstances and the culprit rather than the responsibility which is the universal sorrow?
J.T. I think that things are often made too local and we lose the wealth that is available to us. If a man anywhere in the world has ability for government, he is available. These things are set in the assembly and it is important to give them scope, God has provided them for us. On the other hand that person ought to be concerned not to go beyond his service. I think the universal side needs to be emphasised because it embraces all that God has furnished for the assembly so that we do not want to shut anything out..
Rem. The principle would be borne out in the epistle to the Corinthians, while it was apostolic yet there was a priestly element in it. That is, "In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit", @1 Corinthians 5:4. The principle of it is that he is thinking of it in relation to the Lord.
J.T. That is right, and his spirit was there. One would not be fanciful, but the idea is that he was not there in body but he was there in spirit. How far-reaching assembly elements are! Spirituality reaches out.
Rem. A sectional movement would have a tendency to lose men, would it not?
{93}
J.T. So all these conflicts should yield wealth universally.
Ques. Is verse 9 important? The guilt will never be put away when they do not do what is right in the eyes of Jehovah.
J.T. Yes, that is so. That is insisted on, "thou shalt do what is right".
{94}
THE LIGHT OF HEAVEN AND THE LIGHT OF LIFE
@Matthew 2:1 - 12; @Matthew 4:12 - 16; @John 8: 12; @Philippians 4:8
I have in mind to present from these scriptures some thoughts as to guidance -- guidance by what is in the heavens, what I might designate as entirely objective, and then guidance by what is on the earth -- that is, the light of heaven and the light of life. These two means of guidance are collateral; that is, they run together and should not be separated. We find them early, the first is in the record of the fourth day in @Genesis 1, and the second is in the fifth and sixth days. The principle of life precedes this -- in the third day of Genesis l -- and that is not accidental, it is designed, the divine thought obviously being that the principle of life exists; otherwise guidance, or the means of guidance, would have no force, for inanimate things need no guidance. Nor would there be anything answering at all to God in the universe aside from life, for God is the living God. So the principle of life is seen in the third day. It is but the principle, as I said, the law of life; that is, vegetable life, a kind of figure much used in Scripture as to life -- that is life according to God -- and is only capable in persons. The figure is applied to persons, even as to the Lord Himself as "the grain of wheat falling into the ground". @John 12:24. And so the principle of life being there, we have the luminaries set up in the heavens which divide between the night and the day, to be for signs, for years, for seasons. And they stand, they are in a way fixed and so may be likened in some sense to principles. Principles are fixed and unvarying, whereas life is pliable and so the full thought of it awaited the incarnation of the Lord Jesus. Hence we have,
{95}
"In him was life; and the life was the light of men". @John 1:4. That is not heavenly -- not that He does not remain life, for as in heaven He remains what He was, He is the same in that respect, His condition being changed He remains the Same -- but "In him *was* life, and the life *was* the light of men", not '*is*' but "*was* the light of men" @John 1:4 refers to Him as here, to the great principle of life. All the thoughts of life set out in Genesis found their answer perfectly in the Lord Jesus. So we have the two thoughts: one the heavenly, referring in the main to Matthew, and the light of life found in the main in John. It is John that tells us that "In him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not". @John 1:4,5.
As to the kind of light it is, it is not what we are ordinarily accustomed to, because darkness must go in the presence of light ordinarily, but the nature of the darkness is that it remains. It *will* go, of course; the whole universe will be cleared of darkness, but the nature of the darkness in man is that it stays. Notwithstanding the brilliancy of the light "the darkness comprehended it not". @John 1:5. Now it is disappearing -- "the true light now shineth". @1 John 2:8. It is passing -- not past. In whatever measure the principle is active, there is a testimony to it, that principle is active and the darkness is passing. One may apply it to oneself and discern how in his history darkness began to move until he became light, so that we may say the darkness is passing for him. The principle is active and will be active until every bit of darkness has been dispelled.
Well now, the magi came in for consideration in regard to the heavenly side of the truth, or the light. They represent a class that is what you would call educated or scientific persons, which God takes account of, for He is not a respecter of persons. He certainly will not reject a man because he is educated. The rather will He come into his circumstances whatever
{96}
they may be. Even if they be university circumstances, God can come into them and does. In one sense these things are of little importance to God. He may come into a palace or university as into a house or a coal mine. He operates where men are, because they are men. The light is the light of *men*, whether wise men or ignorant men. And so these men saw the star of the Messiah, King of Judah, they had perception enough, they perceived, there was something more than natural ability to see this star. They saw it, and were affected by the sight; that is to say they were amenable to a divine intervention. They were capable of being affected by a divine intervention in their own circumstances and they removed. That is one great principle in regard to light or guidance, one moves according to it. But then one may make a start and miss, for we are not given to understand they prayed about the matter. I was remarking that life preceded in Scripture the thought of light or guidance, and it is entirely fulfilled in Matthew, for the life was there. Speaking reverently about the Lord, He is expressly called "the young child" @Matthew 2:14 in this chapter. Although the life was there, it was there, we may say, in principle. It was there, all that He is was there, all that He is personally for you cannot alter His Person. How He could be there is another matter, we have to leave that, it is beyond us. I am speaking of what was external and it was a "little child". A small thought, but it was there. And so there was something in heaven in communion with the movements under heaven. We get it later in John, too, "the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man", @John 1:51 that is, they begin with Him. But I am speaking now of the principle of life, however small it was, it was there, for the chapter opens with it -- "Jesus having been born in Bethlehem". The thing had happened, the life was there, and the star alluded to it. The star had in
{97}
mind that it should be reached, and so it is always the principle pointing to where the life is, however small it may be, however obscure it may be. We must never divorce the principle from the thing that it leads to. Now the wise men saw the star, "Jesus having been born", it was a fact. It was no longer a question of promise. They saw His star in the east and came to worship Him. But they do not come to the right place, no doubt governed by their natural thoughts; where would He be but in the royal city? But it was not in the royal city, nor did the star indicate that it was in the royal city. There is no connection between the star and Jerusalem. I call it the royal city, Matthew calls it the royal city, but for the moment it was where Herod was, in the days of Herod. But there is a great connection between the fact that Jesus had been born in Bethlehem and the star, and it was for them to find out, to find a way to the spot where the life was. I use the word 'life', but it was the Lord Jesus, the Person was there, as I said before, in wonderful mystery infinitely beyond any research of men, He was there. I am speaking of what is external, and they came to Jerusalem. Now, dear brethren, what I deduce from all this is that the star is accurate, it is unerring, which points to Christ, which points to what is here, to what is to be found. Whatever the outward appearance is, it is unerring. And so the wise men missed it in coming to Jerusalem. Not that God did not over-rule what they were doing, for they sought "the young child". Their object was right, they came a long way, and it is to their credit, but then do they pray? Do they ask God who sent the star and showed it to them, as to just how they should find the blessed Person? For guidance is not a matter for a year, it is a continual thing, it is a momentary thing. I have got to get it for every step, and I have got to watch for the indication because there are so many things, so many currents, that may
{98}
defile me, unknowingly even. There was the great current of national repute and politics. These men were conversant with Jerusalem and what it stood for -- it was the capital of the Jewish territory -- but then would Jehovah have directed them to the would-be murderer of Jesus? We shall never be guided in that direction if we seek guidance from heaven. They found their way to Jerusalem. I suppose the best roads led in that direction. They arrived at Jerusalem, and say, "Where is the king of the Jews?" A very worthy question -- but then I have to be wary as to the persons I enquire from. What kind of answer will they give me and what effect will my question have on them? May it stir up motives of which the flesh is so capable which will lead to disaster? They were evidently questioning in Jerusalem in a very irregular sort of way, but the tidings came to the ears of the king and although the king is worldly wise enough as to the persons who are likely to know and they give him a sort of correct answer, yet this does not make up for the great mistake of being governed by natural thoughts, so ready to come up with each one of us. It is the most momentous matter possible for us. "We have seen his star in the east". They said, "We have seen it" -- they were not seeing it now, not that they were not scanning the heavens for it. They were, as it were, labouring under their own charges. Did they not miss it? Did they not look behind to see where the star was moving? There is no intelligence. But now they move again, they come in the direction of the little Child and they see the star. That is to say, I am out of range of natural thoughts now -- the star does not belong to that realm. Whatever my motive the star is out of all that and as soon as I move out of that realm the star appears, and I am capable of being impressed. How beautiful it is, "they rejoiced with exceeding great joy". Who of us has not had
{99}
some experience of that? When that heavenly light comes into the soul it points to Christ always. Who of us has not had the joy of a ray of light from heaven directing the heart to Jesus? Directing, it may be, to some great feature of His Person. How great a joy it is; the Lord would encourage us to such experiences. "They rejoiced with exceeding great joy", and the star stayed over the house where the little Child was. "The little child" or "the young child", the Spirit would impress that it is not great externally, not yet. It is to fill the universe, as in John the Lord says, "I am the light of the world". It is a little Child, but it is to the same purpose. As a matter of fact, it is how we all reach Him -- in a small way to begin with. But when there is divine guidance, when clear of the natural realm, what joy of heart when I see the star and I know definitely that it is leading me; that there is nothing else in vision now but the sought one -- the little Child. The King of the Jews was now in their minds, that is what they had in mind -- the great thought -- but for the moment it was where the little Child was. If they had been governed by natural thoughts it was a very absurd sort of place. There would be nothing to answer to their national thoughts, it appeared, a little child with its mother. However little, it was what they sought. No hesitation -- no questioning -- for questioning denotes uncertainty. Now they are certain, there is no mistake. The natural heart might say, 'Well, there does not look to be much reality there'. But it was there, and there was no hesitation with them now. So you see that as we come out of the natural, the star would direct us to the light.
The principles are as true, as fixed, as any heavenly body and they always point to what is of Christ on earth, you may be sure of that.
Well now, I would not dwell on what is so well known to us, that is, the beautiful movement of their
{100}
hearts. They worship, and they were not empty-handed men, not mere professors curiously seeking to see this great personage. No, they were worshippers; they were in keeping with the requirement of the Old Testament, that no one should appear before God empty-handed. They had gold and frankincense and myrrh, beautiful tribute to the now suffering Saviour. He had come to suffer, murder was all around Him and that in high places. Well might they have the myrrh! How beautifully it fitted! They are amenable to heavenly guidance. They will never go back to Jerusalem again. Let us one and all, young and old, learn to renounce the realm of the natural, it is always uncertain and darkening. The principles of light point to life, they point to Jesus, however obscure. He is there, and if we wait we will find Him. Well, in the next chapter, we have not the little Child but the Man. The thing is in full activity, when He heard that John was cast into prison, that is, the time for service had arrived. There is no idea of His serving as a little child. Now His time for service has arrived, He has overcome the wicked one. You might say that He would have known of John being cast into prison, but He heard. He is the true Man here, taking account of things and as John was cast into prison His time for service is come. He is in Nazareth. He has been to Bethlehem -- the wise men saw Him in Bethlehem -- but He is now in Nazareth, the place where He was brought up and He went into Capernaum, which is a suggestion that He had no natural thoughts -- no thoughts of comfort -- in His service. Capernaum was a much less healthy place than Nazareth, several hundreds of feet below the level of the sea. There was no attraction for anyone there naturally, save as they have another motive, and the Lord Jesus had another motive. He was going down to serve and to die. You can understand the radiancy of the light now, it is not in one's own self-exaltation,
{101}
there is no light in that; the antichrist exalts himself -- his coming is after the working of the devil. Whereas we find Jesus went down, and you can quite understand what radiancy of light there was. And so you have here that "light is sprung up" -- not going down, but sprung up, as you will see, "That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, ... The people which sat in darkness saw great light; and to them which sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up". It was not shining down from the stars now; I wish you to notice that, dear brethren, because we are now on the lines of light as guidance, as yet that is, for people are sitting in darkness. How much of that there is abroad in christendom! "Sitting in darkness", unaware of the terrible pall of darkness that rests upon them. But here is light springing up in the midst of them. It has sprung up in the midst of them, as one often thinks of the Lord Jesus, He dwelt in Capernaum, either rented or borrowed a house -- what a thing it would be to live next door to Jesus! What lessons to be learned! When the woman of Shunem saw the man passing by her door she took notice of him. She said he was a holy man of God. What should I think if I lived next door to Jesus, what conclusion would I come to? Peter says, "Thou art the holy one of God". @John 6:69. What minute things Jesus would have done; He says, "I am among you as he that serveth". @Luke 22:27. What would He not do? What light there was! You never saw a man act like that, speak like that! It might be about the most trivial things, as we speak, but He was subject as to them, and every word would be light.
Well, we are to look for these things, dear brethren, what is springing up. That is to say, the work of the Spirit of God in the saints. That is the idea, there is that here that springs up, as in life the earth was to yield; so Christ is to spring up, that is the idea of
{102}
life. The well springs up. "In him was life" -- it was not in any other -- "and the life was the light of men". @John 1:4,. And here it was in Capernaum, shining all around -- no wonder the Lord says, "And *thou*, Capernaum, who hast been raised up to heaven, shalt be brought down even to hades". @Matthew 11:23, @Luke 10:15. And so now, relatively, the true light is shining, dear brethren, however little it may be, it is shining in the saints of God, and it is for me to see it, that is what I am speaking about -- look out for the light. And so in @John 8 you have the expression "light of life", that is just what I am leading up to. The Lord had been doing much in the way of stooping down and the Spirit of God speaks about His actions in that well-known chapter. He stooped down and then He lifted Himself up -- remarkable expressions -- and He stooped down again and He lifted Himself up. These were remarkable actions and everyone of them was full of light -- light was radiant in all of them. As Jacob says, "I wait for thy salvation, O Jehovah". @Genesis 49:18. What shone there came from no other than the Messiah. His speaking and ways pointed unmistakably to His Person and so in this verse I have read He says, "I am the light of the world". Can anybody dispute it? No one! No one would, there was unmistakable evidence of it there -- He, the Light of life, was there -- who could dare to deny it? The saints could never be that, they "shine as lights in the world", @Philippians 2:15 but He was the light of it! Of no other person could that be said but God Himself! But then He says, "he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life". And so this gospel is intended to unfold, among other things, of course, the deity of Christ, His Person is in the gospel, but it is intended to disclose thoughts as to principles of the "light of life" here on earth. It is not that He is in heaven, it is the light on earth here. He is the Light of life, not simply light, but the Light of life; and that is the point --
{103}
in all our uncertainties there is the unmistakable guidance of the star, that is, fixed principles, and then there is the guidance accruing from the work of the Spirit of God in the saints. There is something in them that is in accord with Christ. It is the work of God, but nevertheless it is the true light. The one is the complement of the other, it is the question of the Spirit of God being here working in the saints, so the same life is here. It may be obscure, but if we watch carefully enough we will see it, and if I see it it is for me. It is none other than the work of God and I must identify myself with the work of God. I should never look for it aside from righteousness. I should be looking in a false direction if I look in any other direction than after righteousness, "every one who practises righteousness is begotten of him". @1 John 2:29. Where righteousness is I can look for it. In Haggai we have the thought of the priest being asked if anyone bear holy flesh in his garment, will that make what the garment touches holy? No! The priest says it will not. I may have the best doctrines, as we say, in the Bible, but a garment that is unholy can never be made holy by this. Then again it says, if a man is unclean by reason of touching a dead person, will he render different articles of food clean? No! He will render them unclean. If he is unclean, will the priest make them unclean? Yes, he will, the priest will make them unclean. Whereas if I am holy and I touch the unholy thing, I am made unclean. You see how "evil communications corrupt good manners". @1 Corinthians 15:33. But good manners will not change bad manners. I have to separate, that is the principle. There is no way out of it; and so, as I was saying, the light of life is connected with righteousness. It must have righteousness as its fundamental. The structure is built up on righteousness.
I just turn in closing to Philippians, that well-known verse. It is a beautiful epistle on this subject; it is
{104}
the complement really of Ephesians. Ephesians is the great doctrinal epistle for the heavenly calling of the assembly, but Philippians is the working out of it in the saints -- a beautiful epistle for the guidance of life among the saints of God. Now you will find the apostle is guided by that very principle when he went to Philippi, he went out by the riverside. The word of God began in that connection, the roots were well set, that is Philippians. There was much in Philippi, the principle was "that ye may judge of and approve the things that are more excellent" @Philippians 1:10 -- however much you may have added to it. So that this verse helps in what I am speaking of, "Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things". Now these are the evidences of life, however little -- "if there be any", "whatsoever" -- think on them. So that we are to live in the realm of the positive, of what is of God; "think on these things", he says. I read the verse because it amplifies in detail what I am speaking of, that the Philippian saints, more spiritual perhaps than any of us would think we are, are enjoined to this, not to be occupied with what is evil, but to look for the good, however little. How are we to find it? I do not look for these things amongst unrighteousness. The Spirit of Christ was manifested in a remarkable way in that place, in Paul, in Silas, and so there was the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ in them, but there was to be an addition, they were to be continued, as he says, whatever there was in the way of truth -- "whatsoever things are true"; next whatsoever there was in the way of purity, "whatsoever things are pure", "whatsoever things ... think on these things". There may be much else where they are, we can admit, but
{105}
if I am on the line of pure gold that belongs to the river, spoken of so early in Genesis, I will see it "and the gold of that land is good"; @Genesis 2:12 and the eye that understands mining for gold will see it, he will keep to it so as to get what is pure. Beloved, keep to that line, it becomes guidance for you, so that the light of life is there.
Well, that is what I had in mind, dear brethren, to put before you. I think that it is of God, that is, the principles of light, they are fixed principles of God for guidance and the work of God in men's souls.
{106}
THE SPIRIT'S PART IN THE ASSEMBLY
@1 Corinthians 12:3,12,13; @Romans 8:15; @Ephesians 2:18
J.T. The Lord has been helping us as to the assembly itself, its order and its service according to God, and the place the Lord's supper has in it, but perhaps the part the Spirit has in the assembly has not been stressed sufficiently. It needs to be, because whilst we have the light governing the assembly as to its service, we cannot act in it acceptably to God save by the Spirit. All is to be in the power of the Spirit from beginning to end, so as the tabernacle was set up it was anointed. The parts were functioning as they were set up, but they were *anointed*. The allusion in @1 Corinthians 12 would be to that, "so also is the Christ" (verse 12), that is the anointed; the assembly is alluded to, that which is anointed. The function of the Spirit may be viewed in two ways: the first having to do with the Lord as such, "No one can say, Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit", and the second, the Spirit of adoption, having to do with the Father. You say "Lord Jesus" by the Spirit, and you say "Abba, Father" by the Spirit. These two thoughts set out the service, the function of the Spirit, I think, in the assembly.
F.W.K. When you speak of 'in the assembly' are you thinking now of the saints convened, that is when we are together, for instance, on Lord's day morning for the Supper?
J.T. That is right. John's gospel separates the subject somewhat on those lines, the Spirit in connection with the individual believer, then the Spirit in relation to the company.
S.J.B.C. "Is the Christ divided?" @1 Corinthians 1:13 -- would that be the same thought as "so also is the Christ"?
{107}
J.T. I am not sure that it would be exclusive to the body. There I suppose the thought is that the anointed vessel is not divided. You cannot have the Spirit in the sense of anointing save as in unity.
H.G.N. "No man can say that Jesus is the Lord" -- that is individual, is it not?
J.T. Well, the apostle is contemplating the exercise of gift in the assembly in this chapter. The assembly is viewed as convened from chapter 11:17. In making this remark he is contemplating the exercises of gift, that is ministry, in the assembly, which follows on the Lord's supper. It is a sort of test in the assembly.
F.W.K. What is the meaning of the expression, "No one can say, Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit"?
J.T. It means the thing really. The types show that things have to be real. The functioning is in the anointing. It is to preclude the mere use of words or forms, the things are to be in the power of the Spirit. God never intended anything less. When the Holy Spirit came in at Pentecost His presence was marked. It was no theory, it was obvious. He sat on each of them, and they all began to speak of the wonderful works of God, being filled with the Holy Spirit. And so when the Spirit came at Caesarea in the house of Cornelius, it was apparent that He was there, it was no mere theory.
F.G.S. Would the place Moses had in the tabernacle system have a bearing here? I was wondering as to the thought of authority, expressed in the title "*Lord* Jesus". Moses was to be recognised in relation to the tabernacle system.
J.T. Yes. If it be a question of authority, the acknowledgment of authority according to God is by the Spirit -- the Spirit moving in us subjectively.
H.F. Is your thought that when we come together
{108}
for the breaking of bread we address the Lord in the power of the Spirit?
J.T. Yes. The subject is very wide. What is in mind now is to confine our thoughts to the Spirit in relation to the saints as gathered, the part He has in it.
S.S. So that, in this connection, would it be the voice of the Spirit?
J.T. It would be that the Lord would hear a voice in power. "Let me hear thy voice", @Song of Songs 2:14. Well, what voice does He hear? Is it the mere natural voice repeating words or is it a voice coming from mind and affections governed by the Spirit?
F.W.K. Does not the expression 'Lord Jesus' always involve that the affections are engaged, and not only the thought of authority?
J.T. Adding 'Jesus', you mean? Yes, I think that is very nice. I think you find that running through.
Rem. As with Stephen, I suppose?
J.T. "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit". @Acts 7:59. Yes.
F.W.K. I think the most touching instance of that is in @Acts 20, "Remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, It is more blessed to give than to receive", @Acts 20:35. It carries with it the thought of the blessed character of the Giver that was in that blessed Person.
J.T. The coming in of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost brought about a condition of things very wide in its bearing, but what we are concerned about now is the part He has in the assembly as convened. What it is to God, what it is to Christ, to have those who are of the assembly energised in their affections and their minds by this power; so that what the Lord hears is "Lord Jesus" in a voice energised by the Spirit, and what the Father hears is "Abba, Father". The Holy Spirit Himself cries that, and the Father's ear hears
{109}
that. But it is not the Spirit speaking as by Himself, because He is not incarnate. It is through the saints He speaks. Not that divine Persons cannot communicate between each other, but here the medium is the saints. "God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father", @Galatians 4:6. That is where the cry issues from -- the hearts of the saints. And in @Romans 8 it is by Him we cry, "Abba, Father".
W.D.R. Would this be discerned in the assembly if one was speaking in the power of the Spirit?
J.T. Well, I thought we might have that before our minds. What a place the assembly is for such speaking! It seems as if @1 Corinthians 14 would remind us that the presence of the Spirit implies that if anyone comes in they are affected by what transpires. Speaking to God is bound to have an effect on anyone, speaking to God by the Spirit.
W.E.M. I suppose in Corinth there were a number of gifted brothers, but this would be a great power to regulate things.
J.T. Things were so low there, that it seems as if room were made for demons to speak. Terrible thought! If a demon speaks it is a power of a diverse kind. I suppose division amongst them opened the door for that, so that the apostle has to allude to the possibility of a person speaking in the power of another spirit. He gives this test, that it is only by the Holy Spirit one can say, "Lord Jesus;"
Ques. Would you say, too, that @Revelation 22:20, "Amen; come, Lord Jesus", is what the Holy Spirit is bringing about today?
J.T. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come", @Revelation 22:17.
Rem. It is the voice of affection.
J.H.M. Does this in any way correspond with the testing of the spirits John speaks of?
J.T. Yes, it would. John's allusion, I think, is more general, what is current in christendom, not
{110}
necessarily when we are convened. Paul is alluding here to the saints when convened, when persons are assuming to exercise their gifts. The test is saying "Lord Jesus". If you are under the influence of any other spirit you will not say that.
A.L.B. There is a good deal about gifts in @1 Corinthians 12, for example the distinctions of gifts in verse 4. Are you relating that to the morning meeting?
J.T. That is only stated to bring out the full ground of administration. "There are distinctions of gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are distinctions of services, and the same Lord; and there are distinctions of operations, but the same God who operates all things in all", @1 Corinthians 12:4 - 6. The three divine Persons are brought into it. The administration of the Spirit is what he is aiming at really. He is stressing the idea of the Spirit. If you bring in gift properly, I think you have to go to chapter 14. The reference to gift in chapter 12 is to bring out the body. When it comes to specific gifts, they are set in the assembly. Chapter 12 brings out the truth of the body, and that is the only part that enters into our subject today, that is the part the Spirit has in relation to the Lord's supper, and the assembly convened. If there be ministry, the exercise of gift, then you have to go to chapter 14 for that.
W.W. Will you say a little more as to the place the Spirit has after the Supper? Reference is sometimes made to @Genesis 24, where the servant conducts Rebecca to Isaac, and is not again mentioned.
J.T. Well, that is a suggestion. Abraham's servant is no doubt in type the Spirit bringing the saints to Christ. They are brought definitely to Him. There is no mention afterwards of the servant, for the saints speak to the Lord as knowing Him. It is in the power of the Spirit we always speak. The Spirit, as it were, hides Himself. In Colossians there is only one
{111}
mention of the Holy Spirit -- "who has also manifested to us your love in the Spirit", @Colossians 1:8. He hides Himself behind His work. It is to bring out His work in us; but nevertheless, whilst that is so in Colossians, in Ephesians the Spirit is very prominent.
Rem. After Rebecca meets Isaac, she is still clothed with the apparel and decked with the ornaments, which it had been the servant's work to bring to her.
J.T. Yes, and she is led into Sarah's tent. It does not go beyond that. Her position there corresponds to that of the assembly in the early chapters of the Acts, where she is seen, not in her own place, but in the place of another. It is not Ephesian ground, it is a transitional position that is contemplated in Rebecca's position in the tent of Sarah. It is not there that the full thought of the mystery is set out. Ephesians is a further thought. In eternity it is 'By the Spirit all pervading'. (`14:5). The Spirit will always be in view.
J.H.M. Would the Spirit in the saints detect whether this saying of "Lord Jesus" had a right ring?
J.T. I think so. If there are spiritual conditions in a meeting, and one speaks in mere words, the saints discern it. No one would speak now under the influence of an evil spirit -- not indeed that they are not current, but it is hardly conceivable that an evil spirit should have a place amongst those who recognise Christ as Head of the assembly. There was a divided condition at Corinth, allowing an inlet for almost anything.
F.G.S. Is that why the truth of the body comes in here?
J.T. I thought we might see that the order is first speaking, and then this power of silence. "In the power of one Spirit we have all been baptised into one body", @1 Corinthians 12:13. That does not necessarily
{112}
imply that I am speaking, but rather that I am able to maintain my place in relation to the Spirit in a spiritual way, in silence. And then the next thing is "we ... have all been given to drink of one Spirit", which, I think, underlies the power of silence and satisfaction. We are satisfied in sitting together, as realising the presence of the Spirit. We have been given to drink of it. It is our own side -- we have done it by preference. We drink because we enjoy what we drink. There is satisfaction.
F.W.K. Is not that usually the thought of drinking in Scripture -- satisfaction -- in contrast to eating, which is to meet a need?
J.T. Drinking is peculiarly satisfying.
F.H. So would you realise that you are in the presence of divine Persons?
J.T. It is as important that we should be in spiritual power in silence as when we are speaking.
J.H.M. So all the activity at Corinth was not a healthy sign?
J.T. The very opposite. As we have often remarked, it is not as when we are waiting for a bus or sitting in a train. It is in power. It is a state of things, a condition which the Lord can recognise and come into, because after all, He is just as concerned as to what we are *not* saying as He is to what we *are* saying.
F.G.S. Would the passing of the elements test us in relation to these things?
J.T. Yes. Silence is to be in power, if the Lord has part in it, because He is perfectly conversant with the state of our hearts. Therefore the sisters are included in all this as much as those who participate audibly. We are *all* baptised in the power of one Spirit into one body.
S.S. So, whether in silence or in speaking, if the power is there, would that lead to liberation?
J.T. The outlet is in the brothers, because they
{113}
are the ones who speak. The sisters are not to speak, but that does not mean that they are not baptised in the Holy Spirit. So that there is a state of satisfaction and power.
J.H.M. I am not quite clear how you connect the thought of silence with "in the power of one Spirit *we* have all been baptised into one body".
J.T. Well, the thought is connected with the breaking of bread. "The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ? Because we, being many, are one loaf, one body; for we all partake of that one loaf", @1 Corinthians 10:16,17. That is what you might call light. It is realised by the Spirit, and can only be realised by the Spirit, because you have to add this, "in the power of one Spirit *we* have all been baptised into one body". It alludes to us as baptised into one body by the Spirit, and that truth laid hold of makes the saints a body in principle, energised by power and satisfied by drink. I do not see how we can sit together acceptably to the Lord unless we see this; otherwise we should be so many persons sitting together, waiting until time passes, or thinking of what another says, whereas in truth the idea of the body is there in the bread.
F.F. So that gives great force to the Lord's word in the Supper, "This is my body, which is for you", @1 Corinthians 11:24. Does not what you are speaking of flow from that?
J.T. I think so.
F.F. That is that He Himself is to be seen now in the power of the Spirit.
J.T. Quite so. There is that in the saints which answers to His body. What that body was here, what He was here, how entirely under control, never ruffled or disturbed by any circumstance! He is not said to be filled with the Holy Spirit, but full; @Luke 4:1. It was not a process with Him -- with us
{114}
it is. He was always in that power, whether He spoke or whether He was silent.
F.F. It is very touching that the Lord should say "for you". @1 Corinthians 11:24.
J.T. It is that by which He attests His love to us. It is His own body given for us. For the moment we can only think of it as contemplating ourselves collectively, answering to the loaf. There are the two thoughts in the loaf, the Lord's own body, and the saints as His body, the assembly, and in either case it is a question of the Spirit. For the Lord, although a divine Person, was said to be full of the Holy Spirit after the Holy Spirit had descended upon Him as Man. From thenceforth it may be said that the Spirit was there in the body and so He was an example for us. Certainly the body, the assembly, is to be actuated by the Spirit, and that appears in silence as it does in activity.
F.F. So that Paul's ministry as to the assembly seems to flow from these expressions in the Supper.
J.T. Yes. Another thing that enters into the Lord's supper is the part the Spirit has in the cup, which is the new covenant. That is another feature of the early part of the meeting. There is the speaking in the power of the Spirit, there is the silence in the power of the Spirit, and then there is the suggestion of the covenant in the power of the Spirit, for @Romans 5 says that "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us" @Romans 5:5 -- and @2 Corinthians 3:8 teaches us that the ministry of the Spirit subsists in glory, alluding to the covenant.
S.J.B.C. It is rather striking that in the Greek it is 'poured out into our hearts by the Holy Spirit'. It is the same word used by the Lord, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you", @Luke 22:20. So the love is poured out into our hearts.
{115}
J.T. Somewhat the suggestion of volume.
S.J.B.C. Would you say "in the power of one Spirit *we* have all been baptised into one body" suggests the one loaf, and "have all been given to drink of one Spirit" suggests the one cup?
J.T. Yes. We may stress the *one* Spirit but that precludes diversity of thought. Baptism is by another, but the drinking is our own. So that the Spirit's part in the covenant is a very important part as bringing in the love side, the love of God, so that the ministry of the Spirit is said to subsist in glory -- a marvellous thought. The glory is so great as to eclipse all that preceded it; as though the glory in Moses face is eclipsed, is no glory at all, in comparison with the surpassing glory. Whilst it is said that the Lord is the Spirit in that chapter, it obviously means that two divine Persons have to do with the administration side of the covenant, the Lord with the authority side and the Spirit with the subjective working out of it in our hearts. These are two phases of the Spirit's action in what we may call the early part of the meeting leading out of the Lord's supper. Following upon that we have the Spirit of adoption, leading us on to the ground, not only of the light of sonship, but of the consciousness of sonship, so that we cry "Abba, Father".
H.F. How far would you say the early part of the meeting goes?
J.T. Well, it passes on, I think, to the covenant. After the Lord gave this cup to His own, according to Mark's record, they all drank out of it. Not simply He told them to do it, but they all did it. Then the Lord explains what it means. It is the blood of the new covenant. I do not think the word 'new' is used there. It is the only covenant that there is now that is valid. The Lord explains that. The allusion is the chapter in Deuteronomy. He explains it after they drank it, and I think that is our ground, our
{116}
warrant for proceeding forward a little on the lines of the covenant to set us free. Because after He explained what the cup was, it says, "having sung a hymn, they went out to the mount of Olives", @Mark 14:26.
H.F. How does the Lord's coming to His own in the sense of @John 14 enter into this?
J.T. We are dwelling on the conditions suitable for the Lord, the side of love. "He that abides in love abides in God, and God in him", @1 John 4:16. Light and order, of course, but love.
H.F. Spiritual conditions.
J.T. Then you have "Abba, Father". "Abba, Father" in Galatians is that which the Holy Spirit cries, as if answering to the great desire of the Father. He cries "Abba, Father". The cry is the expression of strong feeling, the Spirit answering as He does to the Father.
H.F. Between the act of the breaking of bread and the time we have liberty to address the Father, is it proper to speak to the Lord as coming into the midst?
J.T. I think it is. The Lord as in relation to the covenant. That part of the meeting, I believe, tends to liberty, to set the saints free. We should not be theoretic about it. The Spirit of adoption cries "Abba, Father". That means that He is urgent about it.
H.G.H. I am glad you mentioned about not being theoretic about it, because you would not advocate anything in the way of a programme. If we were with the Lord things would be in that order.
J.T. Well, there is light, you know. Light is important. But light is just light in that sense. Aside from the Holy Spirit you have not the consciousness and the substance of things. That part of the meeting is very important as preparing for the real
{117}
thought in the meeting, that is that there should be worship.
F.W.K. If there are the spiritual conditions, should we not often have what one might call a little period of association with Christ, a sense of being His brethren and addressing Him in the sense of liberty and joy, thinking of the wonderful thought of being gathered round Himself as His brethren?
J.T. I think that is in order, provided we do not prolong it too much, and above all things that we do not go back to it. "Through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father", @Ephesians 2:18. If that is set on, the thing is to proceed on those lines, not to work back again to what belongs to the covenant. We are on new ground really, because they went out to the mount of Olives. There is spiritual meaning in that, the position is changed.
E.Z.B. That digression would hardly be known if we were all directed by Christ as Head.
J.T. Quite so.
J.H.M. Is the highest point in the meeting when we reach the Father?
J.T. Yes, surely. "Of him, and through him, and for him are all things". @Romans 11:36. The great end is always the Father.
E.Z.B. We feel the silence sometimes, but do you not think that if the brother who handed the elements to us gave us such a sense of the love of Christ our hearts would be transported, and that would result in praise?
J.T. The brother who hands the emblems to us is only doing it for us. It has to be done. I am not to say he is responsible as to giving us anything. What he has, you have, fundamentally. He may make suggestions that re-echo in your heart. Of course, if he speaks through the unction of the Spirit he does touch us.
{118}
E.Z.B. I think it has been said he is but the servant of the saints.
J.T. He has no official place. It is the bread which *we* break.
J.A.C. So we are all responsible in that way.
J.T. Quite so, sisters and brothers alike, as to what we have, the power we have in our souls.
G.P.T. Would the extent of our speaking in the power of the Spirit be governed by the extent to which the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts?
J.T. It would. The Spirit is here in the assembly. That is, if you get up to speak, you find you have more power than you thought you had, or vice versa. To make room for the Spirit in the assembly is one of the most important things I know. If He is in our hearts, He cries. "Because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father". @Galatians 4:6. It is the urgency of it.
H.G.N. So that we make room for the Holy Spirit in silence?
J.T. That is right. The doors were shut, to use the illustration, for fear of the Jews. @John 20:19. That means I have spiritual power to shut my heart against all that obtrudes, especially the mere religious element; I am in liberty. The word 'doors', the plural, means that everyone in the meeting does that.
J.H.M. I have been wondering why you gave the scripture in Romans and not in Galatians.
J.T. In @Romans 8:15 in this translation, 'spirit' is written with a small 's'. The stress is on adoption -- the Spirit of adoption, which is the Holy Spirit, of course.
F.G.S. It produces this cry, "Abba, Father".
J.T. Yes. That is, we cry, but we are as urgent as the Holy Spirit is. We cry in Romans; He cries in Galatians.
F.G.S. I was wondering whether you linked your
{119}
thoughts with @Mark 14:36. Is it not striking that these words fall from the Lord's own lips?
J.T. Yes. The original word is handed down to us -- 'Abba' is never translated. It is the very word the Lord used; it makes it very touching.
S.J.B.C. The language of the Jews and the language of the gentiles, both brought into the same family, both able to lisp that name. It is very sweet and precious to notice the very word the Lord used in the garden -- 'Abba' -- we are privileged to use.
S.S. The Lord used it in suffering, but we can use it in joy.
J.T. What it was to the Father to hear that word out of Gethsemane!
J.A.C. That word "Abba, Father" @Mark 14:36 would involve a desire to give pleasure to the Father.
J.T. The two words mean the same thing, only the one comes down to us untranslated, pointing to the link with the Lord Jesus. It is the exact word He used.
S.S. So that in Mark the Lord leads in suffering.
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. You would have to be in the consciousness of sonship to be able to say "Abba, Father".
J.T. That is what the Spirit of sonship gives you.
E.Z.B. Why is it so rarely audibly said? We sing it.
J.T. We learn properly from the epistles. I think we should approach the gospels through the epistles. We do not find the formula used by Paul, for instance. Still, he alludes to it twice. He says the Holy Spirit cries it in us and we cry it by Him.
J.A.C. Is it not the whole company?
J.T. I should not like to limit it. 'We' is often just each of us. I do not think Romans so much contemplates the company as the individual, that is each of us
{120}
J.H.M. Will you tell us why you brought Romans in?
J.T. Just to emphasise what we are saying, the action of the Spirit in relation to the Father.
F.W.K. I suppose in Romans they are taught it, but in Galatians they are brought back to it when they had got away.
J.T. Exactly. They were not doing it, but the Holy Spirit was doing it. The Jews were not kept out. The Galatians did not shut the doors to keep the Jews out. That, of course, interfered with "Abba, Father".
W.E.M. It is very fine that divine Persons should have pleasure in bringing God near to us, and now have pleasure in bringing us near to God.
J.T. Both divine Persons are on our side now. It shows that what is in the mind of God in the assembly is to bring the saints to God, so that the ark is in the bed of Jordan till all go over. It stresses that, for the saints are to go over. That is what God is seeking.
W.E.M. The Lord delights to take us to Him. "I came out from the Father", @John 16:28. "*I* am the way, and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father unless by me", @John 14:6.
J.T. Reverting back to what belongs to the Lord's supper in the assembly, the divine thought in the assembly is God the Father. When the Lord has subjected all, then He Himself is subject, that God may be all in all. He is subject to Him who is God and Father. We want to be in accord with that. Not that the Lord does not hear us, even if we do go back, but He loves to see us moving in intelligence, so that from @Acts 13 onwards, one is struck with the stress laid on intelligence and teaching.
F.W.K. Would you say, if we have been led to address the Father, you would hardly expect a hymn to be given out addressed to the Lord Jesus, and prayer similarly?
{121}
J.T. No, I should not.
H.F. Does it not sometimes occur that there are those who run before?
J.T. Yes, that is true, too. I think it is well to make room for the covenant.
J.H.M. Is it right to address the Father before the breaking of bread?
J.T. It is not fitting. The Corinthian epistle stresses that you keep the directions. There were directions he had given when there, directions given when away and directions he would give when he came back. It is normal procedure. To use an illustration, in a man's house you want to proceed as he proceeds.
F.G.S. If we made room for the covenant rightly, would it not liberate our affections in relation to the love of God?
J.T. It creates conditions in our souls for the Spirit to take the place of the Spirit of adoption. He changes over from the Spirit of the covenant to the Spirit of adoption. I think these two expressions help us in our minds, the Spirit of the covenant and the Spirit of adoption.
W.D.R. Would you distinguish between the love of God and the love of the Father?
J.T. The love of the Father is for His sons, for His family; the love of God is a wider thought.
P.C. Would the access in Ephesians be connected with "He shall receive of mine and shall announce it to you" @John 16:14 -- so that between the first and second part of the morning meeting there would be room for a word sometimes?
J.T. It very often helps.
J.H.M. Do you mean it is a higher thought to reach the Father than to reach God in relation to the covenant?
J.T. Yes, it is really. We have "him who is God and Father". @1 Corinthians 15:24. You will never find
{122}
judgment, for instance, connected with the Father. Hence it is a title that relates to God in grace and in affection. So that it applies to God when all that is objectionable to Him is done with for ever. The Father comes out fully where there is nothing of judgment.
{123}
THE SPIRITUAL DRINK OF ISRAEL AS SEEN IN THE WILDERNESS
@Exodus 15:27; @Exodus 17:5 - 7; @Numbers 20:7 - 13; @Numbers 21:16 - 18
J.T. These scriptures will be familiar to the brethren, but the Lord, I believe, will give us something from them fitting in with current exercises that are among us. The subject of drink is always important and interesting, and has in mind that the people of God should be satisfied; and it appears in the middle of these books which treat of the wilderness, for the wilderness circumstances occasion thirst and complaint. One finds in @Exodus 17 and @Numbers 20 the spirit of complaint, and in order that this should be met we get a word earlier in the book of Exodus for those who serve, those who would minister to the Lord's people in a specific way. The early part of Exodus is largely to prepare such ministers. So we find a great minister, that is Moses, sitting by a well in chapter 2. It is a very significant attitude, as indicating that he had learnt not to trust to himself in the service. There can be no meeting the thirst of the saints as the ministers trust to themselves. So that the great typical minister, the one who is said to be faithful in all God's house, is seen sitting by a well; and what comes out after deliverance is effected is how the experience thus acquired is effective in the ministerial provision, that is, the seventy palm trees and the twelve wells. That is what I was thinking of, if the brethren are free to move on in it. The passages, as I said, are well known, and the teaching of the history is particularly to help young christians.
H.E.F. What have you in mind in speaking of the seventy palm trees and the twelve wells?
{124}
J.T. I think the numeral seventy alludes to ministerial provision; that is, it is early instruction that is in mind. It raises the question whether there are those today whom God can use under this heading, and the twelve wells point to the abundance; there is administrative means.
H.E.S. Is there any connection between this passage and the twelve apostles in the New Testament, and the Lord appointing "seventy others also", @Luke 10:1?
J.T. I think the allusion to the seventy indicates the resources of God, that He has more than twelve. The Lord has more: "seventy others".
W.C.P. It says, "they encamped there by the waters", as though there were only the twelve wells. Is there a distinction made in that way in connection with the character of God's resources as seen in the seventy palm-trees and the twelve wells?
J.T. "They encamped there by the waters": I think it means the people were satisfied now to accept the position in the wilderness -- a very great matter -- God making such provision for them. In the next chapter they complain in relation to food, and Aaron spoke to them, and they looked toward the wilderness; that is, they are sustained by priestly ministry in their view toward the wilderness. It is the acceptance of the wilderness by the young ones which is so important.
M.W.B. Is that why Marah comes in first before this? I was wondering whether Marah was definitely the acceptance of the wilderness. Consequent on that there is God's ample provision for them, as they encamp there.
J.T. Yes; the first waters presented to them were brackish, a very great test; but the waters that had been offensive were made sweet by the wood. The passage really is remarkable as bringing out God's gracious consideration for us in our circumstances.
{125}
He comes in and shows Moses wood; that is, He calls the minister's attention to Christ. The point is first to get in our minds the thought of the minister God provides. He calls the attention of the minister to the wood; it says, "Jehovah shewed him wood, and he cast it into the waters, and the waters became sweet" @Exodus 15:25. That is the minister's move; it is left to him. God, having instructed, educated and explained things to his servants, helps them and calls their attention to some feature of Christ, and they know how to use it, and use it effectively. What you find with regard to Moses throughout this book is that, whilst we constantly get the expression, "As Jehovah said unto Moses", or "As the Lord commanded Moses", yet Moses acts of himself; as, for instance, with regard to the instruction relative to the passover in chapter 12, you find it is a lengthy instruction, but Moses, when speaking to the people about it, epitomises it, and his epitome -- or his presentation of what Jehovah gave to him -- brings about worship in the people. That means that you know how to present impressions you receive from God so that they become effective in the saints.
M.W.B. So that in taking the two together -- the well in chapter 2 by which Moses sat, and then the wood to which his attention is drawn, would give a very wholesome suggestion as to not depending on ourselves, and as to having intelligence to use and apply that which is of Christ.
J.T. That is right. You have a certain service to perform; you have certain needs before you in connection with the saints; you get before the Lord about it, and He gives you some inkling, or impression. Then it is for you as a minister to know how to use that, how to present it so that it becomes effective. You know the brethren you have to deal with (or you should know them), and you know how to use what the Lord gives you.
{126}
J.H.B. In what way is Christ typified by the wood?
J.T. It is a feature of the wilderness; it has a great part in the wilderness -- that is, wood of a particular kind, acacia wood. (We are not told what wood *this* was.) As in the wilderness it suggests Christ, presented so as to afford material for building. But He is cast into the waters. The idea of wood comes into the mind, and that wood is Christ; so that the wood is seen as altering the circumstances.
W.R.P. How do you apply the fact that at first they found no water, and then when they did find water it was brackish?
J.T. It is a test; God would give us to taste what the Lord Jesus passed through. The brackish waters denote death; they denote what typically the Lord Jesus passed through in the Red Sea -- the bitterness of death. It is well to taste the bitterness of death; it is intended to give character to us; but as accepted it becomes sweet to the soul, as we find it is part with Christ, and understand that typically (as it says here) He was cast into the waters.
M.W.B. I had not noticed that Moses was not instructed to do that; as in other instances in the book, his own spiritual intelligence seems to come into great evidence.
J.T. That is what I thought we might see, that in seeking to serve the saints we get inklings -- impressions -- from the Lord; then He assumes that you profit by the education you have been through. The earlier chapters are full of that thought of education. Moses begins with the great impression he receives in connection with the angel of Jehovah in the bush, the fiery bush that burned and was not consumed. You would be impressed with the thought that there was a representative of God there; he was to be that himself, for he was told later that he was to be God to Pharaoh, and Aaron was to be his prophet; @Exodus 7:1.
{127}
You get the great thought of representation, and for representation of God there must be the knowledge of God. God loves to see us act in our service according to the knowledge we have; that is, the servant knows what he is doing.
A.W.G.T. He is marked by spiritual initiative?
J.T. Quite so, spiritual initiative is a good expression. He profits by the experience connected with those forty years of education -- quite a long time. He sat by the well, we are told, and presently the seven daughters of Jethro came with their father's flock, and he watered the flock. As soon as you take that attitude you find something to do. No true minister in this attitude has far to go for service, but it comes to hand, and what his hand finds to do he does with his might, as Moses did in this case; he watered the flock, and he maintained the place of subjection and contentment in a foreign land; for that is the idea -- he says, "I have been a sojourner in a foreign land", @Exodus 2:22. He accepts the position, though it was not what he would desire naturally; it was the very opposite to that. So it says, "Moses was *content* to dwell with the man" @Exodus 2:21.
M.W.B. Are those restful conditions more or less reproduced in Israel for the moment at Elim?
J.T. Yes, they encamped by the waters; it is a fine result, God helping the minister, so that the saints are restful, accepting the wilderness, and that with satisfaction, for there is plenty of water. The plentifulness of it is suggested, but still it is under control, because the number of the wells is twelve.
J.H.B. What would the water at Elim represent?
J.T. It is ministry, I think; it is not yet the Spirit in the christian, but so far it is what is objective, what is brought to him. "They encamped there by the waters". The saints at a meeting like this, listening with interest to the things of the Lord, are
{128}
encamping by what is provided; as valuing it they take up a position in relation to it, and are not going to be turned away by the world's allurements from such a place of resourcefulness. The seventy palm-trees give a suggestion of beautiful shade and freshness in the desert, and there is plenty of water to drink; that is surely attractive, and if we are spiritual we shall encamp there.
R.E.S. Is this at all in line with @Psalm 23?
J.T. That is exactly the idea. How beautiful it is to see the saints of God turning aside from that which this world provides on an afternoon like this, and encamping by the waters! How pleasing to God that is, and how ready the Lord is to meet such a state of things among us. "Assemble the people, and *I* will give them water", He says; @Numbers 21:16.
E.C.R. Do the seventy palm trees involve the idea of victory and overcoming?
J.T. That is the thought; the palm is usually a sign of victory. When you have seventy of them you have a great result; it shows the earlier instruction to Moses and Aaron in the type has borne fruit. The servant has learnt to sit by the well. Sitting means a permanent attitude; he says, 'I am never going to move from this position in regard of my ministry; I am never going to exercise my will or energy again'. That is what is meant by sitting, and the result is seen here. There is victory in the ministers; they have overcome, and now are affording shelter for the people of God, and there is plenty of water. The *twelve* apostles allude to the presence of love which would make room for one another in mutuality, free from all pretension as regards one being above another. "Seventy" is a different number; it is seven times ten, and alludes to a responsibility in the Spirit.
W.R.P. Would that be the place for education, sitting by the well of water?
J.T. It is rather the evidence that the minister
{129}
has learnt; sitting is a permanent suggestion, meaning that he would always take that attitude in his service.
H.E.F. Is that in contrast to what he had done previously?
J.T. Yes, it is in contrast to natural energy. "I keep under my body ... lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway", says Paul; @1 Corinthians 9:27.
J.H.L. Is there any significance in the fact that Moses life was divided into periods of forty years, the first forty being spent in Egypt, the next in the backside of the desert, and the last forty years in the wilderness?
J.T. The first two periods of forty years point to the long training and education required by all of us. There is no short road to the service of God; you have to go all the way round. The first forty years has rather to be undone; the unlearning is the most difficult thing; but Moses apparently made haste on that line. The journey from Egypt to Midian was a long one; even today it would take a long time. He learnt on the way, apparently, and as soon as he arrives he sat by the well -- a very remarkable thing.
J.A.P. What were you alluding to when you said the apostle kept his body under?
J.T. He did not allow the natural side. The allusion is an athletic one. You have to sacrifice with that in view, so that the result is wholly spiritual. The natural is brought under restraint, so that one is not a castaway after having ministered to others. Moses was not a castaway. I think the result of these seventy palm trees and the twelve wells is very significant as pointing to the effectiveness of the ministry and the effectiveness of the divine training.
Rem. So that if our service is to promote restful conditions among the saints we must learn to be restful ourselves.
{130}
J.T. Yes, the minister learns to be quiet and restful; he affects his hearers according to what he is.
G.C.G. Is Simon Peter another of the Lord's servants who had to come this way? He said at one time that he would follow the Lord even to prison and to death. Did he not have to learn not to trust in himself?
J.T. That is what he had to learn; the Lord said to him: "When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst where thou desiredst" -- that is the natural, as Moses slew the Egyptian -- "but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and bring thee where thou dost not desire", @John 21:18. It is against your will. "If not of my own will", the apostle says, "I am entrusted with an administration", @1 Corinthians 9:17. No one goes into the ministry and takes it up in a natural way. So the Lord says in @John 12: "Where I am, there also *shall* be my servant" @John 12:26; it is not 'would be', but what "*shall* be". John presents it abstractly; the true servant is in accordance with Christ, and in order to make that fit in Peter's case the Lord puts him under discipline so that he is in correspondence with Christ in his death, and glorifies God.
G.C.G. Would the attitude of Paul and Silas in the jail at Philippi show how they were maintained in this satisfied and restful attitude?
J.T. That is very beautiful; they were undergoing one of the greatest tests, you might say, but in prayer they sang praises to God at midnight -- a very great triumph. If you were to have seen them or heard them you would have said: 'What victory that is!' That is what is meant by the seventy palm trees. Such ministers must bring to light results, and the assembly at Philippi is the result in that case.
Eu.R. Would the being shown wood impress the heart with the perfect dependence on God that marked
{131}
the Lord Jesus in His pathway of service here on earth in these conditions, in contrast to the tendency of our hearts to trust in the flesh?
J.T. Very fine: you have a bit of service before you, and you want an impression. God gives you that as you seek it, and now how are you going to use it? I think the dependence of the servant is seen in being shown the wood, but the skill is seen in that he knows what to do with it.
Eu.R. So Paul and Silas used it well in the case of the jailor?
Ques. Would you say how the skill is acquired?
J.T. We were tracing that in connection with the history of Moses, and alluding to the fact that his life was divided into three parts of forty years each, eighty of which you might say were educational, so that only a third of his life was properly occupied with his commission. Now, we have to analyse all that we have of those eighty years to see how the minister is fitted for his service. That is what we get in the earlier part of the book.
Rem. He would never again turn to the wisdom gained in Egypt.
J.T. He had to unlearn all that. Stephen says, "Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and he was mighty in his words and deeds", @Acts 7:22. Sitting by the well means that he has learned not to trust in that; whereas the universities are ever turning out ministers instructed in the very education which Moses had to unlearn -- not that ordinary education is not necessary, but I refer to the spiritual thing.
W.C.P. What is the value in a practical way of the casting into the water? Moses did that, as you were pointing out; did he recognise the death of Christ as the basis of all service?
J.T. Yes, it is to complete the type of the Red Sea, showing how Christ having been in death has
{132}
changed the situation for the believer. The change is in *you*, not in the water, for the antitype has to be understood thus. I acquire a new taste; I learn to accept death. God rolls it in upon us, and it gives us character. I believe Miriam represents that here, for her name means 'bitterness'.
Eu.R. Is it like @Romans 6: "Reckon yourselves dead to sin" @Romans 6: 11 -- that is like the life of Egypt -- and then the result is "newness of life" @Romans 6:4?
J.T. Yes, @Romans 6 is what answers to this; and then there is the provision for us in the minister that God raises up. The young believer finds this wonderful heritage which he knows God has provided to protect him; for the seventy palm trees suggest victory, as seen in Paul and Silas, and the jailor would know what these men were; he could trust them.
H.M.G. Would the gain of the seventy palm trees and the twelve wells fit us for the next step, for they journeyed at once?
J.T. The fact that they encamped *there* at Elim shows that they accepted the position, but then they had to move on, and that brings in the thought of murmuring in relation to food. Then in chapter 17 there is another murmuring, which is met by the smiting of the rock. Perhaps chapter 17 is less understood than we think. One thing to be observed is that in that chapter it does not say that the people drank at all, whereas in @Numbers 20 it says that the people drank and their cattle. I think the point in @Exodus 17 is to take account of the gift of the Spirit of God as the outcome of the sufferings of Christ. The rock was not spoken to here, but smitten, and not in the presence of the people as such, but in the presence of the elders, suggesting the idea of responsibility.
M.W.B. Is that why in Corinthians it says, "they drank of a spiritual *rock*" -- not of the water -- "a spiritual rock which followed them", @1 Corinthians 10:4?
{133}
J.T. Quite so; the allusion there would be, I suppose, to the actual drinking spoken of in @Numbers 20. No doubt they drank here in @Exodus 17, for they were thirsty, but God is not going to call it *drinking* till they are appreciating the thing; and the time has not yet come to say of such believers that they have drunk. The Lord says, "If anyone thirst, let him come to me and drink" @John 7:37, that means I appreciate the provision for me.
W.R.P. And yet the rock followed them.
J.T. You mean in the antitype? Quite so. They drank, undoubtedly, but the fact that it is not said that they drank is to be noted; it is initial, and what you get instead of drinking is conflict, meaning @Romans 7.
Ques. What did you mean by the water being under control in connection with the twelve wells at Elim?
J.T. Twelve is an administrative number. It is not like a river that runs off. The wells are there, and they are to be used.
M.W.B. Do you think there is an allusion in these early incidents to the idea of authority and subjection, meaning that it is only as I abide in those conditions that the gain of these privileges is realised?
J.T. Exactly; so that at the end of chapter 15 it says, "There he made for them a statute and an ordinance; and there he tested them. And he said, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, and do what is right in his eyes, and incline thine ears to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none of the complaints upon thee". @Exodus 15:25,26. That is what you mean?
M.W.B. Exactly; and then the reference to the elders in @Exodus 17, and to the staff or rod being taken, again introduces the thought of authority.
J.T. I see what you mean: it is the rod carefully
{134}
specified here; it says, "Take with thee of the elders of Israel, and thy staff *with which thou didst smite the river*, take in thy hand, and go. Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock on Horeb; and thou shalt strike the rock, and there shall come water out of it". @Exodus 17:5,6. The rod is an interesting consideration. Here it is really Moses own rod, but there is no differentiation between the rod of Moses and the rod of Aaron so far, because Aaron apparently used it. It is the rod of authority, and the one idea is linked with both Moses and Aaron, till Aaron's rod budded, blossomed and yielded almonds; that is where the great difference is made. Aaron's rod (according to @Numbers 17) had in mind Christ's death and resurrection, and that is the rod to be used in @Numbers 20.
E.C.R. What is the force of "thy staff with which thou didst smite the river"? Would it emphasise the sufferings of Christ that we might have the Spirit?
J.T. The smiting of the river would mean that it was effective. It was not only the rod that had been turned into a serpent, and had been brought back again to its normal condition, but it had become effective in its use. The thing that becomes effective is the one to use. When we come to the death of Christ, it is on the suffering side -- the smiting, with the elders present -- that it is seen in its effectiveness.
E.C.R. Why is the emphasis laid on the expression, "I will *stand* before thee there upon the rock"?
J.T. It is to bring out the solemnity of it. God is having to do with it; it is the judgment of God.
Eu.R. Did you allude to @Romans 7 in connection with this?
J.T. Yes, as to the conflict with Amalek.
Eu.R. You mean that there being no mention of their drinking in @Exodus 17 suggests that the conflict of @Romans 7 is unsolved as yet?
{135}
J.T. That is right. The Spirit is there before @Romans 7, but the conflict has to come in before we appreciate that fact. It is the conflict which hardly any young christian would not understand. Of course they drank, but instead of that being stated you have the conflict, because before we come to the full appreciation of the Spirit of God the conflict has to be gone through, the analysis which involves conflict in @Romans 7.
M.W.B. Do you mean that the victory that is gained over Amalek is practically the way they would realise what the drinking means?
J.T. That is right; @Romans 7 prepares us for @Romans 8; but the Spirit is there before -- not that the experience of @Romans 7 implies that one has the Spirit actually, but the principle is there according to @Romans 5.
W.R.P. On God's side the Spirit is given, and on our side we have to receive it.
J.T. So that you have not the idea of the *reception* of the Spirit in @John 4; the reception is in @John 7; "which they that believed on him were about to receive" @John 7:39. Reception means that I value the thing.
H.E.F. Have you in mind that when Scripture speaks of our drinking we should afterwards be characterised by what we have drunk?
J.T. Yes, and so that the inward state of the saint should be intelligent to him (it is known to God) @Romans 7 is given.
H.E.F. So in @John 7 it says, "Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water" @John 7:38.
J.T. Well, that is the other side.
H.E.S. Your point is that in @Exodus 17 the emphasis is on what *God* did.
J.T. Yes, there is the thought of judgment there: "God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh". @Romans 8:3.
{136}
There was an action of smiting. It touches the heart when by the Spirit I see what God has passed the Lord Jesus through in suffering. In @Numbers 20 the smiting and the suffering are not in view; it is a question of speaking to the rock.
Eu.R. How do you distinguish between this smiting and what is set forth in the brazen serpent?
J.T. We shall have to come to it presently. I quoted from @Romans 8, which alludes to @Numbers 21, but only to bring out the reality of the Lord's sufferings, not only that my sins should be forgiven, but that I might receive the Spirit and drink.
M.W.B. Apart from the thought of the greatness of the Spirit, that ought to make us value the gift of the Spirit as seeing that Christ suffered for us that we might have such a gift.
J.T. That is the way @Exodus 17 is intended to affect us as we read it; it should touch our hearts to see how Christ suffered.
E.C.R. Should not that help to maintain us in the conflict?
J.T. Quite.
Ques. Could we have a word about the speaking to the rock in @Numbers 20 in contrast to what we have been dwelling upon in connection with the smiting spoken of in @Exodus 17?
J.T. It is the other side. It is one subject, really -- one theme: He died and He rose. @Numbers 20 contemplates the resurrection of Christ; it contemplates His being in heaven; in fact, it is more like @John 7; "The Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified" @John 7:39. It is not now a question of smiting as in @Exodus 17, but the rod to be used in @Numbers 20 is the rod which is Aaron's; that is the only one now -- the one which had budded, blossomed, and yielded almonds overnight; and that one is not to be used in smiting at all. Aaron is not brought into the matter in @Exodus 17, but he is in
{137}
@Numbers 20. "Take the staff ... thou, and Aaron thy brother, and speak *ye* unto the rock"; and all the people are to be there -- it is not now a question of the elders -- "Gather the assembly together ... and speak ye unto the rock before their eyes, and it shall give its water; and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock, and shalt give the assembly and their beasts drink". It is the fulness of the thing now, without smiting. It is the rod that denotes life -- that is, the resurrection of Christ.
W.C.P. Does it not fit in very well with the thought of "the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus", @Romans 8:2?
J.T. It does; it is the law of the Spirit of life. Moses disregarded the word to him, but in spite of his action the water flowed. The allusion, I think, is to the clerical conditions of today; in spite of their action which is so detrimental, and so opposed to the free flowing out of the Spirit, the water flows. They did not act rightly at all: Moses smote the rock and called the people rebels -- a very sorrowful situation; and yet the grace of God rose above that and caused the water to flow.
H.E.S. Was Moses going back to natural resources on this occasion?
J.T. He and Aaron were relying on themselves, whereas the apostle says, "That the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us", @2 Corinthians 4:7.
M.W.B. So that this chapter must be read in the light of @Numbers 17, where we read of the rod that budded, and God rising above the rebellion of Korah.
J.T. That is right; you must have the two sides -- that is, the sufferings of Christ, and the death and resurrection of Christ, and, we may say, the ascension of Christ; for it is only after Christ's ascension that we could have the Spirit.
J.H.B. Does the water in @Numbers 20 refer to
{138}
something different from the water of Elim in @Exodus 15?
J.T. Yes, it is directly from Christ in @Numbers 20. The rock would hardly apply in connection with the water of Elim; it is not mentioned there. The water of Elim is what comes in through ministry, but where you have the rock it is the Spirit as come direct from Christ to the believer; firstly, as the outcome of His sufferings and death, and secondly, on the principle of asking. I see that, and I must have it; and the cattle get it, too; that is to bring out the plentifulness of it. The emphasis is laid on the drinking in this chapter, whereas nothing is said about that in @Exodus 17.
Eu.R. So you would encourage us to face this conflict, and get deliverance from the thirst and dissatisfaction that marks the flesh, and get the gain of the Spirit in the way of satisfaction?
J.T. That is it; because we shall never be any testimony to God as unsatisfied. Satisfied christians are what are needed, those who are satisfied with what God provides. "We ... have all been given to drink of one Spirit" @1 Corinthians 12:13, which means we are mutually satisfied, satisfied together. I think it is very encouraging to see how the brethren have come together now, to see how persistent the interest is, so that our brethren are ready to sacrifice -- to encamp, as it were, by the waters. How delighted the Lord is to give the water; but in giving it to us He would tell us that He has suffered, and died, and that He has risen and gone into heaven in order that we might have the Spirit. Why not have the water? It is in abundance; but the conflict in @Exodus 17 is what is so necessary, so that we might discover what is inside, and carry out the analysis and what is involved in it, so that we might know what is going on, and be able to call upon *all that is within us* to bless the Lord.
{139}
Eu.R. Does this speaking to the rock involve the love of God coming into the heart?
J.T. It is the principle of the dispensation -- the word of God, and men freely addressing Him; @1 Timothy 4:5. The word of God and prayer are the great principles of the dispensation. It is not the time of smiting -- that is all over; it is the word of God and prayer.
W.C.C. Would that be in keeping with what we get in @Luke 11: "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" @Luke 11:13?
J.T. That is exactly the point. That passage comes in at the end of a section that contemplates provision for the local assembly. How are we to carry on without the Spirit? The Lord would teach us to ask the Father and He will give Holy Spirit. Not that the Spirit is given from heaven now, for He is here; so to speak, the water is here to be drunk.
W.C.C. It is "the Father who is *of* heaven". @Luke 11:13
J.T. That is right; it is not 'in heaven', but "of heaven", suggesting the character of it, for the Spirit is here. In the first feeding of the multitude the Lord looks up to heaven, but in the second feeding He does not look up, for He is recognising what is here -- a very important thing; for, indeed, God is here in the Spirit.
W.C.C. In the light of that it is very solemn what Stephen says, "*Ye* do always resist the Holy Spirit; as your fathers, *ye* also", @Acts 7:51.
J.T. Quite; the Holy Spirit is here, and hence "whosoever shall speak against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this age nor in the coming one", @Matthew 12:32.
G.P. Do you not think there is some significance in the fact that in @Exodus 17 it says, "That the people may drink", but in @Numbers 20 it is, "Thou shalt ... give the assembly ... drink"?
{140}
J.T. There is something in that: the word 'assembly' has its own meaning there; and then the cattle were to drink, too, referring to all the surroundings; the whole realm in which christians are is to be affected by the Spirit. It is the Spirit's day, and as affected by the Spirit, a state of holy satisfaction characterises not only the man himself, but his family and his whole environment. That is what God provides.
M.W.B. "The water came out abundantly" (verse 11).
J.T. That is very significant.
M.W.B. It does not say that in @Exodus 17, but it says it here.
J.T. In @Numbers 20 it is to bring out the character of christianity in type, and that in spite of the official class. There is plenty of water. God is overcoming the obstacle, and the result is that Israel now is able to speak of himself as having "feet" @Numbers 20:19. He is on his way to Canaan, and is ready to walk on his own feet.
H.E.S. Did the Lord have that in view when He said, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly", @John 10:10?
J.T. That is so; He emphasises the plentifulness of it.
M.W.B. Are you referring to @Numbers 20:19: "I will ... go through on my feet"?
J.T. That is what I was thinking of; the christian now has to do with Edom, and he is not to quarrel with him. It is a question whether we are great enough not to quarrel with brethren, even though they may be very provocative and unreasonable. Israel is great enough now to turn aside and go another way to avoid quarrelling with the brethren; he is ready, however, to go on the highway on his own feet. That represents that he is satisfied and set up of God.
{141}
E.C.T. Would you say he is now becoming a tree? Balaam likens Israel to trees in @Numbers 24:6.
J.T. That is right: "The trees of Jehovah are satisfied", @Psalm 104:16.
J.A.P. How does the exercise of @Numbers 21 come in?
J.T. Now you have another thing, a deeper thing. You observe in the beginning of @Numbers 21 Israel is victorious over the Canaanite: "The Canaanite king of Arad, who dwelt in the south, heard that Israel came by the way of Atharim, and he fought against Israel, and took some of them prisoners" @Numbers 21:1. That is a very bitter experience; but still they are victorious in the main: "Then Israel vowed a vow to Jehovah, and said, If thou give this people wholly into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their cities. And Jehovah listened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites; and they utterly destroyed them, and their cities. And they called the name of the place Hormah". @Numbers 21:2,3. That is how the name Hormah is given; although it is mentioned in chapter 14:45, the name is given here. Then it says, "They journeyed from mount Hor by the way of the Red Sea, to go round the land of Edom; and the soul of the people became impatient on the way". @Numbers 21:4. Now there is a fresh test. You may already have been victorious over the Canaanite, and have journeyed, but you have to go round because of the brethren; you have to comply, and you have to accept the unreasonableness of the brethren. They had undertaken to accept it; but to prove it, and to go all the way round -- that is the test! It is because of the unreasonableness of the brethren, and we are all unreasonable, more or less. Edom is still the brother; it does not say yet that God hated him. Nothing tests us more, I think, than the unreasonableness of the brethren, and what it involves -- that I have to go round another way; but I have to do it.
{142}
It brings out what is in me -- something that I did not know before was there. The brethren have been unreasonable, and I did not know that I could not stand that; and they could not stand it here. They complain: it says, "The soul of the people became impatient on the way; and the people spoke against God, and against Moses" -- a very sorrowful and terrible thing that they spoke against God and against Moses, and all because they had to go round a longer way, because the brethren were so unreasonable.
H.L.T. Whereas if they had accepted the position they would have gained.
J.T. Surely; if you have to go round because of the unreasonableness of the brethren you do not suffer in the long run. You may sacrifice and suffer in the meantime, but you gain through it. It is a lesson to be learnt.
L.D.M. We get a similar circumstance in @Luke 9 in relation to the Lord, and it brought out the spirit that marked Him. When His disciples desired Him to call down fire on the Samaritan village that would not receive Him, He rebuked them, saying, "Ye know not of what spirit ye are. And they went to another village" @Luke 9:55, 56. Do not the next three chapters, 10,11 and 12, bring out the Holy Spirit, and spiritual things?
J.T. That is very excellent. The Spirit is given for the asking. What a beautiful spirit the Lord exhibited on that occasion! He tells them, "Ye know not of what spirit ye are". "When they persecute you in this city, flee to the other", @Matthew 10:23. If He was not received by the uncircumcision (@Luke 9) He goes on; but then it is sorrowful for the city which does not receive; that is another matter. The point here is what Israel had to endure because of the refusal of Edom.
M.W.B. You would make a very great distinction between Edom, whom we have to recognise as our
{143}
brother, and the Canaanite in the early part of @Numbers 21, which is definitely an evil element?
J.T. That is right; these books contemplate him as the brother; it is only later that he is said to be hated.
H.E.S. Your thought is that all these different conditions which we have been considering bring to light our state; and the recognition of that should open the way for blessing?
J.T. That is right. The instruction for us is in connection with what is brought out as to the state of the people. They spoke against God and against Moses. Then the brazen serpent is lifted up, which deals with a deeper thing, involving what I have learnt in the conflict implied in @Romans 7.
Ques. How would this apply to us locally, going round brethren who are difficult?
J.T. The idea is that if they do not let you go through you accept it; you wait and are patient. "The soul of the people became impatient". There was lack of patience. "Let patience have her perfect work", @James 1:4. It is a question of the Inner thing in a man's soul; he had not discerned before, perhaps, that he was so impatient. "But let patience have her perfect work"; the result is sure.
W.C.C. This incident is not referred to by Rahab the harlot when she spoke to the spies of the victories they had won, and of how the heart of the people of Jericho melted; does that show that this incident in connection with the land of Edom represents a secret thing?
J.T. Quite so; though she refers to what God did at the Red Sea, and what they did to Sihon and Og, she does not refer to this experience which comes a little earlier, and which I think brings out what we did not expect to be in us, this impatience of soul. So the serpent is lifted up to deal with all this. The believer looks at the lifted up serpent and lives. It
{144}
is the great question of life coming in here. Then the verse we read refers to the Spirit viewed as in the believer now, "Well which princes digged". There is again an allusion to ministerial service, only it is princely here; that is, persons of great moral weight are having to do with things. It says, "Well which princes digged, which the nobles of the people hollowed out at the word of the lawgiver", and the result is that they sing. The people are now fully recognising the Spirit. "Spring up, O well: sing ye unto it" (verse 17). It is a question of assembling: "Assemble the people" (verse 16); and then "Sing unto it" suggests that there is response to the Spirit; but it is a poetic composition showing that the saints are brought into it intelligently and feelingly. Then they move on to Pisgah, where they look "over the surface of the waste" (verse 20).
M.W.B. So here it is not so much a question of circumstances, as in the earlier part of Exodus, but the deep springs of the moral elements of a man's life here.
J.T. That is right; it is the impatience that you did not know was there, perhaps. "The signs of an apostle were wrought among you in all patience" @2 Corinthians 12:12. That is the first thing mentioned.
Ques. In @John 7 the Lord's brethren wanted Him to go up to the feast at Jerusalem, but He answered, "My time is not yet come, but your time is always ready", @John 7:6. Were they not somewhat impatient?
J.T. Yes, they were impatient; they wanted the Lord to show Himself.
{145}
PERFECTION
@Hebrews 6:1, 9 - 15; @Genesis 17:1 - 11,22 - 24; @Genesis 18:1 - 8,16 - 26
I had in mind, dear brethren, to speak about perfection; the idea would become simple if the Lord helped me to dwell upon the things that belong to it. That is, I believe, the meaning of the clause I read in verse 1, "Let us go on to what belongs to full growth", or perfection. As these things are detailed in any measure, I believe the youngest here will understand what is in my mind -- the idea of perfection, of full growth. The suggestion of it must always be of interest and importance; for conditions generally among the saints of God are not just characterised by perfection -- the babe state, indeed, may be said to mark the people of God generally, whereas the divine mind is full growth, or perfection, and for that there must be some standard, which is also evident. And God has brought in that -- indeed He began with it; whether we go back to His eternal counsels, or whether we go back to the detailed work of @Genesis 1 and 2, we see that God began with the full thought. For instance, He made birds and fishes and cattle; there is no idea of His creating an egg or a lamb; when He came to man, there is no idea of a babe -- He made a man, He made a woman. Nor had Eve any other thought when Cain was born, she caned him a man -- "I have acquired a man with Jehovah". @Genesis 4:1. The babe idea had not yet taken form in her mind; and so the Lord, in comforting His disciples, speaks of the joy at the birth of a child that a man is born into the world. And so in the types, in the Israelite's house, however many children there may have been, they were all to have an omer of manna, the father
{146}
and the mother and the children, each was to have the same measure. I refer to these thoughts, dear brethren, that we may see that God would impress us with a full thought -- with completeness and perfection.
This passage in Hebrews has that in mind; it is a passage of scripture calculated to stem the tide of retrogression which had set in. There is always, I may say, a tendency with the people of God to retrograde. If a little bit of growth has been attained, the tendency to retrograde is always present; the ministry, the general service graciously provided by the Lord, is to meet that condition amongst us and to maintain steadiness where God has begun; there should be a steadiness with us to His thought. So the word is, Let us go on to the *things* that belong to full growth. Young christians may say, There is Mr. So-and-so, he has been a long way in the path, I cannot hope to attain to his measure. But then, let us begin with the *things*. What marked that brother in his earlier days? He had to begin young, too; and his progress was marked by certain things. The writer of this epistle alludes to what he would regard, as the opposite to progress at that particular time; he refers, for instance (but not with any thought of discrediting them) to "a foundation of repentance from dead works and faith in God, of the doctrine of washings, and of imposition of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment". @Hebrews 6:1,2. A christian in the Establishment might be familiar with such a category of things, right perhaps in themselves; but he must take other ground, he is not in the Establishment now. You will see what I mean. Were he there, there might be a certain consistency in his occupation with such things; but he is not there now. Those things belonged to Israel before Christ was born, or died. The Jewish believer in Christ had moved professedly, and occupation with
{147}
those earlier principles was not a mark of growth or development in the truth. He says, Let us go on to the things that belong to full growth. God has brought in Christ, Christ has died, He is risen and gone into heaven, the Holy Spirit has come down from heaven; a few years back, at Jerusalem, there were men occupied, with the greatest depth of feeling and joy, with the things that attached to Christ gone into heaven; the Holy Spirit had come down. And so today, God has wrought, and men have great joy in the things that belong to Christ as having come down into this world, as having died and risen from the dead, and gone into heaven; the Holy Spirit having come down and formed the assembly here, and having brought about a state of liberty in relation to the things of God in those who are sons of God. Well, these are the things that belong to full growth; let us go on to *them*.
I mention these things in a simple way so that the youngest here may understand that this thought of full growth is not simply an abstract thought of Christ personally, but the things that have come in through Him and by Him, that attach to Him as gone up into heaven, and that mark many here upon earth today. These things are practical, not far to seek; the young ones here will find them if they look about. And so the writer goes on to say, "But we are persuaded concerning you, beloved, better things, and connected with salvation"; that is just what I am saying, "things that accompany salvation". Then he suggests some of the things -- "the love which ye have shewn to his name, having ministered to the saints, and still ministering". Now this ministering to the saints is very simple -- I am speaking in a preliminary way. If anyone is concerned as to full growth, this is one of the things; the youngest here may have part in that feature. The Lord, in His wonderful discourses while here in flesh, spoke about
{148}
the reward of a righteous man, and the reward of a prophet, too; then He speaks about a cup of cold water given, not in the name of the Lord Jesus, but in the name of a disciple -- that should not lose its reward. The young sisters and brothers perhaps think little of that, but it belongs to perfection. It is a very small thing, but it sets you on the way; keep on *that* line, let us go on to *that* sort of thing. There are a thousand ways in which you can show that you belong to the class who are going on to perfection.
And so the writer says, 'That ye may be imitators of those who, like Abraham, inherit the promises'. We may take Rebecca to illustrate further what I am saying. She is, as you will know, a type of the assembly; but she is not a myth, she was a person, and she belongs to the holy women of old -- a very great distinction; many are unnamed, but she and others are named. And Abraham's servant draws near to her father's house, he is under the guidance of heaven. What a moment it was! Think of a brother coming into a district under the direction of heaven -- you have had many such occasions here. He is under the direction of heaven, a man who communed with Jehovah. He is a nameless man in @Genesis 24, he is simply Abraham's servant. We must not let our minds rest too much on those who are more distinguished; distinguished persons in Scripture are usually named, but there were thousands who were unnamed, and there are today. They are in communion with heaven. This man was in communion with heaven; what a time he was having, there alone, as I may say! He had his camels and others, doubtless, and if you had eyes to see you could see how that man would bow his head in communion with heaven, with Jehovah. What a beautiful picture of real service! And here is Rebecca; she comes out with a pitcher on her shoulder -- a
{149}
common incident in the East, but there had never been such an incident as this. The servant of Abraham is looking for Rebecca; there is no uncertainty about her, her name is mentioned in @Genesis 22:23. You will remember that when Abraham offered up Isaac on the mountain, it is not said that Isaac came down from the mountain. The idea is that Christ has gone into heaven as having risen from the dead; and there must be someone suitable to Him as a wife. And so Rebecca is mentioned; her genealogy is given to us in @Genesis 22, so that in sending out the servant there was no doubt that there was such a person as Rebecca; just as it is here this evening, there is no doubt that there is such an element here as is needed for the assembly. No true minister of Christ has anything else in his mind in what he does but that there should be something for Christ in the assembly. So the servant is there, not in a mechanical way as sent to a certain town, and a certain street in the town, and to a certain number in the street, and to a certain woman, Rebecca; that is not the thought. The thought is that she is to be marked by the *things* that belong to what he has in mind. He had perfection in his mind, and she had the marks. They were, apparently, outwardly very small; but look at the beautiful grace of that young woman. I am speaking to the young sisters here, because the Lord has need of you, not because you were converted on such and such a day, but because He is looking for certain graces in you, certain things that accompany the thing He has in His mind. And so when the servant asks for water, Rebecca says, "Drink, my lord!" @Genesis 24:18. How beautiful that is! She lets the pitcher down, and is ready for service, for the service that was needed. That is the point. What is the need here in Trowbridge? What can a young sister or brother do? I have no doubt you are looking at the elder brethren and you may be leaving the matter with
{150}
them; but that is an entire mistake. There are things that only the elder brethren can do; but the explanation of the weakness is that the young do not take up the things that they *can* do. The point is to be available. Rebecca is ready, and even goes beyond what is needed -- "I will draw water for thy camels also, until they have drunk enough" @Genesis 24:19 -- no small matter for a young woman to do. Well now, I am illustrating the simple thought I have in mind for the young ones here so that you might see that the Lord has need of you in relation to the assembly. He has a certain thing in His mind, and there is perfection attached to it; and He is looking in you for something that belongs to that perfection, however little it is; and you must not be discouraged if it is only in a little way that you can show what belongs to perfection. Rebecca had that feature strikingly at the very outset, a feature that belonged to the perfection that the servant was looking for. I might multiply such illustrations, but one suffices; I am thinking of the young people here first.
Now I go on to the older ones, and I have selected Abraham, as you will see, to illustrate the idea of perfection; he is brought in by the writer to the Hebrews as one who inherits the promises, and we are to imitate him. You will notice, first, that he is to walk before God and be perfect. He was an old man, so that he certainly fits as an example for those of us who are older, Jehovah appears to him and says, "Walk before me" -- a word that comes to one's own heart, because in service we are apt to walk before the brethren. That is right, surely, to commend oneself to them; but then the word is, "Walk before *me*". What eyes those were that would look down on Abraham every day in his walk! And then, "Be perfect". One wishes to show as briefly as possible from these scriptures how this great thought was worked out in the patriarch. First, he is to walk
{151}
before Jehovah and be perfect. God then says to him, "It is I" -- addressing Abraham in a personal way, saying, as it were, I have a great matter in hand, and am come Myself to effect it. He is putting Abraham on his feet; he is to walk before Him and be perfect. Now He says, "It is I" -- and I am going to make a covenant with you, you are to be the father of a multitude. That is a great thought of God: that one man, who as yet had no child, save Ishmael, and nearly one hundred years old, should be the father of a multitude. And He says He will change his name, meaning that the thing is certain. It is a potential thought; he is not yet actually the father of a multitude, but he is potentially. He is that in the mind of God, who calls things that are not as though they were. Every time Abraham signed his name, that is what would be in his mind. In the book of Isaiah the young people are enjoined to subscribe themselves by the name of Israel; it is what is in the mind of God, and you are writing it down, and every time you write it it is greater to you. Well, he is to be the father of a multitude and kings shall come out of him; Isaac is to be born: this all enters into the divine proposal. God says, "It is I": He is proposing it all. Now He says, 'All your males are to be circumcised', meaning that the flesh profits nothing; these things that accompany salvation and that belong to full growth are not fleshly products; no university in the world can develop in any person a product that belongs to full growth. Circumcision means the rolling away, "the putting off of the body of the flesh" -- the totality of it -- "in the circumcision of the Christ", @Colossians 2:11.
Well, what will accompany this, what will belong to full growth in Abraham after such a command? What will be required of him? God says, I have finished for the moment: and we must understand, dear brethren, that we are to learn in part, we get a
{152}
word now and a word later; if you move in the light of the present mind of God in any word given to you, you get another. God had spoken to Abraham and conveyed His mind to him in part, not altogether yet; He stopped speaking with him and went up. How often one has experienced it, God ceasing to speak to you and leaving you to yourself, as it were. Now what will Abraham do? He did exactly what God enjoined him to do. That is the secret of progress, dear brethren; you move in relation to the last word you have from God, whatever it is. Then God will come again to you and speak again to you, and speak greater things to you. But the first thing is, what is Abraham going to do now? Jehovah broke off the conversation and went up; and the selfsame day, we are told, Abraham circumcised all who were in his house, not one exempted. How delightful that was to God, the carrying out of the commandment. Look at Abraham there, in that house, on that day! What a house it was! What a scene it was! How delightful to heaven! There is an accompaniment of salvation, a thing that belongs to full growth. Dear brethren, have we all come to that? It is a very simple thing -- one of the things that belong to full growth -- the acceptance of death in a drastic way: it is the acceptance of the death of Christ, "the putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of Christ". @Colossians 2:11. It was a wonderful day in Abraham's house; there was the feeling of the thing, death was rolled in on that house; everyone was affected.
In the next chapter Abraham is sitting at the tent door, and three men come to him; that is to say, he is recognised as a *man*. The Lord Jesus says to the Father, "The *men* whom thou gavest me"; @John 17:6. It is "the men" in @John 17, not 'the children' -- though that word may be used rightly in other connections; the idea is of men, those who belong to the assembly, those whom the Father has given Him
{153}
out of the world. Now Abraham is recognised in the dignity of manhood. Three men come to him, but it was no less than the appearing of Jehovah to the patriarch. He was honouring that which was already there, that is, the accompanying feature of full growth. So Abraham was honoured by the visit and communication of the Lord, for it was none less than Jehovah who was there, but as a man with two others. How great is the position -- God coming into our circumstances to commune with us and honour us, and to give us the opportunity of ministering to Him. Abraham is ready, he is not disconcerted in the least degree. Were he a babe spiritually he would be hardly equal to such an occasion; it belongs to manhood. Abraham got the manhood, he advanced into it; the things that belong to it are with him. He is restful as sitting by the tent door by the oaks of Mamre, speaking of so much in themselves. Jehovah draws near, but as a man with two others; He comes in company, so that you have four persons now, one of them serving the other three. How dignified that is! Abraham is ready for it, he has everything under his hand; there was no consternation or perplexity, as with the women at the tomb. He is ready for the great occasion. It is a picture that may be carried on into the assembly. How urgent it is that we should go on to the things that belong to full growth, so that as a visitation takes place, we are ready; the things are all there under our hand, we are not disconcerted. The scene is beautiful; they remain under the tree, waiting for Abraham to go through what was necessary for the service. That is God coming into circumstances that are marked by full growth, honouring them and Abraham in them.
Finally, I want to call attention to God's own comment on this man; for He delights to comment on us. I have no doubt that one might hear encouraging things spoken of one (I am not speaking of myself)
{154}
if we could get up into heaven. These things should not be very far away from us. Do you not think there is holy converse in heaven, dear brethren, in regard to what is down here? I am sure there is. God says, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" The scene is beautiful. They move on towards Sodom, and Abraham goes with them to conduct them. What a manly thing that was! And to think that God placed Himself in such a position, that Abraham could do it! Now God says, "Shall I hide from Abraham?" Abraham clung to the Lord, he knew Him among the three; and he stood before Him. What a word to the elder brothers and sisters, some of them getting very old and weak -- how great is the opportunity for prayer when we can do nothing else! Abraham yet stood before Him, while the others went on to Sodom. "Shall I hide from Abraham", says Jehovah, "what I am doing?" He is a man now; he is showing the qualities of a man. "He will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice"; that is God's commendation of him, as it were to Himself; he is worthy of being a friend of God, and of being brought into His secrets. Nothing is to be more desired than to be brought into the secrets of God. Abraham stood before him. Now he is not thinking of himself, but of others -- a very fine feature accompanying full growth, that I am thinking of others -- and others, perhaps, who have not treated me very well; Lot certainly had not treated Abraham in a very brotherly way. It is remarkable how much we have of unbrotherliness in Scripture; but, thank God, it is not only what is unbrotherly, but what is brotherly, that is found in Scripture. Unbrotherliness, however, is depicted in Scripture as in Edom and Lot. But to think unselfishly, to think of the welfare of persons who have been unbrotherly towards me is a very fine feature of full growth; and
{155}
that is what comes out here. Abraham does not name Lot, it is a question of numbers. He stood before Jehovah and said, "To slay the righteous with the wicked, that the righteous should be as the wicked -- far be it from thee!" See how beautifully he speaks to Jehovah. That Jehovah should place Himself in such a position that Abraham could speak to Him thus is what is so striking. Then he says, "Will not the Judge of all the earth do right?" As if God did not know it! But then it was a *man* who was talking to Him; it was delightful to Him to hear Abraham tell Him that. Now he says, Perhaps there are fifty righteous persons in the city, would you not save the city for their sake? God says, I will. And supposing there were only forty-five, will you save it for their sake? God says, I will save it for forty-five. Supposing there are only forty, he says. Jehovah says, I will save the city for forty. For thirty? Yes. For twenty? Yes. And if there are only ten, says Abraham. I suppose his heart was failing him, he would not go below ten, and he knew well enough how few there were. He did not go below ten, and God did not go below ten. But how fine the position is -- the perfect man, as you might say, marked by the features of perfection; for that is the point. He is now able to intercede in this beautifully mutual way with the great Creator of the universe. That is what is open to us. Then we are told that Jehovah finished conversing with Abraham, and went His way. He did not go up from Abraham this time; it is a finished matter. Chapter 17 is unfinished; chapter 18 is finished. Abraham is complete, in the setting; and Jehovah leaves him, and he returns to his place. What a brother he would be locally now! That is the idea: God would have us in perfection before Him, interceding in regard to persons who may have been unkind or unbrotherly. God respected that, and He respects it now. It is the
{156}
best way to serve them, however unbrotherly they have been; in interceding for them you are what you would wish them to be. If you are with God about them, and they get to God about you, the distance will soon disappear. God Himself removes the distance.
{157}
SPIRITUAL UNDERSTANDING
@2 Timothy 2:7; @Exodus 3:2 - 4; @Matthew 1:19 - 21; @Acts 11:5 - 12
I have in mind to speak about the understanding of divine things, and so begin with the verse in 2 Timothy: "Think of what I say, for the Lord will give thee understanding in all things". The apostle Paul was speaking to his beloved Timothy who was to continue in the service, being the younger, after the apostle's decease, hence it was of the utmost importance that he should understand what Paul said. Young men and women should understand, they should know what the Spirit says. We can assume that the Spirit is speaking, having come down from heaven to take the place of Christ. Whilst the Spirit remains here His speaking is a fact, and it is for the younger to hear and understand what is said. In addition to hearing there is understanding -- thoughtfulness -- of what is said. Our words sometimes offend -- there is mixture in them, but never in what is inspired. In spite of our weakness as to what is spoken, the Lord will give the understanding. He will come to us, no matter how small the understanding, and there is no mistake when He does -- it is as clear as noonday. We can say, in measure, *we know*: we are sure of something. We should cultivate the desire to get something from the Lord, and He will come in.
The Lord would have us move for ourselves. There are times, of course, when we should wait for the Lord, but there are also times when we should move of ourselves, and we shall not be long alone in it. There is a great deal of shallowness with us. After such meetings as this, we say we have good times yet cannot remember much or even convey one spiritual impression. Indeed, sometimes we cannot give the
{158}
scriptures read. This is a matter to be looked into, for as we ponder these things the Lord will give us understanding.
The scripture in Exodus is well known. It is the "section of the bush" @Matthew 12:26, @Luke 20:37 to which the Lord Himself refers. It is not only the burning bush but the whole section, and the Lord draws our attention to it as being a matter of importance; we must read before and after it. The scriptures speak of the goodwill of Him that dwelt in the bush. No one can afford to be without that. So the Lord says to His opposers, "ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God", @Matthew 22:29. God is not the God of the dead but of the living. A flood of light enters the soul when one takes that in. Jesus could say, "whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die" @John 11:26 -- we have the victory over death: we are brought to the realm of life, as the Lord beautifully adds, "*that* world and the resurrection". @Luke 20:35.
Moses in this section of scripture is occupied with the flock of his father-in-law, serving unselfishly without wages, continuously and with contentment. He brought the flock to the mount of God -- you could not take saints to a better spot, for there "it shall be provided". This great servant had served for forty years and God honours him -- He shows His valuation of Moses in this way, when he turned aside to see. What valuable impressions! Moses was at the mount first and God comes in because Moses was there. Then he moves again in turning aside to see the sight, and God calls him, "Moses, Moses". God would have us know of what interest it is to Him when we turn aside to see and He will give us to know the meaning of things. To Moses is revealed the wonderful name of Jehovah. Some had used that name before with little understanding, but to Moses it is opened up.
Now the scripture in Matthew corresponds with all this. Joseph, the husband of Mary, is an illustration
{159}
of what has been said. Something happens and he ponders over it. As a spiritual father he would cover things. There is a great need of spiritual fathers, and this implies certain things. Joseph was really a great man. He is called "son of David" -- he is in a spiritual line -- forty-two generations. In reckoning time, God reckons by what He does in that measure of time by His own work; all else is a blank. So Joseph has his place as a son of David, a just man. He ponders things, and God would take on one who would do this. Joseph has to learn, and learners see difficulties; they are bound to see them, but God would lead them on and the cloud will disappear. We have to face the difficulties as Joseph did, which shows that there was something in him. And then he has a vision. That is what you will get -- a vision from God. He will give you a charge. The Lord would have us know that we are something to Him, not that we should be inflated. Joseph is called "son of David"; he is in the line, and he is given to understand that he is in it. He is to take to himself Mary his wife -- light floods his soul. He is to name things, also, and then he takes the child into Egypt, and we see how everything fits in -- "out of Egypt have I called my son". @Matthew 2:15. These are features that affect the testimony. God discloses it to you and you see how it fits in. But you must take it into your closet and pray about it, and ponder it and fit it into its place.
The final thought is seen in Peter. @Acts 10 and 11 taken together give an account of the introduction of the gentiles into the assembly. It is an important point -- the turning of the wall, and the turning of the wall requires great strength and care. When dealing with holy things we must allow no point of weakness for the enemy to attack, we must strengthen the position. Peter is ready; he is on the house-top praying, for we get nothing without prayer. He was a
{160}
man who could draw on the power of the Spirit; he was free from nature, he does not mix things here. The Lord foresaw that and trusted him with the keys. So Peter expounds it clearly. "I was ... praying", he says, "and in an ecstasy I saw a vision, a certain vessel descending like a great sheet, let down by four corners out of heaven, and it came even to me". On this he fixed his eyes and considered. What thoughts would come up in the apostle's mind! It was direction from heaven, and was full of food for thought. As Peter ponders it, there comes a voice from heaven; nothing can make up for that. Heaven comes in. "Rise up, Peter, slay and eat". Do not put it aside, see what it means. Not only does the creature come from God but the conception comes from God, and the voice illuminates it; there is nothing unclean there, God has cleansed it. What food for thought that is! Then immediately there are three men at the gate, and Peter perhaps has still a little doubt remaining, but he is confirmed by the Spirit to go with them nothing doubting.
In a company such as is here, there is always the work of God going on, and I would appeal to you with regard to fellowship. God has cleansed what is in this sheet. There is, of course, the other side; we are to wash our robes so that we may have right to the tree of life and enter in by the gates to the city. Do not linger. Inside the city is the tree of life. Will you not then go with these men, nothing doubting?
{161}
EARTHEN VESSELS
@Jeremiah 19:1 - 3,10,11; @Romans 9:19 - 24; @1 Thessalonians 4:13,14
I wish every one of us to take account of himself as an earthen vessel; this is how men are regarded in Scripture. The prophet Jeremiah is directed to take such a vessel, a potter's earthen bottle, and to "take of the ancients of the people, and of the ancients of the priests; And go forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is by the entry of the east gate". He is directed thus to take the vessel, in the presence of responsible witnesses, to the east gate; that is, the sun-gate, or the pottery-gate, where the potter makes his vessels in the light and heat of the sun. We have here a picture of fragile humanity brought into this world indeed as God's creatures, but as in it coming under influences which form them according to this world; the sun in this prophet as belonging to the "host of heaven" is seen as a powerful influence used by Satan to divert men from God; chapter 8:2 and 19:13. The influence that bears upon men and women in this world is such as to bring about in them the state that is indicated in this chapter. So that the scene is laid in the valley of Hinnom, one of the darkest spots, signifying the place of filth and judgment, and indeed the place of eternal torment.
How serious it is, beloved friends, to be taken, according to divine direction, by the prophet, a representative of God, accompanied by responsible witnesses -- the ancients of the people and the priests -- and to be faced with this solemn scene! Satan is deluding men and women at the present time; a lying spirit has gone forth, and lies are being formulated in many ways and through many persons, so that men and women should be darkened and
{162}
deceived as to this solemn picture. And yet the Scriptures abound with testimony as to the judgment to come. We read, indeed, of Tophet that it was "ordained of old" -- it is not accidental -- and that it was prepared for the king, for Satan, and that the judgment should be direct from God Himself; so that this awful picture of judgment is not accidental, nor is it merely because of men's guilt, it was "ordained of old". God, having foreseen the circumstances that would arise in the universe, ordained it. We read of eternal torment, the place of it -- hell -- being prepared for the devil and his angels. It is divinely designed, dear friends. This valley of Hinnom, Tophet, is but a picture of it -- a mere suggestion of it. What it suggests was designed of old, and it was designed for the king, that is to say, God had in mind the author of sin, for "the devil sinneth from the beginning". @1 John 3:8. He is a liar and a murderer, and, having come into this world, he has acquired influence over men in it; the whole race has fallen under his power; he is called the god of this world, and he is called also its prince. He is the head of it religiously, and the head of it politically. These facts have not yet come out openly, at least in these countries in which we live, but the time is fast approaching when they will come out. A man will come who shall set himself up in the temple of God, exalting himself against all called God. He will be, the direct representative of the king, of him who is the author of sin; of him who introduced it and maintains it in this world; indeed of him who has built up this world. He will embody the two features I have referred to; there will be the idea of god in him and the idea of prince. We are told that the beast and the false prophet are to be taken and cast alive into the lake of fire burning with brimstone; and thus we know that the direct representative of Satan will be consigned to that awful place alive. A thousand years
{163}
later, Satan himself will be consigned to it; never again to have scope among men, never again to lift up his head against God and against Christ.
We have here some very solemn pictures presented to us, raising the question as to whether we shall choose to exist with the devil and his angels in that awful place. The prophet takes a potter's earthen bottle, which would be a type of each one of us, of every man and woman brought into the world, but as coming under powerful influences in this world and being formed by them, formed apart from the influence of God, and the influence of Christ; and as so formed, only fit to be broken, never to be repaired. That is a solemn fact that comes out here. It says of the vessel, "Even so will I break this people and this city, as one breaketh a potter's vessel, that cannot be made whole again"; note, it cannot be made whole again.
Such is the picture that we have in this prophecy of what man is -- a mere potter's earthen vessel, such as can be broken, and as it says elsewhere, "broken to shivers". @Revelation 2:27. When the Lord Jesus comes out by and by and takes up His rights in this world, this king, for whom the judgment was ordained of old, will be arrayed against Him, but we read "as vessels of pottery are they broken in pieces"; "thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel". There is no power in man to stand up in the presence of God, yet we all have to stand in His presence, as it says, "the dead, small and great, stand before God". @Revelation 20:12. And so I would speak to those who have not believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, and I would put it to you, as to whether you are prepared, in view of these awful facts, to let things drift along as they are with you? Are you prepared to drift along in the current of this world, and take your chance at the end? How can you continue for one instant on such a course? Here you are, as it were, as a tiny potter's earthen
{164}
vessel brought face to face with the very place of judgment, and you are shown the whole scene, you are warned of it, and it is pointed out what the end will be of those who have not believed on the Lord Jesus Christ. They will be broken like the potter's vessel, that can never be made whole again; they will never stand on this earth again; they will never enjoy the benefits of their Creator, but will be consigned to His eternal wrath. Are you prepared for that? You say, You are seeking to frighten people. But it is right that you should be made to feel how solemn it is to have to do with God.
God has the means by Him, not only of dealing in judgment with your tiny vessel, but with all the nations of the world. Take the nations banded together, as they will be, against God and against His Anointed; we read He will break them with a rod of iron and dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel; He will break them to shivers, so that there is nothing left of them. Such is the power that God has, that Christ has, connected with judgment; all judgment is in the hands of Christ; authority has been given to Him to execute judgment, because He is the Son of man. But you may be assured that, inasmuch as He is the Son of man, He is on our side; He will put off the judgment till the last moment. He is on man's side -- He is the "mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all". @1 Timothy 2:5,6. He has given Himself for us; He has given Himself for all as a ransom, and He is waiting on men now to turn them aside from their folly. "Unto you, O men, I call", @Proverbs 8:4. He says, and He warns you as to the wrath to come, for "wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men". @Romans 1:18.
This tiny potter's vessel represents the smallest as well as the greatest amongst men. A bottle is a containing vessel; what have you contained from
{165}
God? What about the christians? The christian is also an earthen vessel; I am an earthen vessel, even an unbeliever is an earthen vessel, but my earthen vessel will not be broken in Tophet. When the believer dies, *Jesus puts him to sleep*. Is Jesus going to put you to sleep? I tell you that, if you are unconcerned as to the future, the devil has put you to sleep, for he has his sleeping draughts. The Lord never gives His people sleeping draughts; on the cross He Himself refused the sponge with vinegar; the believer is maintained in his senses. Satan has his drugs, his deadening things, by which he deadens men's senses so that they are unaware of what is coming. They do not feel divine displeasure; they are, as Peter says, "senseless men". @1 Peter 2:15. Has Satan been putting you to sleep? If so, you are oblivious to what there is for you, to what God proposes to you, and to what most of us here have accepted and enjoyed -- you are dead to it all. Why are you dead to it all? Why so senseless? Why so unmoved, when your relatives, and your acquaintances have been moved, and have accepted the gospel and enjoyed what it proposes? Why not you? Satan has been working with you. He has watched over you all these years since you came into the world, he has had his eye on you; he has brought influences to bear upon you that have deadened your senses. Perhaps you were at one time conscious of the reality of these things, but you have lost that consciousness, you are deadened to the overtures of God and Christ, and are quite senseless as to what we enjoy.
When the light of God enters a man's soul, it awakens him. Things he had never seen, appear to him; impressions that he had never felt, but should have, are now felt; he begins to think of God. Has the thought of God come into your soul? One said, God, be merciful to me, the sinner. What does that evidence? It evidences that the light of God had
{166}
come into that man's soul, and he felt that he had to do with God, and as a result he smote upon his breast and said, God, be merciful to me, the sinner. He is singled out; God had already singled him out, for God deals with us severally; His finger finds us and touches us. He singles you out and, as God singles you out, so you single yourself out. Instead of saying, 'God be merciful to us miserable sinners', you say, God, be merciful to me, *the* sinner. You discover yourself; you have found out that you are *the* sinner, and you are not concerned to include others. You say, God be merciful to me, the sinner; and what does the Lord say? "I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other". @Luke 18:14. Would you not like to go down to your house justified today? I can tell you, on the authority of Scripture, that you may, however black your course may have been. You may be justified, not only forgiven -- yes, forgiven -- but justified. Forgiveness is a wonderful thing, but justification is greater, and the believer has both. The blackest sinner may be forgiven and justified. A justified man is a man against whom you can make no charge. He is not simply justified in regard of one offence or charge. Think of it, that the guiltiest person in the whole world may be justified -- "By him all that believe", it says, "are justified from all things", @Acts 13:39. Do you wish it? Or, as I said, are you prepared to drift along as you have been, in the presence of the fact that you are portrayed here in this potter's earthen vessel brought to the pottery gate; you are in the presence of the whole of humanity, in the presence of responsible witnesses, and it is pointed out to you that there is nothing for you but Tophet, that which was "ordained of old" for the king, and of which God Himself says, "where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched". @Mark 9:44,46,48.
Now in the epistle to the Romans there is the same thought of the potter introduced, but God is the
{167}
potter there, and there are vessels of mercy, and vessels of wrath. God had said, "I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion" @Romans 9:15, and as God thus asserts His will the question is asked, "Why doth he yet find fault? For who hath resisted his will?" Do *you* say that? Who has *not* resisted His will? It is not 'who has', but who has *not*? I know of no one who has not, except the Lord Jesus Christ. I know of no man, or woman, who has not resisted His will. We have all been guilty of it. Paul speaks of himself in this way, as a wilful man: "who before was a blasphemer and persecutor, and an insolent overbearing man"; @1 Timothy 1:13 he went forward in his own will, breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord. Did he not resist the will of God? Did he not resist the will of Christ? He did. And so has every one of us; there is not one of us who has not resisted the will of God, and yet God has met us in Christ and broken us down. Let no one say "who hath resisted his will?" for all have resisted His will. The Lord Jesus came into this world saying, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God", @Hebrews 10:9 "Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me" @Hebrews 10:5 -- One who did the divine will in every movement of His heart, in every breath He breathed, in every word He spoke, in every step He took, in every act He did: He did the will of God. I invite you to contemplate Him who did the will of God. He never resisted the will of God, though that will led Him down to death in the body that He took for that very purpose; and the Scripture says, "By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once" @Hebrews 10:10; God offers forgiveness to those who have been resisting His will.
Now God would meet you with, the gospel concerning His Son, concerning Him who did God's will, and
{168}
He proposes forgiveness. You need forgiveness; it is offered to you. He is ready now to take you up and form you into a vessel prepared for glory. Think of that! It is all mercy. "Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us", @Titus 3:5; it is according to His mercy. Who is there that can answer? "Who art thou", he says in this passage in Romans, "that repliest against God?" You have no moral title to call upon God to give you an answer; you need mercy. You are brought to the valley of the son of Hinnom, as I said; you are in the presence of the judgment. Why do you want to reply against God? What right have you to ask God questions, to ask Him to explain Himself? You want mercy; it is for you to cast yourself on the mercy of God; there is no other place for you. So it is "according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Spirit". @Titus 3:5. God has the means of cleansing; there is the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit, which christians can say "he shed on us abundantly". @Titus 3:6.
God is merciful, and is calling on you now to submit. He is ready to make you, not a vessel broken never to be repaired, but a vessel of mercy prepared for glory. Think of such mercy. You say, Do not believers die? Not all; Enoch did not die, Elijah did not die; thousands of us are hoping that we shall be changed by the power of Christ, that we shall be changed and caught up to be with Him for ever. We are not afraid of Tophet, although it was ordained of old, but we bring the testimony of it before you at this time, and warn you in regard of it; and also we would bring you to the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and show you from the Scriptures how He bore the penalty that lay upon man, and how forgiveness is consequently offered to you now; and that on the simple principle of faith, all is yours -- forgiveness,
{169}
justification, the gift of the Holy Spirit, and everlasting life.
But then, what about your earthen vessel? Paul says about his, "we have this treasure in earthen vessels", @2 Corinthians 4:7 for believers are containing vessels. The epistle to the Romans shows how the believer is brought to the idea of a vessel; he presents his body to God a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable -- as a vessel. God has in every believer a vessel. What kind of vessel? It is an earthen vessel, sure enough, but, taking the believer as a whole -- spirit, soul, and body -- he is a vessel of mercy fitted for glory. You may look at us, and say, You are not much different from us, and you die like others. Christians do not *die* like others, nor do they live like others. I have seen christians death beds, and they do *not* die like others. They die in light, they die in love, they die rejoicing, and full of hope; in other words, they are put to sleep through Jesus. Jesus is by them. The pitcher is not broken, never to be repaired. "We know that if our earthly house ... were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens". @2 Corinthians 5:1. What a prospect! If you are an unbeliever and in your sins, you have not got that; you are just this potter's earthen bottle capable of being broken in the valley of Tophet, never again to be repaired, "that cannot be made whole again". Having passed out of the world by way of death, you will never stand on earth again, never will you contain anything of God, or enjoy any of His benefits; you will be a vessel of wrath fitted to destruction. Why? Because you resisted the will of God. The will of God now is that you should be saved, for our Saviour God desires that all men should be saved; He desires that you should submit to Christ, that you should bow and acknowledge yourself a guilty sinner, and say, God be merciful to me, the sinner; then God will take you up. I can tell
{170}
you from experience, I can tell you from the Scriptures, that God will take you up from that moment and make you a vessel of mercy prepared for glory. Think of being prepared for glory! We believers will come out with Jesus presently; when the Christ, the One by whom God is doing everything for His glory, when that great Person comes out from heaven, we shall come out with Him -- every one of us. "When the Christ is manifested who is our life, then shall ye also be manifested with him in glory", @Colossians 3:4. Will there be any disparity between us? No, we shall be like Christ -- each one -- a vessel of mercy prepared for glory. We shall be containing vessels, not one of us will be empty; and so, I would say to believers, acquire the habit now of being filled. The Holy Spirit having come in, fills us; for the idea is that we are containing vessels -- containing the very greatest thing, the treasure -- and we shall come out by and by as containing vessels in the aggregate; we shall be the heavenly city, which is said indeed to have the glory of God. It comes down from God out of heaven, having the glory of God -- truly a vessel of mercy prepared for glory.
Then there is just one other thought that Jeremiah gives us in regard of an earthen vessel, corresponding with a believer; chapter 32:6 - 15. The evidences of the purchase of the field by Jeremiah, which Jehovah charged him to purchase, are put into an earthen vessel (@Jeremiah 32:14); for the testimony is to be continued for a long time. There was that which was the *open* evidence of the purchase, and there was the sealed evidence, and these were put into an earthen vessel. And so it is, that God having taken us up in mercy and filled us, we are the repositories of the very greatest thing -- the testimony to redemption is cherished in our hearts, and we love to speak of it, and bring it forward. There is in the Holy Spirit here a testimony to accomplished redemption, and hence we
{171}
can preach to you, having the evidence of the purchase in our possession. Jesus gave Himself, and the Holy Spirit is a witness to us, a witness *in* us indeed, that the purchase has been made -- that He has given Himself. So it is for everyone to avail himself of it, of "the redemption which is in Christ Jesus". @Romans 3:24. The righteousness of God is towards all and upon all those who believe. May God help us all to believe, and to have part in the purchase, to be "the purchased possession", @Ephesians 1:14 those who are redeemed "with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot". @1 Peter 1:19.
{172}
"THE BLESSING OF ABRAHAM"
@Galatians 3:6 - 9; @Luke 19:1 - 10
It is said of Abraham, in @Galatians 3, that the gospel was preached to him by the Scriptures, and it is also said of him that he is "heir of the world", @Romans 4:13. We read also concerning Noah that he "became heir of the righteousness which is by faith". @Hebrews 11:6. We may all become heirs of this, and for the sinner there could be no greater inheritance than the righteousness which is by faith. If you are an unforgiven sinner, and you are convicted, it will be interesting to you to know about this righteousness, the righteousness which is by faith. It is for you to claim it and to appropriate and apply it. It will bring relief to your conscience. Later you will find that you are heir to other things, but you now need this inheritance sorely. Not only is there an inheritance of righteousness which is by faith, but God takes great pains to let it be known, not only by informing people, but by commissioning men to preach it. Noah was "a preacher of righteousness", @2 Peter 2:5 he preached it in dark days. Righteousness is being preached now, God having fitted men to preach so that it should be forced home upon the needy, for there is power in preaching. Preaching is not merely informing you of things; it does, of course, impart information, but there is divinely given force in the preaching, indeed it is said that it is "preached ... with the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven". @1 Peter 1:12. There is a divine commission behind it. There is power in what is preached by the Holy Spirit. If you have a needy, convicted conscience, the Spirit would give you to know, as He can, that this inheritance is yours, that is righteousness not by works, but by faith.
{173}
Now, following on Noah, Abraham is said to be heir of the world, and believers, according to Galatians, are his sons, as it is stated in the passage, "Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the children (sons) of Abraham", and again, "So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful (or believing) Abraham". Thus you see that you are brought into good company in taking up this inheritance. Abraham is only used conveniently in this scripture to bring the gospel close to us, and so we are told at the end of the chapter that "if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise". @Galatians 3:29. Abraham is thus brought in by the Spirit of God to bring the gospel down to us and simplify it, so that we might appropriate it and understand what a company we are brought into, as blessed with such a man as Abraham.
Now Abraham is portrayed by the Spirit of God in the gospel narrative, of @Luke 16, as speaking to a man in hades. God takes up this remarkable personage so as to aid men in believing the gospel, and escaping the punishment that is meted out to those who reject it. You will remember the Lord's vivid parable of hades, the place to which the "rich man" @Luke 16:19 went when he died. No unbeliever can ignore the fact that death is staring him in the face. We christians, of course, are expecting, not death, but the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ from heaven, as we are told. It is the hope of our hearts, but if in the meantime we do die, the Lord Jesus has to say to the death of each, and He takes us to Himself, for as absent from the body we are present with the Lord; @2 Corinthians 5:8. In the parable to which I have referred, Abraham's bosom, into which Lazarus is carried by the angels, symbolises this truth. Lazarus is seen in Abraham's bosom. Having died, he is attended by angels, those mighty beings that were created before men, servants of God from the outset. When the foundations of the
{174}
earth were laid angels were there. Now they are employed, according to the Lord's own words, in carrying this departed saint into the bosom of Abraham. It is a parable, and Abraham is used by the Spirit of God, and by the Lord Himself, to bring the truth home to us and make it simple. What a privilege belongs to christians when departing this life, or, as the Spirit of God would say, of them "which sleep in Jesus", @1 Thessalonians 4:14 that means, falling asleep through Jesus. The Lord does it. He has to do with the closing of the eyes of the christian. This is a blessed sleep indeed. When the Lord comes the christians alive on the earth will be changed and caught up with the saints raised from the dead, to be for ever with Him. Lazarus is borne by angels into Abraham's bosom. He is received there.
It is also of interest to note that Abraham is conversant with the Pentateuch, for he speaks about Moses, although he died years before Moses was born. Such is God's way, for when we come to God in the gospel we come to the God of the living, and all live to Him. We are dealing with a living state of things. As the Lord Jesus said, that God is the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and all live for Him; @Luke 20:38. Viewed in that way Abraham is living for God, and God is pleased to use him as in the realm of the departed to symbolise the place of blessing, "the bosom of Abraham", @Luke 16:22 a remarkable expression. We can understand, dear friends, that it could not be literal; it indicates the place of blessedness, which is the portion of those who have fallen asleep through Jesus. It is God's way to come down to our minds and feelings, and to show how we are cared for as believers with believing Abraham, for indeed we are his sons. This is set forth in the parable, for Lazarus had that place, but we christians realise that we are sons of God. This is a much greater thought, but still God comes down to
{175}
us and makes things simple. If anyone here is a believer in Jesus, however feeble he may be, and he dies, or 'falls asleep', the Lord Jesus has to do with that.
On the other hand, the rich man could speak to Abraham. What a picture the Lord gives us there! Is there one here who does not trust in Jesus, who fails to join with believing Abraham in believing in the Lord Jesus? What will happen if you die? Jesus will not close your eyes, nor will angels have to do with you either. You may have a burial here, and you will doubtless have mourners, men will speak well of you possibly, but there will be no attention from heaven. "In hades" the rich man, "lifting up his eyes, being in torments, he sees Abraham afar off" @Luke 16:23 -- understand this is not the hell of the damned, the final place, the lake of fire, it is a provisional place, but still a place of suffering; let no one be infidel about this. These are the words of Jesus, and to reject the parable of @Luke 16 is to reject the words of Jesus and make Him a liar. Think of that! -- and men do it.
The Lord tells us that the rich man lifted up his eyes, being in torment, and he spoke to Abraham. Lazarus is seen in the bosom of Abraham, as if God would bring the redeemed who are in comfort into the view of condemned unbelievers who are in suffering, though there is a great gulf between them. A conversation is carried on. You can understand this is not final, for there is no such thing as a conversation between the saved and the unsaved in the eternal place of punishment. This is a provisional state of things to bring the position vividly before us, so that we should not be foolish and reject the gospel and thus find ourselves in company with that sufferer. He begged Abraham to send Lazarus to him, but Abraham said, No, there is no possibility of that. He is perfectly conversant with the whole position, and
{176}
he can answer the man who refers to his relatives here on earth. He begs him to send to his brothers who were yet alive on the earth, but Abraham says, "If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead". How conversant he was with the truth, and how he would bring it home to us, beloved friends, that unless we believe the Scriptures today, the same doom will be ours.
I now speak a little about Abraham being heir of the world. As heir of the world he has a great outlook, and we may place ourselves beside him. When God spoke to him according to Genesis, He showed Abraham that he was to be heir of the world. Those words are not found in Genesis, they are in @Romans 4, but their substance is in Genesis, and Jehovah said to him, "in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed". @Genesis 12:3.
Suppose you had been alongside of Abraham at that time, what an outlook would have been yours! What an outlook he had! We learn that he prayed for the nations. God said to Abimelech, the Philistine king, "he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee" @Genesis 20:7; that was his position. In other words Abraham represents the world in reconciliation, for God is looking at it in relation to Abraham. He says, I am going to bless the world in you, so that we get an outlook of grace in placing ourselves alongside of Abraham in the book of Genesis, and the scriptures say of him, "In thee shall all nations be blessed". Now that is the world in reconciliation, and it is in that way that Abraham is taken up in the New Testament, because he represents such a great thought, a thought that is very little taken into account, that the world is now in reconciliation; @Romans 11:15.
Well, someone may say, Does not the Lord say, "Now is the judgment of this world"? @John 12:31. Yes, but the Spirit of God says later that the casting away of the
{177}
Jews means the reconciliation of the world, so that the Lord evidently meant the Jewish world. The apostle Paul speaks of the gentile world, and says that the world has come into reconciliation because of the casting away of God's ancient people. We are in a wonderful time, and hence I would enlist your interest in Abraham, that you might see how God speaks to you in relation to him, and presents the gospel so that you might see that we come into sonship through it. We come into sonship in this great personage who is heir of the world. All that, of course, comes down to Christ, He is Son of Abraham, and as Son of Abraham He is heir of the world. He is heir of all things, but God is pleased to occupy us with Abraham so as to simplify the matter, and to show how He will bless us. He blesses us with believing Abraham. We christians here take up that attitude; we are blessed with believing Abraham.
Now I come to Luke to show you how these sons of Abraham are brought in. We have a daughter of Abraham in chapter 13:16, and John the baptist says to the Jews in chapter 3:8, that God can raise up from these stones children to Abraham. He could do that, so that in the gospel of Luke we are introduced at once to Abraham, and to the purpose of God as to him, and the power of God to raise up children to him, even out of stones. It is a question of God's ability, a very great thought in the gospel, what God can do, and I am here to present what He can do for the hardest heart in this world. God forbid that your heart should be hard. I have no difficulty in preaching to believers, I get on better with them, for normally their hearts are tender, but if you are an unbeliever, God can do great things even with your hard heart. God says to Jeremiah, "Is not my word ... like a hammer, that breaketh the rock in pieces?" @Jeremiah 23:29. God can do that; He can raise up
{178}
children to Abraham even from stones. He does it in affecting our hearts, and I want to show you from Luke's gospel how He does it. Luke knew that there were hard hearts. What hard-hearted people were abroad in the gentile world, and what hard-hearted people there are today. I do not believe there ever was a time when the soil was harder than it is now. Apostate soil is hard, and that is the governing spirit at this moment throughout christendom; so the word is "harden not your hearts", @Hebrews 3:8. The fact that you are ready to listen encourages us to believe that there is some little softening. It may be that God has taken away a loved one. He uses that to soften our hearts and seizes the softened time to speak to us, and to embrace us. It may be some other kind of sorrow, for God uses many sorrows to soften our hearts, and so the word is "harden not". If there be any little softening of heart under the governmental dealings of God, do not allow the hardening process to be resumed, "harden not" your heart, retain that bit of softness. God is seeking to bless you, and He would make something out of that hard heart of yours, He can turn a stone into a child of Abraham. In chapter 13 of Luke's gospel we read of a woman who had been bent together by Satan. Eighteen years earlier Satan had had to do with her -- he had bound her. We are told that he goes about like a roaring lion. I do not say that *her* heart was hardened, but I do say that the devil had something to do with her, and it is he who hardens hearts. If there is a little bit of faith in our hearts God shelters us, but perhaps will is at work. Some young person turns away from the authority of a mother or a father and takes her own way. The devil is waiting for such. The Lord says of this woman that eighteen years before she was bound by Satan. She must have been comparatively young then. We are not told how old she was,
{179}
but eighteen years is a considerable period, and the Lord goes back over those years, and, looking at that woman, He says, "Satan hath bound, lo, these *eighteen years*". @Luke 13:16. As I said, she may have been young, and drifted away, taking her own way, and Satan laid in wait and bent her over. He damaged her, and the damage remained up to that moment. Maybe you are like that.
I often refer to this woman, for she is a very striking example of Satan's work. People come under his influence through their own wills, unquestionably. God lifts His hand and the devil is ready to attack. *Eighteen years ago*! It is possible that you may be aware of something that happened years back. It has never been settled, and you have never been able to pray since, never been able to look up to God. You have never confessed that guilt, and there you are like a cow or a sheep, looking down instead of looking up; no place in the christian company, unable to pray, unable to sing praises to God. Satan has done that, and it is not undone yet, whereas the Son of God has come, as John says, "to *undo* the works of the devil". @1 John 3:8. He is ready now by the gospel to undo that work, whatever it may be. Whether it be a year ago, or two, or three, or four, or eighteen, the Lord is here to undo what the devil did, and straighten you out, so that you might look up and join the saints, join with believing Abraham as one of his sons or daughters, as the Lord says, she is "a daughter of Abraham" @Luke 13:16. He said that of this woman as straightened out. God says of Abraham that he commanded his house and his children after him to do judgment and justice. God will have a world with people like that, and the Son of God is ready through the gospel to straighten you out. Perhaps you have had to do with the devil and have come under his influence, and the matter has never been settled. The Lord is ready to help you; to
{180}
straighten the matter out so that you may look up to Him in faith.
Then there is the son of Abraham, of whom we read in @Luke 19, and I want especially to speak about him, that is Zacchaeus. The Lord takes special interest in this man. One loves to notice any particular movement of the Lord. He called the woman to Him, and He said, "Thou art loosed from thine infirmity". @Luke 13:12. That was a matter of words. In the case of this "son of Abraham", the Lord takes great pains with him. It may be that there is someone here like that. The Lord has taken much trouble with you, and there has been no definite result so far. In this gospel we find that the first mention of Simon Peter is that the Lord entered into his house; @Luke 4:38. His wife's mother was sick of a fever, and the Lord stood over her and rebuked the fever, and it left her, but it did not appear to have any effect upon Peter. The Lord had come very near to him. He had come into Peter's house, and performed this wonderful cure on his mother-in-law, changing the whole atmosphere in that house. It must have been an uncomfortable house. There are today, alas, great domestic disturbances, even among the people of God, and the service of God is hindered by these disturbances. The Lord took great pains with Peter's mother-in-law. He went into the house and, standing over her, healed her, and she arose and served, causing great change in the house, and yet apparently Peter was not affected. Is your case like that?
The next point in connection with Peter, is that the Lord entered into his business affairs. He has His eye on you, and if you are in the purpose of God, He will have you. If He cannot affect you in domestic affairs, He will enter into your commercial matters. The Lord had great interest in Peter, and in entering into his business affairs -- taking his boat and using it -- He secured him. What joy there was in heaven
{181}
as the skill of the Lord secured that man! Some persons would detach their business from their christianity. The Lord says, No, you cannot do that, I will come into your business if you are not right. It was by this means that He secured Peter.
So it is with Zacchaeus, the Lord takes much trouble with him. Jesus passed through Jericho, and Zacchaeus wished to see Him, and he could not. He was the chief tax-gatherer, a notorious man, as we understand such officials were. Every person in the surroundings branded that man as a sinner. That was his reputation, he was the subject of general resentment, and the Lord knew that. It is not so where the gospel is preached; there is no such atmosphere as that in a company of christians. I always regard these gospel meetings as a great advantage. Persons seeking help from the Lord have the advantage of an excellent and sympathetic atmosphere, but concerning Zacchaeus they all pointed him out as a sinner, and murmured that the Lord "was gone to be guest" with such a man. But the Lord knew. The Lord would have His man -- a chief tax-gatherer; he was rich, and he was little, but he had a desire in his heart that the surrounding crowd did not know of, and possibly that is going on with you. In spite of the bad feelings there may be against you, or the hard judgment about you, you have in your heart a desire to know who the Lord Jesus is. Zacchaeus wanted to see Jesus, "*who he was"*, mark you, or *who He is*, for *what He was He is*. The Lord knows what is going on in your heart. Satan did not put into this man's mind the desire to know Jesus, who He was; no! he did not do that. Satan had no transaction with this man as he had with the woman. On the contrary, God had had to do with him, and that is what is so comforting about such meetings as this. In many instances God works beforehand with persons that attend them; the seed
{182}
is already in their souls; something has happened before, but the transaction was God's not the devil's. The crowd did not know of this in Zacchaeus case, but the Lord knew. The Spirit of God says that he ran before the Lord and got up into a sycamore tree. He wanted to see Jesus, who He was. Is there anyone here like that, with a desire to know who Jesus is? This is really one of the leading difficulties at the present time. Who is He? God had had to do with that man before. Satan would never suggest it to him, or put it into his mind that he should know who Jesus is. He would turn him away and occupy him with politics, or business, but he would never occupy him with Jesus, whereas he was occupied with Jesus, however vaguely. He had the desire in his mind to know about Jesus, and the Lord saw to it that he should know. He says, I will see to it that you will know. I say that for your encouragement. This meeting is that you should know. The Lord knows what is in your heart, and His desire is that you *should know* "who he is". Zacchaeus went on and got up into the tree, and the Lord moved on to the spot where he was.
You will notice that the scripture says, "when Jesus came to the place he looked up". He ought not to have needed to look up, the Lord should never have to look up to a creature, but He does it in grace. Perhaps some of us have a little status in this world, a little money, ancestry, learning, or whatever it may be; we think ourselves big, and perhaps we would have the Lord look up to us! We may expect the most spiritual man on earth to look up to us; but that should not be. Naaman, the Syrian, expected Elisha to recognise his greatness, but he did not. God is a God of measure, and His measure is a spiritual one, and no spiritual man should have to look up to an unspiritual man, however great he is in this world, but in grace the Lord did look up. Luke
{183}
says, "most excellent Theophilus", @Luke 1:3 but that is grace. You cannot conceive of Luke saying that to any nobleman by and by, but in this setting and in the time of grace we must not allow anything to hinder us in reaching needy souls. The Lord looked up when He came to the place, He did not turn away from the tree because that man ran up there. He came to the place, and He said, "Zacchaeus". It is most touching. He knew his name. All the crowd thought that the man was a sinner, but not only is he in the Lord's mind, but the Lord knew there was something going on within him that was changing his texture, so to speak, and He was going to finish that work. This meeting is in order that He might finish what He has begun. Some of us remain unfinished, we do not go on, but the Lord intended to continue the work, and He said, "Zacchaeus, make haste and come down", and he did. It was not a command merely, but the Lord added a premium to it; He says, "today I must abide at thy house", not simply, I will look in, but I will stay. It is His intention to get this man. He went to Calvary, into death, to secure him, He suffered on the cross to this end. Paul said, "the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me". @Galatians 2:20. The same could be said by Zacchaeus, and doubtless was said many a time afterwards. Every son of Abraham will glorify Jesus and love Jesus, for Jesus is Heir to everything. What belonged to Abraham and to David belongs to Jesus.
The Lord is bent on securing this man, and He says, "I must abide at thy house". The murmurers say, "He was gone to be guest with a man that is a sinner". Never mind what people say, if faith is operative in you. The Lord knows what is in your heart and that you really want to know Him; He is ready to make Himself known to you. He went into death to make Himself known, and He surely does it in detail. Zacchaeus came down quickly. Let me
{184}
appeal to anyone here who is hesitating. Do not delay another moment. Zacchaeus did not, he came down quickly, and he was in his house before the Lord arrived, we might say, to receive Him gladly. How beautiful that is! It gives joy to the Lord. If you receive the Lord into your heart now it will be a joy to Him. Do not delay. I believe the Lord was peculiarly glad with the kind of reception He got; he "received him gladly". Unlike Martha, for on the first visit to Martha's house there was no gladness, no reception. The Lord must have been uncomfortable in Martha's house, but not so in the house of Zacchaeus. He said, "I must abide at thy house". The Lord comes into our hearts to stay. He is to remain there, it is His home surely, it belongs to Him, "ye in me, and I in you". @John 14:20. "Christ in you the hope of glory". @Colossians 1:27. Is it too much to say that? Not at all, it is the gospel. The Lord is ready to enter and to remain there, and then to make known to you all the glories that belong to you. Zacchaeus speaks with great respect and reverence. He says, "If I have taken anything from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold". He speaks now as a son of Abraham, that is, he speaks righteously; every son of Abraham must be righteous, so that he establishes his righteousness and the Lord says, he is a son of Abraham. "This day is salvation come to this house, forsomuch as he also is a son of Abraham. For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost". May God bless this word in the gospel.
{185}
MINISTRY FOR THE YOUNG
(*Copy of reply to a letter on this subject*.)
As regards ministry for the young, it seems to me that Scripture warrants it. But it is not seen as a separate department, so to speak. He who made God known took little children in His arms, and Paul fed the Corinthians with milk as unable for meat, and John writes to little children as distinct from fathers and young men. Peter urges that those he addressed should desire the pure mental milk of the word so as to grow by it. Thus the same person ministers to old and young. It is a question therefore of discerning *what is needed*, and hence *spirituality* is essential if young people are to be properly served.
As you say, 'young people are especially exposed to the wicked doctrines and views of modernism'; and this should be borne in mind in what is set before them, that is, 'meal' is to be put into the pot to counteract the poison. What they are to be fed with is Christ, and, of course, He is the food for old christians also, so that all eat the same spiritual food; but there is the 'milk' and the 'meat', and those who serve must know how to differentiate both as to the state of those he serves, and the food he has to present. The "household" @Matthew 24:45, including all grades, has to be provided for, and it is obvious that the "prudent bondman" will not set before the babes the same food (although all may use milk) that he sets before the full-grown. The *same* bondman provides for all, and this agrees with what I said above.
Thus it is clear that the great thought of the house, or household, should always be in view in ministry, and if young ones are to be fed, what they *can* eat and assimilate must be given them, and not what is beyond their digestive capacity.
{186}
Ministry -- or meetings specially for young people -- is really a matter of levitical wisdom, and the true levite will not fail to keep the household of God, the assembly, in view in all he does; he will impress on his hearers that they belong to it, or that it is in view for them, and that he is seeking to get down to their range of understanding (an important matter) in what he is saying, so as to lead them into "greater things". Thus they will hear and ask questions and have *understanding and answers;* @Luke 2.
I trust these remarks will be of *some* service to you.
*(Signed)* J.T.
{187}
CLEANSING
@John 13:2 - 11; @1 Kings 7:23 - 39
These scriptures deal with the thought of cleansing, which may be considered as a great service. However spiritual we may be and apparently free from all blame, the need of cleansing is constant. The passage in @John 13 furnishes us with the full spiritual thought involved in the Old Testament scripture and stands at the threshold of the house. The Lord in the succeeding chapters is furnishing instruction for us as to the Father and our part with Him in relation to the Father, and so the section in 1 Kings helps to amplify the truth of @John 13 because it shows how much water there is, how plenteous it is. The lavers are portable, so much is made of the bases of the lavers. It may be helpful to consider it because it has in view those of us who would use water to help others. The sea is that each might help himself, cleanse himself from all filthiness; the sea is stationary whereas the lavers are portable, having wheels.
You will observe that the sea is a large containing vessel that held 2,000 baths, suggesting the plenteousness of the water. It is on the right side of the house over against the south, it would be where it would be needed. It is said elsewhere that the priests washed in it. Sometimes God has to allow things to happen to remind us of the need of carefulness, the need of washing is always present. The sea means there is plenty of water for us to be used.
Attention is called in @John 10 to the place where John was baptising at the first. The Lord went there where John baptised *first*, and many believed on Him there. I suppose the waters of Jordan are the best waters, there was much water elsewhere but where He baptised first the water was running. In
{188}
@John 13 the Lord brought water to them; wonderful grace that He should go on round the table carrying the basin all round. You may say, 'nobody comes to visit me', that means you are complaining, it does not excuse the brethren, but you are complaining and overlooking that there is the sea you can go to yourself, plenty of it. 'Having wheels' -- whilst you carry the water in love to a person who needs cleansing the element of judgment is with you, if you do not bring the 'brass' with you you will not help them. This water should only be used by clean persons in one sense, it is not for the sinner, but for the christian. We have to learn everything from the Lord. The Lord after He served sat down, "as I have done unto you" @John 13:15 -- it is example. First the sea is to be considered, abundance of water so that no one should assume to be unwashed or complain that the brethren are not helping, the water is there for yourself, plenty of it. When we come to the antitype the supply is infinite. The idea of the water is always present whether we are together or not. The water is for moral cleansing, there is no idea of its ever running short, it is infinite. The water is the moral side that one is purified in oneself from the influence of sin, there is constant need of it. The blood is applied once, it relieves the conscience, cleansing us from all sin, but the need of washing is constant. In 1 Kings you get a much greater description of these vessels than in Chronicles. Here it is typically the whole heavenly system with which we are connected, great stress is laid on building. Much is made of the house of God and what is inside it, specially the folding doors, as if we are reminded that God will have us near to Him; so He gives these instructions about the sea and the lavers. A christian should not be at a distance for want of water, there should be no stain upon us that would rob God. The wonderful patience in the divine system is borne
{189}
witness to in the oxen bearing the thing day and night. All is borne up by divine patience. The whole divine system is marked by that, God waiting on us, providing for us. The "Rock that followed them ... was Christ". @1 Corinthians 10:4.
Naaman's servants helped him to get down from his high horse. He wisely came to it and used the water as it was, the most effective waters for cleansing. Naaman's washing is more general than that we are dealing with; rather more the water in @John 13.
There is enough to cleanse the universe but the application here is to a people who draw near to God. If we do not draw near to God we do not come into contact with these vessels at all. The idea is that in all our approach, whether personally or in serving, there is the need of the application of the water, however spiritual we may be, it must be constant. God is the judge of all, no one can escape that. "Our God is a consuming fire". @Hebrews 12:29. The Father judges no one, for that name gives more the side of grace and privilege. The type in Kings is so helpful, there is so much water, it is for all, the most spiritual have to wash. If you are a priest you will wash in the sea, you will not expect the brethren to do it for you. It is a large vessel, not a common thing, it is ten cubits from brim to brim, and five cubits high. This is no ordinary matter, it is a wonderful vessel and one that requires energy to get to. Ten always involves responsibility. @1 Kings 7:24 speaks of the ornamentation, denoting the power of life attached to this service; there is great moral elevation and beauty attached to it.
There were lions, oxen and cherubim in the construction of these vessels. The lion turns not away from any; if you go to a brother to help him you are apt to be timid. The cherubim is the well-known figure of the government of God -- I am here in relation to the government of God. Then the palm trees would
{190}
mean that you gain the victory. One finds in oneself a want of courage in speaking to the brethren, not in public but in private. "The righteous are bold as a lion". @Proverbs 28:1. The brass would mean the judgment of God has been executed in the death of Jesus. If you are in accord with the brass you show you are judging yourself and then you can be bold.
In 1 Kings we are in the presence of the great heavenly system of things; things are on a much wider scale. The tabernacle is a question of getting through, it is not the full thought of God in the wilderness, but provisional and therefore much more reduced. There was no cedar in it, only shittim wood, a wilderness thought. Here you have the cedar and all the great woods, it is a question of dignity as well as approach to God. When you have a fixed state of things which the temple means, you have largeness. Whilst we may have outward order we may be neglectful of the cleansing side. "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me". Although right outwardly we may be wanting inwardly as to this service and thus miss the enjoyment of our great privilege in the assembly of part with Christ. God is patiently reminding us of the sea so that you may never draw nigh to Him apart from the use of it. "Bodies washed with pure water". @Hebrews 10:22. It can only be understood spiritually. It is the death of Christ maintained in spiritual power and reality among the people of God..
{191}
THE RICHNESS OF THE LAND
@Deuteronomy 8:7 - 10; @Deuteronomy 10: 5 - 9; @Colossians 2:1 - 4,8 - 10
These scriptures speak of the richness of that into which we are brought, namely, the land, the word 'land' being used seven times in those verses in chapter 8 to call attention to the richness, the wealth, of that into which we are brought, not that into which we shall be brought merely, but that into which we are brought, for the land typifies our present portion. It is not exactly a type of heaven literally, that into which we shall be brought when the Lord descends from heaven, as we are told, and raises the saints from the dead, from sleeping, and changes us who are alive and remain; the land of promise is rather what we are brought into now, something to be understood, a place of great richness, a land which requires no imports. No nation in the world can be spoken of in this way, scarcely any nation, if any, is independent of the products of other nations. Our land is, as I hope to show in detail; there is no need of importations of commodities.
Now, in speaking thus, it is but right morally that I should refer to the one who tells us these things, for the Spirit of God loves to enhance in our eyes the vessels He uses, that we may have them in esteem if they be living, and hold them in reverential memory if they be gone; we are to remember them -- "Remember your leaders", @Hebrews 13:7 whose faith we are to follow. Moses, in a sense, is unique in this respect, whether we view him typically or personally, for the Spirit of God presents him to us in this double way, what he was personally and what he was typically. Scarcely anyone in the Old Testament more agrees personally with what he was typically and officially than Moses does -- faithful, as we are told, in all God's house, one
{192}
of whom Stephen, in his address, says, "This is he who was in the assembly in the wilderness", @Acts 7:38. For forty years he bore with the manners of Israel in an adverse scene, a provocative scene, for the wilderness is provocative of our proclivities, it tends to irritation and complaint and revolt, even apostasy; hence the tribute to Moses, he was in the assembly in the wilderness, and retained his freshness and sympathies and love until the last moment of his life of 120 years. This book is written when he was about to die, and it is perhaps a fact unparalleled that he could write such a book, as you will observe the date given in chapter 1:3, "in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on the first of the month, that Moses spoke to the children of Israel, according to all that Jehovah had given him in command to them" @Deuteronomy 1:3 -- he spoke according to orders. It is not here the oft-repeated, "The Lord spake unto Moses, saying ..." -- it is the general outline of all that the Lord had commanded him to give unto them, in the eleventh month of the fortieth year -- as I apprehend, the last month of his life. What a man he was! and what an example for elder brethren, to retain all that they have received in their ministries from the outset, so as to bring it forward as needed at the end; nothing to recall, nothing to cancel, all pervaded by the true spirit of ministry to the saints, so that his speech remained to distil as the dew, it came down as the small rain at 119 years and 11 months. We may well take note of this, dear brethren, so that the elder may not discourage the younger, but rather enhance the ministry, enhance christianity indeed in themselves, in their own enjoyment of it; unsullied in their appreciation of what they have received from the Lord in earlier days, able to review it to the end, as the apostle Paul alludes to himself, "being *such an one* as Paul the aged", @Philemon 9 simply such an one as Paul the apostle -- he was that in surprising
{193}
degree, as he tells us, nothing behind the chiefest -- "laboured more abundantly than they all", @1 Corinthians 15:10 he says, and so he addresses a beloved brother, "being such an one", he says, "as Paul the aged". No allusion to any decrepitude of old age, for that could but discredit him, but "being such an one", he retained his freshness and affection such as had always been manifested in him.
Well now, thus are Moses in the Old Testament, and Paul in the New, examples for elder brethren to encourage forward the younger. Moses knew he was about to depart, for honoured servants are not taken by surprise if dissolution come, he was apprised beforehand indeed by Jehovah; and buried honourably, no one had such a burial as Moses, as we may say, God Himself was the undertaker, speaking reverently -- dug his grave, I suppose; Jehovah buried him, no one knows where -- such is the honour conferred on this great servant. We may well listen to him, especially young ones, listen to his description of the *Land*.
One is reminded of the gospel of Luke; it is a peculiarly buoyant gospel, indeed to be evangelical we must be buoyant, or we shall discredit the gospel -- dolefulness ill-becomes a preacher of the gospel. @Luke 15 is, I suppose, one of the best known scriptures, and one of its leading features is buoyancy: the shepherd rejoicing and calling others into the joy; the woman who lost the silver piece finding it, rejoicing, and calling others into the joy; the father of the prodigal rejoicing -- others brought into it -- "It was meet that *we* should make merry, and be glad". @Luke 15:32. And this is merry-making, as it were, that is to continue, for the house is turned into a dancing hall, God, by His Spirit, graciously coming down to the thoughts of young believers to wean them away from the world's spheres of pleasure, to show how infinitely greater is the pleasure proposed in the gospel --
{194}
pleasures for evermore. "As well the singers as the dancers shall say, All my springs are in thee" @Psalm 87:7, that is to say, in the sphere of the pleasure -- Zion, the place of it. Barzillai had no taste for it, a warning to old brothers and sisters -- lover of Christ indeed, lover of David, for he maintained him in the wilderness the other side of the Jordan and came over the Jordan with him, but returned back. He had grown too old, he said, for such enjoyment -- what will he do in heaven? He will have to change his mind -- no doubt he has. We have to anticipate, dear brethren, and not to come short now of what we anticipate; to show that what we anticipate is real, that we have the earnest of it, the Holy Spirit is the earnest of the inheritance. So that, when we go to heaven, there shall be no great change -- there should not be. 'There no stranger-God shall meet thee' (`76:10) -- that heavenly scene, heaven literally, I mean, surely should not be strange to us. Beyond anything perhaps we may have anticipated, but in character what we anticipate, for we anticipate what we enjoy in principle now by the earnest; hence the music and the dancing. The elder brother had no interest in it at all, he was in the field, his heart full of envy, marked by inability to take in that holy scene of love. The word 'dancing', as I said before, is God graciously using a human term to win our hearts, to show us that He has everything the world can give, but in an infinitely superior way and of an infinitely superior kind. David is the leader in this kind of thing, dancing with all his might, but clothed with a *linen* ephod, he was perfectly sober, although you might say, in another sense, beside himself, but he knew what he was doing, the linen ephod means priestly sobriety -- I know what I am doing; like the elders in Revelation, I always give an account of what I am doing, I know what I am doing, I give the reason for it. That is the sort of thing that begins
{195}
now with full-grown people, and Deuteronomy contemplates such, it contemplates growth; we are at the confines of Canaan and we see the great servant with all his feelings and affections, and chapter after chapter brings before us the wealth of the land, but, on the other hand, warning us as to what prevents its enjoyment.
And so these four verses in chapter 8, perhaps more than any others in the book, depict this wealth, this wealthy land, the word, as I said, being used seven times, so as to fix our minds upon it. It is not a shifting scene, it is not the sands of the desert, it is *this land*, it is a fixed thing; and so he says to us, "Jehovah thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of waterbrooks, of springs, and of deep waters, that gush forth in the valleys and hills; a land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig-trees, and pomegranates; a land of olive trees and honey, a land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceness; where thou shalt lack nothing; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose mountains thou wilt dig copper. And thou shalt eat and be filled, and shalt bless Jehovah thy God for the good land which he hath given thee". You will see here, dear brethren, that spiritually there is no need of any importation, in that land we are sustained, self-sustained. The epistle to the Colossians is intended to preclude importations, telling us that there is no need of them -- philosophy and vain deceit -- no need of them -- very appealing as they are to the modernist, the scientific man. All the creeds of christendom are, in some measure, leavened with philosophy; Colossians is to preclude all that, it is simply foreign merchandise, so to speak, which is utterly unneeded in the land. The apostle says, "I would have you know what combat I have for you ... and as many as have not seen my face in flesh". @Colossians 2:1. One would be comforted with the thought that, in a generous way like the Lord Himself, the
{196}
apostle looked down the history of the assembly, and included ourselves; certainly the Lord did; "them also which shall believe on me through their word" @John 17:20 were included in His prayer. The apostle says, 'I combat for you'. What is needed in this respect, dear brethren, is, as it says, that your "hearts may be encouraged, being united together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the full knowledge of the mystery of God; in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge" -- hidden from the gaze of the natural man, but to be entered into and enjoyed by us who believe, for whom he prayed. They are enjoyed in a certain practical state amongst us, a state of affection, a knitting together in love, and an understanding of the mystery of God in which is hid all these things, the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Wisdom and knowledge are stressed because of the danger that beset these christians, the insidious character of human wisdom and knowledge, "philosophy", as it says, "and vain deceit". 'Now', he says, 'you do not need those things'. He said that so that they should not be deceived; that is, he reminds them of his prayer for them, and all the treasures, "all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge" -- *all of them*. The greatest Greek knew nothing of these things, they belong to the hidden wisdom, beloved brethren, "which God had predetermined before the ages for our glory" -- think of that -- "our glory". "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God", @1 Corinthians 2:9,10. This is what is in mind.
Now, having referred to Colossians, I just dwell for a moment on these elements or products of the land so that we may have them before us, knowing them
{197}
and enjoying them, becoming rigidly exclusive of all else because of them, because of their sufficiency, because of the variety of them, furnishing us fully, as the apostle further says, "ye are complete in *him*". In whom? In Christ. Who is Christ in Colossians? It is a question of the Person. The "image of the invisible God", @Colossians 1:15 he says in chapter 1, "for in him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell" @Colossians 1:19 -- *all the fulness*. That is to call attention to the Person, to the greatness of the Person -- that is chapter 1. In chapter 2 it is what all that is to us, that is, it is within our range, it is all the fulness of the Godhead, of the Deity -- *bodily*, meaning that it is within our range. As John the apostle says, "that which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled" @1 John 1:1, referring to the Lord Jesus down here, referring to Him bodily; that all that God is is there, there to be available to us. What else do we need? Whatever wisdom there is is of God, it comes from God, and it has come within our range in that blessed Man, that blessed divine Person who became incarnate -- "in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily; and ye are complete in him". Hence we are fortified in the enjoyment of these precious things against all that is outside -- it is extraneous, we do not need it. Bad it may not be -- that is not the point, it is that it is unneeded by us, the land into which we are brought furnishes us with everything.
So that the first thing is "a land of waterbrooks". How refreshing waterbrooks are! what beauty, what attractiveness they lend to a landscape! -- a land of waterbrooks, that is the Holy Spirit manifestly moving, so that one does not need to draw things out from the brethren, the Spirit's activity is manifest. How attractive such a district or town where the saints are! -- a land of waterbrooks, a land of such refreshments. And a brook has not only refreshment,
{198}
as suggested by water, but a sound to it; there is something about it that is peculiarly attractive and enhancing to a landscape. A land of springs of water, that is to say christians full of the Spirit, where things are not superficial, as the Lord teaches us in @John 4. A land of deep waters, as the word 'depths' means -- deep waters. They are indefinite, but the characteristic being 'deep', there is plenty there; the depths of God, we may say, searched out. How exclusive that is, as understood, of all that man can supply, the infinite resources of God in the Spirit. And, as it further says, "of springs, and of deep waters, that gush forth in the valleys and hills". The word is 'gush' -- the richness, the volume, gushing out of the valleys and the hills, for God is the God of the valleys, as He is of the hills, and the water gushes out; no pumping needed, no drawing things with labour from the brethren. Well, that is the thought. Valleys are fertile -- the saints viewed, I suppose, in that way, the action of the sun upon them; and the hills or mountains -- the same people viewed as towers of strength; in either case the waters gush out, no hardness, no exaction, no taxation, there all is in liberty, all is furnished in richness and fulness. Such, dear young people, is that into which you are brought if you have eyes to see and ears to hear, and sensitiveness. Such is the wealth of the land, and, as I said, it is a stable state of things -- such is its wealth. Then we have fruit, too -- "fig-trees, and pomegranates; ... olive-trees and honey". An address could be given perhaps on each of these items, the subject is inexhaustible. We are dealing with spiritual matters, with what we need spiritually, too, the rich supply.
Then the Spirit of God runs on, referring to the saints -- a land of stones; they are stones -- but what kind? They are of iron, they have strength in them; and we dig brass out of the hills, that is, *we* do that. Enjoying all these things -- the means of judgment,
{199}
the element of judgment, is not wanting -- we do that, we dig brass out of the hills. The land is not wanting in that. So that we eat to the full, we are satisfied, and the normal effect is that we bless, we become worshippers, we bless the One who gives it; that is, we are land worshippers, so to speak. There is worship in the wilderness, but there is worship also in the land. Worship in the land is out of the richness we have tasted, of the joy lavishly supplied by the hand of love. It is very attractive, where faith is, it is drawing in its effect; for ministry can only be to faith, without faith, the most spiritual ministry must fail, as it were. Where faith is in any little way in the saints, this is attractive.
Well now, I just want to show how, in chapter 10, there is movement in the light of all these things; that is the next thing. Colossians means prohibition; not simply heavy taxation on commodities, but absolute prohibition. Commodities are not allowed in at all, no such imports are allowed, they are rigidly refused. Now in chapter 10, as I said, the children of Israel took their journey (verse 6), that is to say, Moses here refers back to the second writing of the law in which there is no mistake made or discrepancy -- no need to break the tables. The ark is there, Christ is there; everything now is there and we can afford to move, there is no breakdown again. That is the principle -- we can afford to move; and they did move, and what comes out is that they move "to Jotbath, a land of rivers of waters", that is where the journey led to. I fit in this, dear brethren, with what I have been speaking of in chapter 8, which is the Spirit's description of the land; chapter 10 is my coming to it. How do I come to it? Well, it is a question of the shining of the glory -- of the covenant. It fits into the Lord's supper, to the saints in assembly; it fits in in a general way, too, that is "perfect love casts out fear" @1 John 4:18 -- the covenant is perfect love. The
{200}
tables are in the ark, and Moses says, "They are there ..." @Deuteronomy 10:5 -- there they are, there is no change. And then there is a parenthesis, these two verses (6 and 7) are properly a parenthesis. This parenthesis anticipates, for us, some thirty-eight years; it is the principle of anticipation, like @Ephesians 2 where it is said, we are "raised up together", and made to "sit down together in the heavenlies", @Ephesians 2:6 not we *shall be*, but *we are*, that is, the future brought into the present -- that is a great thought, it can only be realised by the Spirit; in the power of the Spirit the future is brought into the present, and I know I am in it. The passage begins with Sinai and Horeb, which was just a year (or maybe less) after Israel came out of Egypt. The parenthesis is at least thirty-eight years later. Why is this? It is that the glory has moved us, the shining of the glory in the face of Jesus has moved us -- that is the covenant. "We all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit", @2 Corinthians 3:18. That is movement -- "glory to glory" -- one glory after another. What a way that is, what a shining way that is! "They go from strength to strength:" we are told elsewhere, "each one will appear before God in Zion", @Psalm 84:7. It is a shining way. We walk through the valley of Baca, we make it a well-spring, the rain fills the pools. It is the perfect love of God coming into the heart, the glory shining, and I begin to move. Well now, God says, 'You have begun to move. I will bring in the new priesthood, I will antedate things for you'. It is a heavenly matter now. You say, 'It is a wilderness matter'. Yes, but a heavenly matter; it is a question of reaching the land of waterbrooks, that is the heavenly land. Whatever the geography may be, it is the heavenly land, that is the character of things, so that you get the waterbrooks. It is not a question
{201}
of the sympathy of Christ in the wilderness now. Aaron dies, and the Spirit of God brings it in now to show us how much God thinks of a movement towards Him. That is the land of Canaan; God will have you in His own land; He says, Aaron dies. The chapter begins with Horeb -- notice Aaron did not die at Horeb, he died at mount Hor; but he dies here; that is, the Spirit of God anticipates, for God would have us to get on to the line of the new heavenly priest, Christ in heaven, in other words, Christ having died and risen and gone into heaven. "Such a high priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens". @Hebrews 7:26. That is the priest, as if God would say, 'That is My thought. The wilderness is only a tentative thing, it is only My ways with you; My thought is what can be reached in a few days'. God says, 'I am helping you; there is a heavenly priest to sustain you there'. That is the thought, dear brethren, so that the thing should not be deferred, but I should enter now in the power of the new priest, the heavenly priest, by the power of the Spirit, into a land of waterbrooks. Then it says God took over the levites at that time, that is at Horeb, but all in connection with the heavenly position, for it is God's inheritance in the levites, and they have no other inheritance but God. So you see, dear brethren, the reality of Canaan may be reached at any moment we are ready for it; it is a land to be entered into, God would have us to know we are sustained there, it has all we need and more, so that there is no lack of enjoyment.
May God bless these thoughts to us.
{202}
ASSEMBLY FUNCTION AND SERVICE GODWARD
@Acts 1:1 - 14,21,22
J.T. If we compare the last verse of Luke with this chapter, we shall observe a striking difference in the bearing which is there towards the Jewish remnant, as left here with jubilant spirit "praising and blessing God" in the temple @Luke 24:53; while in this chapter the bearing is toward the assembly, We have allusions to it which indicate this. In verse 4 it says, "being assembled with them"; then in verse 21, "the men who have assembled with us"; and further, we have allusions to ascension, "Having said these things he was taken up, they beholding him" (verse 9); then, in verse 10, "as they were gazing into heaven, as he was going, behold, also two men stood by them in white clothing, who also said, Men of Galilee, why do ye stand looking into heaven?" "Then", it says, "they returned to Jerusalem ... . And when they were come into the city, they went up to the upper chamber" (verse 13). These are two lines of thought running through the chapter. Then there is the statement in verse 3, that "he presented himself living, after he had suffered". I thought we might look at these scriptures under those heads: first, as indicating that the assembly was to be marked as living; then, that there is the understanding of how to assemble in the Lord having assembled with them; then thirdly, there is the thought of ascension and moral elevation in going *up* to the upper room; then the manner of Christ's own ascension in that "he was taken up, they beholding him", and in the two men saying, "This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven" (verse 11).
{203}
I think a careful comparison of all this would help us as to assembly function and service Godward. The epistle to the Hebrews may be linked on with this, which speaks of the assembly; the chief point or, as it says in chapter 8, "a summary" being that "We have such a one high priest who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens; minister of the holy places". @Hebrews 8:1. What is summarised includes chapter 2:12 which quotes the Lord from @Psalm 22 as saying, "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises". @Hebrews 2:12. I think the Lord would help us as to assembly service towards God.
J.J. You are looking at this first chapter as pattern?
J.T. Just so, as containing the elements of instruction for assembly service, in view of the coming in of the Spirit; the Lord stresses that presently, and this light is furnished so that the Spirit will be free when He comes in, the saints will know how to regard themselves; and hold themselves, so that the Spirit may carry on the service. It is noticeable that the Lord's action here is by the Spirit -- He charged them "by the Holy Spirit", the power in the assembly would be the Spirit. I think the Lord would help us as to coming together in assembly, and how He presents Himself living to us. The trend of His mind would be towards God, towards the Father -- He is going back to God, to the Father -- "I ascend to my Father" @John 20:17 -- all that enters into this chapter. As in heaven He is Minister of the sanctuary, whereas on earth He would not be a priest, so we are to come on to heavenly ground as in the assembly, so as to be available to Him in the service. He comes before us Himself here, as we see in a preparatory way; but as Minister of the sanctuary He is before us in relation to the service of God; it is in mind that that should be maintained.
{204}
Ques. Does "presented himself living" answer to the manifestation we would covet every Lord's day?
J.T. It is suggestive of a living state of things, I think, after He had suffered; of course He was living before, but now it is "after he had suffered" -- the "being seen by them during forty days" alludes to a spiritual state of things, that brings them into it as witnesses of the forty days, a known thing by persons like ourselves, that He was seen *by them* for forty days -- to bring in that there is such a thing as seeing Him in resurrection in the experience of the assembly.
Ques. So there is an advance here; in the end of Luke it is, "witnesses of these things", @Luke 24:48 but here it is "my witnesses", would that involve our understanding the place into which the Lord has gone?
J.T. Yes, I think so, that He has gone into heaven; they are here, so all this is to qualify them for this service, to be His witnesses. I find in moving about that certain gatherings are somewhat confused as to assembly service, through the want of apprehending that the Minister is in heaven; and whilst He joins us here, in a spiritual sense, the service is carried on now in relation to heaven, and as the Lord is apprehended as indicated here in this chapter, He carries on the service in relation to God the Father. He is rightly enough an Object of worship, as the Father is, all are to honour Him, as they honour the Father, but if He takes a subordinate place, you see why that is so and join Him in that place, so that the service is carried on according to divine purpose, according to what it will be eternally.
J.J. The reaching of it is a spiritual experience.
J.T. Yes, that is what the chapter teaches, I think. He was seen of them forty days, they had not had that experience during His lifetime on earth; it was the same Person, but now He is in a new condition, a spiritual condition of things.
{205}
E.A.E. Would you link that forty days experience with the experience of Moses on the mount in view of the tabernacle being set up?
J.T. I think so, it is preparatory in view of the tabernacle. Moses, Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and, in some sense, the seventy elders also, were taken up to a realm which is a pattern of what heavenly things should be. The earthly public side of it has to be distinguished from the actual thing; the tent was covered with the cloud, as it was set up and in function as set in its place in every part, and anointed, all, as it were, living, then the cloud covered that, God said, 'That is the thing now', He lays hold of that for Himself, and then He fills it with the glory; I believe that indicates what is in mind, it is a heavenly thing.
E.A.E. So that you get a vessel at the end in Paul who said the same things as Jesus -- preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom of God -- is that what is in view, the assembly left here on earth taking up this service intelligently?
J.T. Just so. While the court is part of the system, it is on earth, the public view; the cloud covered the tent, the covenant side of things where the priests officiated. If you think of its bearing Godward, it is all inward, but as present testimony here the court is included, it is outward. I think the Lord's supper is celebrated in the court, that is the public side. The tent is covered by the cloud, even Moses does not enter then, it is God's sphere.
T.J.K. Is there a passing over from the ministry connected with the remembering, for in @Luke 24 two men asked the women why they sought the living One among the dead? Then, lower down, they heard He was living; but here the two men connect their hearts with the Person immediately after He had presented Himself to them. Is that a greater ministry than that connected with the two men?
{206}
J.T. The two men in @Luke 24 would be what marked the resurrection, they represent the feelings proper to that; and the two men here, the ascension; and the two men in @Luke 9 would be the heavenly saints above. I think if you link on the three twos you have the idea, two being a testimony: they were angels, no doubt, but they are called "men" as these are, too; the idea of man at the resurrection and the idea of man at the ascension calling attention to it, the manner of it; and men above -- two men speaking with Him above -- showing the liberty that men have up there, to indicate what is available to us even above, the two men are speaking with Him. Here they are speaking with the disciples, and at the grave they spoke with the women; but above the two men are speaking with Jesus, appearing in glory, in full heavenly attire; that is what we shall be, and such an order does enter into assembly service. I think we ought to see that in the service we are not only risen with Christ, but we belong to Him *in heaven*, we are partakers of the heavenly calling on heavenly ground, for it is in heaven He is Priest and Minister.
Ques. What have you in mind when you say, assembly service?
J.T. I am thinking particularly of what is inside. The Lord's supper is, I think, in the court; it has an inner bearing, of course, but "ye announce the death of the Lord" @1 Corinthians 11:26 is a public thing, that is introductory. The Lord showed Himself living here, He has His place in relation to the Supper; anyone participating there speaks of the Lord and calls Him "Lord Jesus" by the Spirit: it is the Spirit that gives the touch, it is not the words merely, but the spirit in which they are said. I think that as apprehending Him in the bread, the cup comes into view as in relation to God, it is the covenant; and He is in the current and He would draw all into that current. So we have the
{207}
Lord Himself in His sacrificing love for the assembly, and God too, who purchased us with "the blood of his own", @Acts 20:28 as we are told, that is the blood of the covenant, it brings God in, God in Christ; but then there is the thought of ascending, He went *up*, and that, I think, changes the ground. One only suggests these things; a change of ground implies heavenly position, for christianity is heavenly, it is not earthly at all; it touches the earth in testimony, but it is heavenly, and our Priest is in heaven.
Ques. And is not the Supper to advance us to the upward position? Ought we not to be ready to ascend almost directly after the breaking of bread?
J.T. It is a question of liberty. If the Holy Spirit is amongst us and operating, He will stress these features first, so that we are free to take heavenly ground.
Ques. Would you say the covenant brings God in?
J.T. I think so. The covenant is not between Christ and us; it is between God and His people. Why should He not be recognised in it?
Ques. Do you distinguish between God and the Father, in addressing Him?
J.T. Yes; the covenant was made by God, the Father is an additional thought; when we say 'God' we think of Him as we have learnt Him in Romans -- after all we must proceed on the line of divine order in our souls; it is the Spirit of God that has shed the love of God abroad in our hearts. The Father is further on; it is a question of the family.
Ques. You are not in covenant relationship with the Father in that way?
J.T. No, the covenant is not between the Father and us, children do not need a covenant; the covenant is to assure our hearts and to establish us. We have the status of His people, and love sets us free that we might enter into our heavenly part.
{208}
Ques. Are we in order if we do not speak to God in relation to the covenant?
J.T. I should not rule a person out if he did not speak to God; the Lord is sufficient; but if you get into touch with His thoughts, He will lead you to God, He is the Mediator of God.
T.J.K. Do we come together to break bread -- and if we were ready we should do it -- then in the giving of thanks for the cup, the covenant love of God would be before us; and after that would the Lord be free to lead us to another elevation, the thought of the Father and coming to Him?
J.T. I think that would be the order; that is what appears in this chapter. The trend of the Lord's heart as the Mediator is towards God, to bring us into that. Why should He not bring us into covenant affections? -- that is what mediatorship implies; it would bring us into those affections, that we should enjoy them. So "perfect love casts out fear", @1 John 4:18 we are free.
Rem. In @John 20 as He came into the midst, the hearts of the disciples were made glad; He secures His portion as the saints are taught in that way.
J.T. Just so. Luke is the public side, where He adjusts us, and where they were speaking; but they are not speaking in John, He is speaking, it is the spiritual side. Then, as you say, He has His part in it; His brethren surely ought to be in accord with Him, but the trend of His affections is Godward. We need to take heavenly ground, and this chapter teaches us that, He was taken up. Then Hebrews states plainly that it is in heaven He is a priest, and a priest that "became us". It is a very remarkable thing that we need such a high priest as that, @Hebrews 7:26 showing the greatness of our status.
Ques. Would the assembly be a very important feature in view of service?
J.T. I think it is important, coming in after life;
{209}
life is the first thing, "He presented himself living" to them. Why to them? Why not to the Father? It is to impress them with the conditions after He had suffered. The stress is on the Spirit, it is the way of doing things in the assembly that is in mind.
J.J. Would the two presentations in Luke and John help us, as showing the two sides? In Luke He showed His hands and feet; but in John His hands and side. Would that have a bearing on both sides of the meeting, so to speak?
J.T. I think John's way of speaking would make way for the assembly, that is where the assembly came from, in the type, from His side.
J.J. Whereas His hands and His feet would be more the early part of the meeting.
J.T. Just so -- what He has done for us.
Ques. In presenting Himself living, were the disciples brought to understand by His teaching during the forty days, something of the meaning of an order of things out of death?
J.T. That is the thought exactly, life out of death.
Rem. He had spoken to them, and, as we find so often in the gospels, they did not understand His words, but are they brought now to understand what He said to them before the cross?
J.T. I think so. It says that when Jesus was raised from among the dead, His disciples remembered what He had said. It is the condition now, it is life out of death.
Ques. I was asking that because, lower down, we have the thought of His assembling with them, they would become acquainted with an order of things out of death, like Hebrews where the Sanctifier and the sanctified are all of one.
J.T. That is exactly the setting of the truth, I think, that we are to understand the living state of things, life out of death; and then the procedure -- He assembled with them. Later on it says. One who
{210}
has "assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us" @Acts 1:21 -- that was *their* assembling, but now *He* is assembling with them -- that is the order of procedure.
Rem. So this had to wait till resurrection was an accomplished thing.
J.T. Yes. So, if I come in as an uncouth person, Peter would say, 'That is not the order; look how the Lord did it'. Not simply that He stood in their midst -- that is stated at the end of the gospel -- but we are to learn things from what He did, He assembled with them. We are gradually rising to a heavenly line where we shall be partakers of a heavenly calling.
Rem. There is another passage, in @John 12:16, similar to the one you have quoted, "his disciples knew not these things at the first; but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were written of him, and that they had done these things to him;" @John 12:16.
J.T. Quite so. That would mean that the Holy Spirit had come. In @John 14 the Lord said He would send the Spirit.
J.J. So, as you were saying yesterday, the future is brought into the present, and we should enter into that now. Would that not be realised if we knew what it was to go up?
J.T. That is the thing, so the basis is laid in @Ephesians 2 where we are said to be raised up together. We are entitled as in assembly to take proper assembly ground; so it is no longer the local setting, but we have moved on to universal and spiritual ground, so that the Lord is in the midst of that great company as in heaven, carrying on the service.
J.J. You make the sanctuary almost equivalent to heaven?
J.T. It is; it is said to be "the figurative representations of the things in the heavens", @Hebrews 9:23.
Rem. It says, "As they were gazing into heaven, as he was going, behold, also two men stood by them in white clothing"
{211}
-- would that give them an understanding of the kind of people that would be welcomed there? Then would the Lord, as in that scene of exaltation, encourage our hearts in relation to what is here?
J.T. Yes, He is waiting for us, as in assembly, to take that ground, and then to know how to carry on in it; not to be changeable, but to be governed by principles that govern that exalted level. There could be no service after the camp broke up and moved on; it is when they are in camp the service is suggested; God is there, and the priests in function and the levites and the people -- that is our first day of the week.
Ques. Is the lack of understanding of the covenant what hinders our rising?
J.T. I think so. Our hearts are not set free until the perfect love of God in the covenant is felt. We have a formal order of things so much in our minds. The covenant shows the disposition of God; as knowing the freedom and liberty it would set us in, there would be no difficulty in rising to this high level. @John 14 to 17 imply a current, the current of His mind -- the Father is in mind; it says, "Jesus, *having said* these things" to carry them with Him. I think these are the elements that enter into assembly service.
Ques. Would you say some of the feelings are seen in the way Elijah led Elisha along till the last point when he ascended? I was thinking of the forty days Elijah had to go in the strength of that meat; then he goes up and the Spirit comes down, answering to these chapters of Acts. Would that be right?
J.T. Just so. They walked and talked together after they crossed the Jordan -- that is the forty days -- then the point is, "If thou see me when I am taken from thee", @2 Kings 2:10 and that is the point here, it is specially
{212}
mentioned that they beheld Him. Well, you want to see that move, and to know you have part in that, for He has raised us up; here "he was taken up, they beholding him".
J.J. Would the message to the brethren help us to see Him go up? "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". @John 20:17. Does not that hold good to all time?
J.T. Quite so. That message is the great treasure in the treasury.
J.J. The Lord says enough to secure their following Him; then He says, "Rise up, let us go hence", @John 14:31. Would the Lord have us with Him in what is before Him?
J.T. Quite so. Then He lifts His eyes to heaven and says, "Father" @John 17:1, and He speaks of the love with which He was loved being in them @John 17:26, that they should love like the Father. It is not covenant love now, we learn to love as the Father loves.
Ques. What have you to say about the manner of the return; do you look at it in a spiritual way?
J.T. Yes, I think the assembly understands; in the interval we carry on according to this movement; the interval is to be filled out in the assembly according to these movements. "This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven". What they saw is known in the assembly, the movement is known.
Ques. And it would eventuate in the rapture, would it not?
J.T. We understand the rapture, I think, in this way, it is the manner of His coming; I think it is the rapture that is alluded to. Of course He will come publicly, but it is the *manner* that is in mind here.
Ques. The return from the mount called Olivet seems to have a large place, it comes into prominence
{213}
both before and after the Lord's death. It says He went, as was His custom, to the mount of Olives, His disciples following Him; here they returned to Jerusalem from the mount of Olives. What do we learn from that?
J.T. I think they are now moving as He moved; coming back to Jerusalem is coming to a public state of things where all these things are worked out, a scene of contrariety; but He had access -- He went by night, Luke says, to the mount of Olives @Luke 21:37, that means a heavenly retreat. So that, whilst we work the things out in a scene of contrariety, we have an outlet in the Spirit to a heavenly state of things, where there is no contrariety.
Ques. Is that why the distance between these two points is "a sabbath day's journey"?
J.T. Yes, I think so. I suppose the distance would refer primarily to the distance between the tabernacle and the camp, they were to pitch afar off. God would not be deprived of that on the sabbath, they could walk that distance.
Rem. Directly you touch the public side, the upper chamber becomes necessary.
J.T. Well, the idea of the upper chamber is, I think, that we are apart from current religious ways. We have to distinguish between the upper room, and Olivet; Olivet means a spiritual elevation, a link with heaven; the upper room is *our* moral elevation, that we do not sing hymns like they do in the Church of England, we do not give thanks as they do, we have learnt assembly procedure, the spirit in which the service of God is to be carried on -- I think that is what the upper room signifies. It is not the temple, it is a level above that; the contrast is between the temple and the upper room. Olivet is a realm outside of opposition; Jerusalem is the realm of opposition.
T.J.K. Does it bring in something new, for in Zechariah the mount of Olives is "before Jerusalem toward the east", @Zechariah 14:4?
{214}
Is it bringing in some new elevation connected with the spiritual realm?
J.T. I think Luke makes it very plain that it is the Lord's retreat, *the link with heaven;* and in view of the assembly He ascends from mount Olivet, in the Acts; whereas in Luke He ascends from Bethany, for the remnant is in view there.
Rem. The thought of Olivet would not suggest spiritual conditions so much as heavenly communications.
J.T. That is the idea, I think, it is outside the realm of opposition.
J.J. Would the names of the persons in the upper room denote the moral fibre of the assembly -- the quality of the persons?
J.T. Yes, they can stand against the evil.
J.J. And the reversal of the order -- Peter, John and James -- in the New Translation, is noticeable, as if it gave a kind of assembly order to the company.
J.T. The same order as on the mount of transfiguration -- it is changed there again.
Rem. And in @Luke 8:51.
J.T. They represent the spiritual element, I think, the best, so to speak.
Ques. Andrew comes in here after Peter, John and James, and in Mark's gospel we have these four on the mount of Olives addressing the Lord as Teacher. What is the special significance of Andrew being brought in? He is linked with the three in this chapter.
J.T. I do not know. There is something in it, but one would have to enquire as to how Andrew is presented in Scripture. His introduction in John is, "Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who heard this from John and followed him. He first finds his own brother Simon", @John 1:40.
{215}
Rem. I wondered if the city to which they belonged had any connection with it, they belonged to Bethsaida. Would it be an element on that line?
J.T. I think so. I think Bethsaida represents the levitical side.
J.J. Then in @John 6 he knows where the food is.
Rem. The Greeks in chapter 12 came to Philip, and Philip told Andrew.
J.T. He had an important place in that he was one of the first followers of Jesus, and he was a gatherer. But these thoughts should help us in our part in the assembly, as to our thanksgivings and hymns -- the use of the means of praise, of carrying on the service of God -- in that we should know what to do in assembly as on heavenly ground.
E.A.E. You have raised a question that has been a matter of exercise, with regard to addressing God in the cup; would you go on with the thought of the Lord Jesus after that? Often many a hymn is addressed to the Lord Jesus after that.
J.T. I think that is quite scriptural, for Paul comes back to it himself in the way in which the Supper is presented from heaven. We have always to bear in mind that the Supper we have is given us from heaven; it is to pass that way, not simply by Jerusalem, by the twelve, but via heaven; and the apostle says, "In like manner also the cup, after having supped, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood". @1 Corinthians 11:25. Well, that refers to God. Then it goes on, "this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me". @1 Corinthians 11:26. Do you not think that?
E.A.E. Yes, that was my difficulty, if, in addressing God, we have to bear in mind that the remembrance is of the Lord. What about the oscillation we have spoken of?
J.T. The oscillation is to pass over from addressing the Lord, to the Father, where we are professedly on heavenly ground, and then come back to the Lord;
{216}
what you are speaking of in relation to the cup is in the court of the tabernacle. The covenant is an old matter, and we are sharing in it. We share in all the good things of Israel, but the best things of Israel are not our best things. What they have, I think, belongs to the court, it is a public thing, and stands in relation to us publicly. These are the people Christ is not ashamed of. But when we take heavenly ground, as we may, and have liberty to do, then the Spirit says, "Abba, Father"; if He does, the Spirit really makes the change; for He has already said "Lord Jesus" -- at least someone says it in the power of the Spirit. But then, if the Spirit says, "Abba, Father", that is another matter, and we should continue with that.
Rem. So Ephesians says we are brought "nigh by the blood of the Christ" @Ephesians 2:13 -- that is positional; but "we have both access by one Spirit to the Father", @Ephesians 2:18.
J.T. Yes, "by one Spirit", that is on a higher plane than @Hebrews 10, where it says we draw near having boldness of access by the blood. In Ephesians we both have access through Christ by one Spirit to the Father; well, why not stay there? -- that is the highest point.
Rem. So the covenant brings us to God, but access to the Father is something beyond that.
J.T. That is the point, and if we touch that it is most blessed and exalted, it is really the highest point; and why come back?
Rem. We need much help as to that.
Ques. In connection with that, it says, "being assembled with them"; would the Lord, in that way, take headship of the company?
J.T. You could understand He would have the pre-eminence there. That is what Hebrews touches on -- "in the midst of the assembly ...". @Hebrews 2:12. The position answers to @Psalm 22, what was in His mind in
{217}
the praises of Israel, and for us that means the praises of the Father. After He spoke of the covenant in Mark, they sang a hymn; not 'He' sang it, for it is not in Jerusalem He sings. Then they went to Olivet -- that is heavenly ground, the ground is changed as soon as you see that.
Rem. Verses 21 and 22 would be another ground.
J.T. I only suggested those two verses to bring in the thought of assembling. The apostle selected is to be "one of those" -- he is to be an assembly man.
Ques. It speaks of "the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us", what is the thought in that?
J.T. That is a suggestion that is very precious -- He comes in and goes out among us. As soon as you touch the mount of Olives, that is, as soon as the Father is alluded to in a spiritual way amongst us -- I do not mean the actual use of the word, but in the Spirit of adoption -- a lead is given, and the saints do well to hold to that ground, it is the Father's portion now.
Ques. Do you think, in a practical way, we need to give more place to the Spirit, so that when there is a movement of the Spirit such as you mention, we should be more ready to follow?
J.T. Yes, to be accustomed to Him; in your prayers, your meditations, to learn how to be conscious of the Spirit's action in you, to give way to Him, not to grieve Him.
Ques. Would the Lord's position at the head of the table at Emmaus show the idea of assembling, that we should come under Him -- He having the place of Head?
J.T. Well, of course that is not the breaking of bread -- still, He took the place of house-father there. I think something is done in that way by you, or me, or someone else, that reminds us of Christ -- that is where the memorial is; but when He comes in
{218}
and presents Himself, you have a living state of things. Then He assembles; I understand that to mean, not the public position in the court, but what is inside, the heavenly side; He is now the Minister. What will He do if He is assembling there? He is assembling with them; He must take the initiative in everything -- you can see that.
Ques. He asked for food and ate before them; would that suggest that, even in His glorified position, the Lord finds delight in being with His people?
J.T. Quite so.
E.A.E. There are two references to the Lord coming in in @John 20. First, in verse 19, "Jesus came" @John 20:19; then, in verse 26, "Jesus comes". @John 20:26. Does it suggest it became habitual to Him to come?
J.T. That is a good suggestion.
E.A.E. So there is no need to mention "for fear of the Jews" @John 20:19; it is habitual on our side to take up that attitude.
J.T. Quite so.
J.J. And the Lord says, "I am coming to you", @John 14:18.
J.T. That is the same thought.
{219}
INTELLIGENCE IN ASSEMBLY SERVICE
@John 20:16 - 23
J.T. Before proceeding with what is specially in view it may be remarked that this chapter instructs us as to not only the need of love for Christ, but instruction by Him if we are to understand part in the assembly. Love alone does not suffice. Love may exist and yet our part in the assembly may be irregular, and maintained unintelligently, as alas! it often is. Mary says in this verse in Hebrew, "Rabboni" to the Lord. That is a term that signifies not only that He loved her and gave Himself for her, but that He instructed her. The word implies that He was her Teacher, and it is only as taught by the Lord Himself that we are in the assembly and have part in it intelligently. The love is there; it is manifest. The love in her was manifest; she was early at the tomb, and was affected by the fact that the Lord had been taken away, His death indeed entering into her feelings; but she was uninstructed, and she owns in her address here that the lack was being made up. The apostle in approaching the subject of the assembly in 1 Corinthians, addresses the saints as intelligent persons, wise persons. In this gospel while it is suggested in an informal way, yet most forcibly, it affords instruction. The Lord is first addressed by followers as "Rabbi". If applied to the last days peculiarly, as it may be, the suggestion is that there has been much imperfect and misleading teaching. The people of God generally have been brought up under imperfect teaching, so that the need of teaching is stressed in this gospel. What is in mind, as suggested this morning, is the distinction that has to be made between God as in the covenant, and God in the absolute, or as the Supreme, coming in in the order
{220}
mentioned here, second after the thought of the Father; that is, God in the sense in which He is generally known in His supremacy. That must be the great end in view, "of him, and through him, and for him are all things", @Romans 11:36. 'The Father' is a more limited thought, though more blessed in a sense, as a term involving family relationship, also involving grace and affection, not judgment. It is inherently limited in that sense, whereas 'God' includes all that attaches to the Deity, and should ever be in mind in our worship. 'Father' comes before it in the order here. The Lord had spoken of 'God' as a Spirit in chapter 4; He has to be before us in that way in our service.
J.H.T. The apostle Paul anticipates all that in the climax of @1 Corinthians 15: "that God may be all in all". @1 Corinthians 15:28.
J.T. That is what I thought. It is "of him, and through him, and for him are all things". @Romans 11:36.
C.O.B. Would "My God and your God" include covenant relations?
J.T. I think not. The Lord can hardly be regarded as in covenant relations with God. He is the Mediator of the covenant. The idea is taken from Jehovah really. The Psalms would afford suggestion that He probably took that place, but properly I think He has to be regarded as the Mediator of the covenant, the covenant bearing towards the people, the house of Israel, as it says, and the house of Judah. In the quotations in @Hebrews 8 from @Jeremiah 31 it is the Lord that is mentioned, not God, although God is implied. It is Jehovah who is mentioned under the title 'Lord' in @Hebrews 8 and @Hebrews 10. I think that if we think of His God as presented here it would be God in His infinite supremacy as the Object of worship. I do not say, the alone Object of worship; the Son is worshipped too, but viewed as the Object of worship of the assembly He is the alone Object of
{221}
worship. God is to be worshipped in spirit and truth.
-.F. Would that be connected with the last verse of @Ephesians 3: "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus"? @Ephesians 3:21.
J.T. I think that is what is in mind in Ephesians, "One God and Father of all". @Ephesians 4:6. It is God. "To us there is one God, the Father". @1 Corinthians 8:6. That is not the covenant; it is God in supremacy, which is the end of everything. The covenant is a means to that, to set us free, a more limited thought; it is certain ones.
J.H.T. Do you get a moral order in @John 13, the Lord departing out of the world to the Father, and then in covenant relationships, loving His own which were in the world unto the end, and then the thought of going to God?
J.T. Quite so. He came from God, and went to God. That is God in the fullest thought, the supreme God; no one has seen Him at any time; that stands. He is still the invisible God according to Colossians. He dwells in light unapproachable, whom no man hath seen nor can see. That has always to be before us in our worship, and is, I am sure, before the Lord as leading the service. I do not know whether brethren have observed that, but it came to me this morning, and I believe it is right, that the Lord would help us in moving in that way, that there are three features of love in the assembly: the love of Christ in the bread, the love of God in the covenant in the cup, and the love of God as Father. "That the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them", @John 17:26 the latter being the greatest, and the great end in view in the service, and indeed, in all God's movements. All is to revert back to Himself. The covenant is a means to an end, manifestly. There will be no need for it when all is fixed divinely and eternally. The love of Christ for the assembly will remain, and the love of God as Father will be the great thought eternally. The message here is given,
{222}
the suitable vessel being available, a lover of Christ adjusted. It is instructed love in Mary Magdalene; she is capable of carrying such a message as this; she would convey not only the words, but the thought of it.
A.R.P. You would say she is spiritually intelligent?
J.T. I should say so. After she says "Rabboni", Jesus says, "Touch me not", The final touch is that the relationship is to be heavenly henceforth. "I have not yet ascended to my Father". That is the historical fact, but then He says, "I ascend"; that is the characteristic thought which is to enter into her soul. He is in principle as if He had ascended. Only instructed love, that is spiritual intelligence, would distinguish thus.
F.I. Would you say that the carrying out of what the Lord said in @John 4, that God is to be worshipped in spirit and truth, could only be taken up by us, by our taking in what has come to us in the covenant?
J.T. The covenant helps us and liberates us, so that we may grasp the thought that God is a Spirit.
F.I. Although God dwells in unapproachable light, as knowing what He is as come to us in the revelation of Himself, we would have Him before us in that sense, and would be able to worship Him as such; otherwise we should know nothing about Him.
J.T. In making promises, the end in view is that we might be instructed to think of Him as He is Himself. We should never lose sight of the infiniteness of God, even His absoluteness. He is to be regarded, even apart from what is created.
J.H.B. *Question re the covenant*.
J.T. I think it is God coming down to us, our way of thinking. There would be no need for God to make a covenant with us if there was absolute confidence on our side.
{223}
R.T.W. Would that be the thought of 'the giving God' in chapter 4?
J.T. I think so: "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink". @John 4:10.
R.T.W. That leads to worship.
J.T. Quite so. The Lord is always constructive in His teaching; He conveys a thought, He has an end in view in it. The gift of God is a great thing. It is not there any particular gift, but characteristic. "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink". @John 4:10. He is leading up to speaking about God.
A.W.G.T. Is that to promote confidence on our side?
J.T. Do you mean the gift?
A.W.G.T. Speaking of God in that way as the giving God.
J.T. Then there is the greatness of the well springing up in her, not exactly to God, but in that direction, into eternal life, which seems to be a sort of platform for the working out of God's thoughts.
J.W. Is it the covenant side in chapter 3, "God so loved the world"? @John 3:16.
J.T. That is wider than the covenant. We cannot say that God entered into covenant relations with the world, save in Noah's covenant. That is not alluded to in the new covenant at all. It is not with the nations, nor with the world. We must regard @John 3:16 as the Creator: "the world" there refers to the creation and the order and beauty of it, that God has never given it up, and would fill it with life.
R.G.B. He has not been defeated in that way.
J.T. He has it in mind, and will establish it on the principle of life. The Lord came into the world. It was made by Him, and knew Him not. It was strange, but it was there in the abstract. The covenant applies while we are here on earth, while
{224}
conditions are contested. God has made an oath. An oath and a covenant and a promise have relation to one another. God comes down to our smallness of thought, and leads us on to know Himself, that we might have strong consolation. If we really knew God, we should need neither a promise nor an oath; we should trust Him. God comes down to lead us on. The Spirit given springs up into everlasting life. There is deliverance, and introduction into an order of things where God is known in victory and power.
R.G.B. Does this gospel bring out the divine giving?
J.T. It does. The gift of the Son in chapter 3, and the gift of the Spirit in chapter 4; these are the great thoughts of divine giving.
E.G.S. Would you distinguish between the worship of God as Father, and God as the Absolute?
J.T. Yes. The Father judges no one, meaning that He has limited Himself in that relation to grace and love. He is sometimes addressed as 'the Father', and referred to generally throughout John in this way, but He is never regarded as *our Father* until we come to chapter 20.
E.G.S. The end to be reached in the assembly is worshipping Him as God?
J.T. Yes. We get the full thought, as supreme. "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". @Genesis 1:1. We have to come back to that. John says, "No one has seen God at any time" @John 1:18; the One who is declared still remains in invisibility. We have to think of Him in His infiniteness.
-.F. Is that the last or supreme act of the Lord in Headship, to lead us intelligently to that?
J.T. Having subdued all, He is subject Himself. "To him who is God and Father, ... that *God* may be all in all". @1 Corinthians 15:28. Not 'God and Father', but "God". 'Father' is the most precious relationship, but the
{225}
thought of God was there before the thought of Father was introduced. We have to come back to that.
J.H.M. Why does it say, "The Father seeketh such to worship him"? @John 4:23.
J.T. That is the side of affection.
Ques. As we worship the Father we worship as sons, but what are we in worshipping God?
J.T. Sons, too, sons of God; that is the general thought. We cry "Abba" as sons, but we are sons of God.
Rem. It does not seem to be so near and intimate as sons worshipping the Father.
J.T. No; when the Lord says, "My Father and your Father", there is a nearness there that you do not get elsewhere.
R.G.B. Would that nearness be carried forward?
J.T. It is. Paul pursues it in his ministry; it is he who opens this up to us. John does not open up to us the truth of sonship; he opens it up as regards Christ, but not as to us. It is Paul who is the first to preach the Son of God. We worship the Father, but we worship God, too. God must be all in all; He has never given up that thought. The other thoughts are subordinate to it. It is to assure us of His love.
-.F. Why does it say in @Ephesians 3 that every family in heaven and earth is named of the Father? @Ephesians 3:15.
J.T. It is a question of the family. When it is a question of the family, that is the Father's realm.
Ques. Would then every creature be brought into the light of the Father in some sense?
J.T. I think so; "every family". In the realm of blessing everyone will be in the knowledge of the Father, in some sense, according to the measure of their growth. There is the angelic group; but as regards men, the families will be grouped under the various measures of light granted, beginning with Abel.
{226}
*Remark on the expression "that God may be all in all"*. @1 Corinthians 15:28.
J.T. That is the great end, and so this passage suggests instructed love, which is needed for the assembly; so that we should understand love in its threefold features -- the love of Christ for the assembly, and the love of God in the covenant -- that would be in the cup -- (the love of Christ would be more particularly in the bread, but it is also in the cup; the covenant love of God is in the cup); and there is the love of God as Father, and God as God in supremacy; He loves His Son, and He loves His sons. The love that is in us is that kind of love according to @John 17.
Rem. The circles of love seem to widen.
J.T. They do. God is the greatest. So you get the three circles in @Ephesians 4:4 - 6, leading up to the thought, "one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". @Ephesians 4:4 - 6.
W.E.B. Would there be a correspondence with the end of 1 Chronicles, where David said to God, "all that is in the heavens and on the earth is thine"? @1 Chronicles 29:11.
J.T. "Thou art exalted as Head above all".
F.I. In making a distinction between the Father's house and the Father's presence, does all the family come into the Father's presence? They will all be in the Father's house according to @John 14. Is the presence only connected with the sons?
J.T. There are grades of nearness, I think. The assembly manifestly has the nearest place, but the others come into the range of the Father. Every family is named of Him, and every family would be named according to its formation. Its formation would be determined by the light given. The light ministered to the saints before the flood from Adam to Noah, would enable a certain formation; from Abraham to Jacob; and then Israel as a nation; increasing light as we come down. The families would be grouped in that way. Christ entered into
{227}
each family. For instance, what Abel represented, what Enoch represented, and others in that dispensation, was something of Christ laid hold of by faith, but it would not be equal to what came out in Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
F.I. I wondered whether we needed a little adjustment sometimes. We often speak of being in the Father's house, but I wondered whether that is not a future thought, whereas the privilege of the sons is to enter into the Father's presence; it would be connected with the house, but it would be the eternal side.
J.T. "In my Father's house there are many abodes; were it not so, I had told you: for I go to prepare you a place", @John 14:2. It would be something special, and would correspond with what we get about the assembly elsewhere as the body of Christ, the vessel in which the service of God is carried on in the fullest way.
H.B. Why did He say, "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended"?
J.T. What is meant is that she was not to assume the old Jewish relations. It was all for adjustment. She was spiritually equal for such a word as that. She should be instructed and adjusted in taking the message. The relation here was to be henceforth heavenly; the disciples would understand that, too. The Lord comes into the midst following that message. He would be in their midst as the ascending One.
F.I. Was she in any way lacking in what the man in @John 9 had when he believed on the Son of God?
J.T. I think she was not equal to that; she had seemingly forgotten much. The Lord had said He would arise, but she did not seem to be in the good of that. What is intended to be conveyed is instructed affection. Peter and John were more intelligent than she, but had less affection. She had affection instructed directly by Himself. She is an example of what is suitable to the assembly.
{228}
J.W. Is this message intended to affect the disciples in a particular way?
J.T. It is a pattern of the assembly in the persons who form it rather than the thing itself. The persons would be equal to the visit. They do not say anything here, whereas in Luke they are speaking as the Lord comes in. He comes in on the message here that He sent to them. The doors were shut; they were not shut in Luke.
J.H.T. The expression is used in verse 19, "Where the disciples were", not 'where they were assembled', exactly, but the persons.
J.T. That is worthy of note.
-.F. I would like to ask concerning worshipping God in the absolute: is the Son as being in Deity sharing that worship?
J.T. You are touching what is inscrutable. His part as seen in @1 Corinthians 15 is that the Son Himself shall be subject unto Him who is God and Father -- the Lord is pleased to take that place -- and it is to the end that God should be all in all.
J.H.T. The reading of @1 Corinthians 15:28 helps in that connection, in the better translation, "then the Son also himself shall be placed in subjection to him who put all things in subjection to him, that God may be all in all". @1 Corinthians 15:28. It is not exactly His own act, is it? It is the supremacy of God coming to light in that holy feature.
J.T. It is important to observe the reading. It is the divine thought, and the Lord accepts it; He never loses His deity; of course we realise that.
J.H.T. I wonder whether our weakness in assembly might not lie in the fact that we may not have had the experience of using the expression, "Rabboni". Bartimaeus did.
J.T. If we are instructed on the line of responsibility we should have more power.
{229}
A.W.G.T. Would you tell us what is in your mind as to responsibility?
J.T. I was thinking of how Bartimaeus followed Jesus in the way, first having said Rabboni, as if he needed instruction for that, how to follow pleasingly.
Ques. Would that lie at the root of this?
J.T. I think it does. Following Him in the way would be for us instruction as to 1 Corinthians. Here it is not that; it is the spiritual side, the assembly convened, as we might say -- how to be instructed for that. To be intelligent in the first is one thing, but how to assemble, and how to serve in the assembly is another thing, the greater thing.
A.W.G.T. Where does that instruction come in? On occasions like this?
J.T. Quite so. Moreover you see what others do. Christianity is not merely a question of precepts, but of example. If you had seen how Peter or Paul would speak to God, you would understand. It is example, too. Young people ought to listen to older ones, and observe what they say, proving all things, of course; but we learn from others. Knowing how to assemble is important. The Lord assembled with them: you would observe how He moved. Peter and the others would take notice. That is how christianity has come down to us. The book of the Acts is that; it is not simply what is enjoined, it is what is seen there.
Rem. We learn that in movements locally.
J.T. The book of the Acts begins with things which Jesus began both to do and teach.
Ques. Is that how Timothy learnt from Paul?
J.T. He was Paul's child in the faith. The end of all the ministry is to bring the soul into touch with the One who is spoken of as "Rabboni"; He, after all, is the Teacher. You feel your need of Him to the end as "Rabboni", as the Teacher, and after all we
{230}
have had -- oh, how little do we know! The Lord is teaching.
W.E.B. The first enquiry addressed to Him as "Teacher" is as to where He abides; @John 1:38.
J.T. That is the first thing in connection with teaching. What they saw in that day! -- they saw some of the tabernacle conditions; John opens up tabernacle conditions. The Word became flesh and "tabernacled" among us. You would see how He walked. The next thing is that they say, "Where abidest thou?" @John 1:38. We are told that the word 'Rabbi' means Teacher there. Then in chapter 8 Jesus went to the mount of Olives. That was His special place; He went there by night, we are told in Luke. And so in chapter 14 we have the manifesting and then the abiding of the Father and Son promised to one who keeps His word. That would imply what is known as tabernacle conditions.
C.O.B. Where does the tabernacling of God with men in @Revelation 21 come in?
J.T. John leads us up to that, God tabernacling with men.
C.O.B. Would we reach out to that after the Supper?
J.T. I think so, only that the assembly is more with God, having part with Christ Godward. There are two thoughts, God with us and we with God. The tabernacle is the greater thing; it is that in which we are *with God;* so that John's gospel from chapters 13 to 17 is to instruct us as to that, as to how we are to have part with Him. It ends up with His saying "Father", and speaking much about us, and saying that "I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known; that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them". @John 17:26. "I in them", @John 17:23. I think, opens up His service in the assembly as the Minister of the sanctuary.
{231}
C.O.B. I rather thought that the cup would open up a vast vista to us that would find its fulfilment in the eternal state.
J.T. The tabernacle is yourself; I am to be that. It is the assembly that is an eternal thought. The tabernacling with men there is not so elevated as the tabernacle itself. We enjoy that ourselves. It is not simply God with us, but we with Him.
F.I. Would that come out by our being consciously where Christ abides in the presence of the Father: "Where abidest thou"? @John 1:38. It seems to me that it is only as we are actually in the good of the position that Christ has with the Father that we can rise up to God as supreme.
J.T. His place with the Father is really Olivet. That is where He resorted to. If you wanted to know where His place with the Father is, John and Luke tell us it is the mount of Olives. After the Supper they went to the mount of Olives. That is where the service properly begins, where the love of the Father to Him is in us, and He in us. When we reach the thought of it spiritually, the thing is to keep on that line. It is the most blessed line; He leads the praises there. He is the Minister.
-.H. Which is the greater thought, we with God, or God with us?
J.T. God with us is more testimony here. Ephesians, a habitation of God in the Spirit, is God here in testimony. What He is seeking is our movement toward Him. Before we have the idea of the habitation of God here, the saints are said to be raised up and made to sit down together in the heavenlies. We are great enough to be God's habitation here because we are heavenly, not otherwise.
{232}
THE LORD'S CARE FOR HIS SERVANTS
@Mark 6:30 - 56
J.T. This chapter contains peculiar instruction for those who serve. All the Lord's people, of course, should serve in some sense; but there are skilled labourers and unskilled labourers, and this chapter is for those who are, or who should be, skilled -- indeed it is so that we should be skilled. It occurred to me that it would be helpful for all, as well as those who serve in this way, to look into it, especially as the Lord's attention to those who serve brings out results in His being better known. Indeed He is, as it were, everything. He has His own way of distinguishing His servants, putting them forward as He may need them in the front, but the more the servant is with Him, the more Jesus is everything; what is done is done by Him; and what is to be observed here is that, at the beginning of the chapter, that is in verses 1 - 6, He is thought but little of, despised indeed; and then in verses 7 - 13 we have the sending out of the servants, the apostles; and in verse 30, the account which they give of their service; but inserted is the solemn martyrdom of, up to that time, the greatest servant among men, that is, John the baptist. So that, in serving, this stands out, that martyrdom is to be expected; the more faithful the service, the more likely the martyrdom. What is in mind particularly is the Lord's care for us, and what becomes incidental, the care of others, the feeding of the multitude, and how He becomes increasingly known through His care for His servants; they will be prominent as they are faithful, but the point is *His* prominence.
Rem. Is that why the Lord told them to take
{233}
nothing with them but a staff? He is to be prominent in His care for them.
J.T. There would be in every moment of their service the sense of dependence on Him.
P.L. "The Lord stood with me, and strengthened me", @2 Timothy 4:17. Does that show how the Lord's care for His servant tends to make him great?
J.T. That is a beautiful statement covering the instruction here. He "stood with me". We have the Lord standing over a certain one, but standing by is another matter, that is, we realise He can identify Himself fully with the servant; and then the strengthening him. "that by me ..." -- the Lord would have that. Paul had a distinction that the Lord intended him to have, and he would have it, the Lord supported him so that he should have it -- "that by me the preaching might be fully known". @2 Timothy 4:17. Others would aspire to it, but the Lord saw to that -- "by me the preaching might be fully known". Is that in your mind?
P.L. Yes. I wondered whether the writer of this gospel himself witnessed to this principle in the care the Lord lavished upon him; his recovery resulted in his writing a gospel which has greatly extended the fame of Christ.
J.T. Yes, just so; the gospel finishes with, "they went forth, and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs following" @Mark 16:26; that is, the Lord could identify Himself with them. We do not want to work save with this assurance. It is one thing to work for Him, but it is more touching to work with Him -- that He should work with us.
Ques. Should we be helped in that way by what the apostles did here?
J.T. I think that is right. They present their account in proper order, what they had done. That is how Luke presents the account of the Lord's life,
{234}
the Lord's ministry, what He "began both to do and to teach" @Acts 1:1; the doing is put before the teaching. Teaching is doing, too, but the fact that it is mentioned separately would show that their walk and ways, how they did things in their service, is put first; because before we can take account of a man's teaching, we must take account of himself, what he is; and he comes out in what he does.
A.J.G. So that it is this gospel which records that it is said of Jesus, "He hath done all things well". @Mark 7:37.
J.T. That is peculiar to this gospel, is it not? I believe the man is seen in what he does.
A.H. Is it your thought that that gives colour and power to his ministry?
J.T. Yes, Paul speaks of his doctrine and manner of life. What a man is should really come before his teaching.
P.L. "Knowing of whom thou hast learned them", @2 Timothy 3: 14.
J.T. Quite so. "Being such a one as Paul the aged", @Philemon 9.
Rem. It is said of the disciples in the beginning of the Acts that "they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus". @Acts 4:13.
J.T. That is that they would take on of His ways, you mean. This proposal on the Lord's part to rest is very touching -- "Come ye yourselves apart ... and rest a little". Some of us have been calculating the time spent by Israel in sabbath according to the types: it would average, in fifty years, thirty-eight per cent of their time. The Lord, I think, would remind us that for effective ministry there should be sabbath-keeping, and I think He has that in mind here. Not that the passage shows that they spent any time in the desert in leisure, -- for it says, "they went away apart into a desert place by ship. And many saw them going, and recognised them, and ran together there on foot, out of all the cities, and got there before them".
{235}
There was plenty to do as they reached the supposed resting-place; there is no suggestion that they went to shore and had a holiday -- the "rest a little" must therefore be other than that; it must have a spiritual significance.
P.L. The demands of the service upon them were very exacting if they had not time so much as to eat. Would the Lord's coming in, in the way He did, be to meet them? The labour was exacting.
J.T. Yes, the labour was exacting and they needed rest, but there is no evidence that it was a holiday they were going to get, nor does the Lord ever take a holiday, as far as we can see; yet He would not be without what was needed. You cannot conceive of the Lord being without what is needed in His service.
A.J.G. Would you help us as to how we keep our sabbaths?
J.T. Well, I think it is in the service. He says, "Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place". Of course, there is the suggestion that there is nothing for the flesh in the proposal, not even ordinary comfort; but elsewhere we are told that, in crossing the sea, He slept; that is, it was not a resting-place externally, it was not a matter of holiday, but there was ability to use a moment for what was needed. The servant acquires skill in securing what he needs in his service; the service does not stop.
A.J.G. How would that apply spiritually, apart from what is connected with physical needs?
J.T. Well, it is not easy to say to people who are accustomed to holidays that we can rest otherwise, but I think that the Lord shows in His own experience that He did it. You will observe that there is no holiday attire about them; there is nothing to indicate that they were holiday people. It says, "And they went away apart into a desert place by ship. And many saw them going, and recognised them". It is "them", not 'Him', according to the best rendering.
{236}
That is, they are re cognisable as servants, as attached to Jesus.
P.L. So that the camel's hair clothing of John the baptist and the leathern girdle about his loins, would be the opposite of the holiday attire.
J.T. That is what I am thinking. If I am off on holiday with tennis or cricket equipment or seaside clothing, I am not recognisable from other holiday people, I just belong to the holiday set. These are recognised, those around recognise their identity with Jesus.
Ques. Is it in the sense that "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work"? @John 5:17.
J.T. Yes, "I work", not 'I will work'; the thing goes on -- "I work". That is the idea, I think. Would you agree with that?
H.F.N. Yes, indeed. Would the thought in Exodus, "in ploughing time and in harvest thou shalt rest" @Exodus 34:21, be the same principle?
J.T. I think that is right. We would put in the word 'toil' there, I suppose, ordinarily; but "thou shalt rest". The lines say, 'Find in Thy service rest'. In this recognition of the Lord and the apostles, we ought to note that they are marked off, as they always were from the time of their entering into service -- they are known. We do not want to be known otherwise; we do not want to be disguised. Of course, holiday-making is necessary, but I am afraid it sometimes entails a great deal of damage to our souls.
Ques. Would it involve the question as to whether we are doing things well in what we are doing? The Lord did all things well, as you were saying. Would it be in keeping with what was in accord with heaven, that what we are doing is ministering in accord with the mind of heaven?
J.T. Yes, I believe the service never stops.
Ques. The disciples were gathered to Jesus; would that be the antidote?
{237}
J.T. Yes. The record here suggests it was good so far. The disciples were gathered to Jesus -- I suppose the form of the words would mean that it was characteristic -- they are there, He is before them, and they tell Him what they had done and what they had taught, and now He proposes to rest a little.
P.L. Do you get this thought in the Lord Himself -- the spirit of Christ in the psalmist going up with the festive throng to the house of God, and the Lord, in Luke, saying, "I must be about my Father's business"? @Luke 2:49.
J.T. Yes -- "*I must be*"; that is characteristic, too, there is no relinquishment of that; and in that you are not disguised by holiday attire and other things that go with it. They "recognised them", it says.
C.H. And in this proposal of the Lord to rest, are we to understand that we cannot constantly be giving out, we must also take in? Would that be connected with eating?
J.T. The Lord says, "*Come* ye yourselves apart" -- the rest is, in that sense, I believe, with Him, and in that you are recognised. You cannot conceive of the Lord neglecting anything in His own service, in His own personal experience, that would be needed; and if we read nothing of holiday with Him, we should not reckon on it as to ourselves.
H.S. Had they the rest in going from one service to another?
J.T. Yes, I have no doubt they got rest on the boat. It is a good place, I suppose. Those of us who travel on the ocean are supposed to get rest on the boat, and there is no doubt opportunity for that, but it is not just as much as might be thought. The Lord, I think, led the way in this in that He slept as they were crossing at a later time. But going across the sea raises the question of whether those who do travel are affected by the world in such a passage, for
{238}
nowhere is the world more condensed, and, I may say, more attractive, than it is on board ship; and those who do go down to the sea in ships, I believe, ought to learn from this scripture that they are to be recognisable as belonging to Jesus. And at the other side it says, "Jesus saw a great crowd, and he was moved with compassion for them" -- there is no thought of a holiday at all, the need is too great; but then there must be what the Lord intended; you may be sure that neither He nor they missed what He proposed to them.
Rem. It has often been remarked that in this gospel we get the word "immediately" so many times in relation to the Lord. It seems to suggest that with the Lord there was no waste of time, if one might say so reverently.
J.T. That is the thought -- from one thing to another. Here we read He was moved with compassion as to what He found on the other side; He found the multitude and He was moved with compassion. That is a state in the servant that pleases God: God is compassionate -- "My Father worketh hitherto", the Lord says, "and I work". @John 5:17. The thing is going on.
Rem. Do you suggest that cities and villages are the sphere of service, and the desert place for retirement, but even when you get there service is to be carried on?
J.T. Yes, you see the need, the need was there ahead of Him. And so it says, "because they were as sheep not having a shepherd. And he began to teach them many things". He was moved with compassion; that is the state which the servant should be in, there is the capability of being affected by need, whatever that may be.
F.L. So that we get the groaning and the sighing -- the feelings of Christ -- in Mark's gospel.
J.T. Yes, more than anywhere else. It is to bring
{239}
out what is needed, what should mark the servant. And then, as we were remarking, what comes out incidentally is the manner of the feeding, involving, as you might say, assembly organisation.
Ques. Is it the heart of the shepherd and the significance of His hands? Is that why shepherds and teachers go together?
J.T. Just so. Then, if you have food to minister, the best way to minister it; so that the servant is concerned as to how the saints are set, what meetings there are and how many in the week and how large; and whether there cannot be more, and whether, if there are more, the food will not be better dispensed and more effective.
Ques. You were speaking of assembly organisation; were you referring to verse 40 -- "they sat down in ranks by hundreds and by fifties"?
J.T. Yes, that is what I was thinking of. The Lord says, in verse 37, "Give *ye* them to eat". Then He says, "How many loaves have ye? Go and see". We have here a state in the servants that is not quite what it should be: "Go and see". It is well, if we do not know, to go and see, but I think the Lord would imply that we should know what there is.
H.F.N. Will you say a little more in regard of the thought of assembly organisation? How does that bear upon the thought of service?
J.T. I think it is the business part of the servant's work to see to it that the saints get the most out of what he may have to minister, and, for that, he enquires as to meetings, what meetings are held, how many saints there are -- you get to know here -- and it is his business, under the Lord, to help as to that organisation, not only because order is needed, but that there should be the greatest effectiveness possible.
H.F.N. Do you refer to the thought of the week-night meetings -- the reading and so on?
J.T. Yes.
{240}
Ques. In Luke is it more from the standpoint of the local setting of the saints, and here from the standpoint of service?
J.T. I think so. It is fifties and hundreds here; Luke confines us to fifties, and I think the Spirit of God there indicates the Lord's mind imperatively; here the matter is more elastic.
Ques. Would this chapter have what is local as a basis, but extended, as our meeting this afternoon, for instance?
J.T. Yes, they might have been more extended; but even as to them, a hundred is the limit here. I do not believe it is one occasion that is in mind; any number may be fed, but it is what is to characterise a locality.
Ques. Are you suggesting that, if there were more than a hundred, you would be moved with compassion?
J.T. Yes, the large numbers arouse the Lord's compassion; "they were as sheep", it says, "not having a shepherd" -- that is, they were not housed and cared for generally; and I think this implies that the servant is to see to that. The shepherd's business is to see to the sheep, not only as to their food, but as to their general welfare and comfort. Therefore, enquiry as to the meetings and their size is a matter of great importance in the service, and that the saints should be helped in a general way, for it is a question of the general state of things, that they may get with greater effect what there is for them.
Ques. Is not that the particular value of the care meetings?
J.T. Yes. This sort of thing ought to be adjusted there, but if not adjusted there, it is the business of the servant to bring it home to the conscience of all, so that it may be attended to.
Ques. Is that why the Lord brings in teaching here? He immediately taught them many things.
{241}
J.T. That is right -- "many things". It is remarkable how many things come up all the time. You say, 'That was taught years ago'; well, it is not learned yet.
P.L. Is it because the wilderness was not learnt? They are in the desert.
J.T. Quite so; it is really a desert position. The people are here because Jesus is here -- that is a great matter.
P.L. Is not the acceptance of small gatherings bound up with the acceptance of wilderness conditions?
J.T. Yes, I think the big gatherings tend to minimise the wilderness conditions.
P.L. Do you mean we like a crowd?
J.T. Yes, we do naturally; there is something about a crowd that appeals to the flesh. In regard to the minister's business -- it is not only that things are said, but they are taught -- "He began to *teach* them many things". We also have the Lord *saying* things, but teaching is so important, that the thing is fixed in the minds of the saints in power; it is so, it must be so, it is the mind of God that it must be so -- teaching enforces things in that way.
Ques. In the Acts, a great man was amazed at the teaching of the Lord by the word of the servant. Is Paul, in that way, a typical servant, a skilled labourer, as you were saying?
J.T. That is what comes out in chapter 13, and it is there you get "Paul and his company" @Acts 13:13 for the first time. Where you get teaching from the Lord, you need not be afraid of the company. That man is said to have been an intelligent man. There was authoritative teaching; we need not be afraid of that.
Rem. There were five thousand *men* here; before, they were a crowd. Does this teaching of the Lord, particularly focussing itself in small meetings, go to produce men according to God?
{242}
J.T. I think that is good. You get the same thing in the Acts; there are *men* mentioned, not only persons, at a certain time in Jerusalem; that is when manhood was showing itself.
Ques. Do you see any importance in the Lord's remark here, "Go and see"? Are we not perhaps apt locally to overlook what we have?
J.T. A very important thing, I think. It is important in a district to enquire what is there, as David did of Abimelech in @1 Samuel 21:3. 'How many loaves have ye?'; whatever you have can be used. They did not have much here, but it was important that what was there should be stated. The whole passage calls for thoughtfulness, attention, care; there are no loose ends contemplated at all. As it says of Lydia, she was a seller of purple, she was a business woman; business people are supposed to be attentive to things. I think that is the thought here, that things are known, enquired into, and if more can be done in the place -- well, that is what is in mind, things should be done, things should not be allowed to rest -- make the most of what we have.
Rem. If there is matter there potentially, the Lord may use it and enlarge it.
J.T. Yes. If we use that word 'organisation' (for want of a better), it conveys the idea of things being ordered and regulated.
Ques. Would it be like the men of Issachar who had understanding of the times and knew what Israel ought to do?
J.T. Quite so. That is what the Lord is aiming at, to make the most of what there is.
P.L. It is what it becomes in His hands.
J.T. Yes. Then there is not only the food but the people sitting in these companies. It is much more for persons with a business eye to see five thousand men sitting in companies than to see them sitting any
{243}
way; in Israel in the wilderness with God this was what appeared -- they were organised.
P.L. Otherwise would it be said that "they all ate and were satisfied"?
J.T. I think not -- you would miss some. You can easily inspect a state of things like this; when they are sitting in fifties and hundreds no one is omitted, no one is neglected, there is an ordered state of things as there was in the wilderness; the book of Numbers brings this out.
P.L. So under David there were captains of thousands, and so on -- is that the organisation?
J.T. Exactly.
A.H. All in view of the prosperity of the work of God in His people.
J.T. Yes, we are moving together. You know where people are and whether they are being cared for, and so on. In a crowd of five thousand it is not easy to see how they are getting on.
Rem. The matter of organising devolved on those who were in the service.
J.T. Yes, the servant brings light in. He told the disciples to make them all sit down by companies on the green grass. He did not specify, as in Luke, how large the companies were to be -- that is the part of the servant -- the commandment is that they should be in companies.
Ques. Do you mean to convey to us that the Lord credited His servants with intelligence to know what His mind was as having companied with Him?
J.T. Quite so; although in Luke I think He specifies, I suppose Luke has Paul's company in mind. Here the matter is left open, and "they sat down in ranks by hundreds and by fifties" -- you could easily count them.
H.F.N. In principle, would the disciples here whom the Lord compelled to go into the boat correspond with Paul's company?
{244}
J.T. I think so; that company was recognised "Many saw them going" -- the Lord was included -- "and recognised them, and ran together there on foot, out of all the cities, and got there before them". The company was in mind, I suppose. The Lord, in moving about Galilee, became known; Jesus and His disciples, they were a known company; I should not like to be unrecognisable as of that company.
H.F.N. Would that always involve a fresh spiritual movement? "Let us go over to the other side". Will the company, as the result of being in faith, always take up fresh ground spiritually?
J.T. I think they would. You can understand any movement of the Lord's would imply that.
P.L. Would the two thoughts of obscurity and being recognised be blended? As in the word of Paul, "unknown, and yet well known", @2 Corinthians 6:9.
J.T. I think so, he and his company would be known. The damsel who had the evil spirit said, "These men are the servants of the most high God" @Acts 16:17 -- that was to becloud the position; they were not that, that was not the position, Paul and his company were not that; they corresponded more with this, with what the Lord was here.
Ques. Have you any thought as to what the five loaves and the two fishes represent?
J.T. What is small: the point is that whatever they had He would use. That is a question that comes up in the locality, 'What is there?' We are put to it to know what there is, and He uses that.
Ques. Are the numbers significant -- five and two?
J.T. I think so. Five would be a suggestion of what is small; two has often been noted as representing adequate testimony. The bread, of course, represents what is on the land; and the fish what is in the sea; the resources of God are implied, and, however little or much the Lord uses, what we have is of divine resources, divine provision. I suppose every
{245}
little meeting has something; every brother and every sister has something; if he is characteristically a christian he has something, a divine provision. God would never send us out without provision, and the Lord uses that.
P.L. Five and two are what is found in the company.
J.T. Yes.
A.J.G. It says "a few small fishes" in the next feeding. @Mark 8:7.
J.T. Yes. I think this first feeding is more explicit, and outward order is more in mind; the second is what is spiritual, although the four thousand are mentioned and you have seven loaves; it is what is spiritual, the ranks are omitted. In other words, the first feeding is like 1 and 2 Corinthians, and the second like Colossians and Ephesians. Would you say that?
A.J.G. I was going to ask if the first feeding is the economy in the divine system of the local assembly as over against the economy in the world as in Herod and his system; and the second as over against the religious world.
J.T. Yes, I think the second would be over against the religious world. Herod represents wicked opposition to what is of God; so 1 and 2 Corinthians, with other scriptures like them, treat of what is public, our public position. The second feeding in this book is in chapter 8, and it is spiritual, so you have larger results, too.
P.L. So that the giving of thanks by the Lord comes into the second, and hence in Colossians and Ephesians we often have the expression "Giving thanks". Is that a spiritual thought?
J.T. Yes, you have more giving of thanks in Colossians and Ephesians than anywhere. "He looked up to heaven, and blessed", it says here, in verse 41, but that is all; you get the blessing in
{246}
1 Corinthians, but in Colossians and Ephesians you get much more about that, the giving of thanks. So in the second feeding, in chapter 8, the Lord does not look up to heaven, for it is a question of the Spirit -- of divine Persons here -- a very great matter. But what we are concerned with now is the order, whether the Lord is getting all He should, and whether the saints are getting the best service in the present state of things.
A.H. Would you enlarge a little on the order -- making the crowd sit down on the green grass?
J.T. Well, as we have been remarking, it is the authority of the Lord; it is like 1 and 2 Corinthians, how the saints should be ordered externally.
A.H. Does it show that part of the work of the servant is to produce a spirit of restfulness with the saints?
J.T. Yes. "He ordered them to make them all sit down by companies on the green grass". I suppose green grass would be something very advantageous in the wilderness; that is, the position should in every way enhance what is being ministered; the saints comforts are provided for, there is an evidence of prosperity even in the wilderness.
P.L. Would the new covenant ministry in 2 Corinthians link up with the green grass, the green appearing in connection with the throne in Revelation?
J.T. I think so. I think the green grass would be 2 Corinthians; the covenant belongs to the wilderness and it evidences prosperity, it is like newness of life.
H.F.N. In the second feeding of the multitude it says they sat on the ground. There would not be the same evidence of comfort in a spiritual setting.
J.T. No, it is not needed. In the public position you look for the evidences of divine care, God is concerned about it, it is His matter; it is "the assembly of God which is in Corinth" @1 Corinthians 1:2, @2 Corinthians 1:1; He is concerned about that and there should be nothing lacking
{247}
in that respect. God would see to it that His people are cared for, hence the collection, for instance, is treated of in those two epistles, God would not have His people suffer physically; I suppose that would all enter into the "green grass" -- the comfort of the saints. If it is God's assembly, there should be nothing lacking in that way.
Ques. Is that why the Spirit of God delights to record again and again that David brought in the recorders and the scribes? He speaks of David's bringing in scribes, chroniclers, and captains -- those who would see that there was nothing lacking.
J.T. That is right. God is committed to the public assembly, it is His matter, and that is, I think, why we get, "So also is the Christ" @1 Corinthians 12:12; it is an anointed matter, God is identified with it in the anointing, and He would have nothing omitted that the saints require, the comfort of the saints and all that goes with the public assembly should be present.
Ques. Would not @Psalm 23 show the green pastures?
J.T. Quite so. That psalm supports what we are saying, that the public assembly should be marked off as provided for by God, there should be nothing lacking, it is God's assembly.
Rem. We have the authority of the Lord as Son over God's house; He ordered, He blessed, He broke, He compelled, He dismissed.
J.T. Yes, that is very beautiful; He is gradually rising till the end of the chapter when they are all running about to bring need to Him. Notice the word 'recognised' at the beginning of the passage and at the end. At the end they are recognising Him, not merely the saints, but Christ. But the saints should be recognised; it goes with the public assembly that we are recognisable as of God.
Ques. Is it a little like what you spoke of at
{248}
Surbiton, "This is he who was in the assembly in the wilderness" @Acts 7:38?
J.T. It is just exactly that, it is the Moses who is in the assembly in the wilderness; and how the Lord shines, as Moses indeed shone, too; he was a king in Jeshurun, as we are told; that is, he rose in distinction in the service.
P.L. So you get the words, "he knoweth thy walking through this great wilderness: these forty years the Lord thy God hath been with thee; thou hast lacked nothing", @Deuteronomy 2:7.
J.T. That is the thought exactly, I am glad you mentioned that. That is due to God if it is God's host. David's camp became "a great camp, like the camp of God" @1 Chronicles 12:22; so in the wilderness it was God's assembly, and it is insisted on that He is there and that everything should comport with this passage; and God, being the God of compassion according to Romans, would omit nothing in His house that the saints require.
Ques. Would that come out when David is in rejection in @2 Samuel 17, when he came to Mahanaim, and Shobi and Barzillai and the others met him with beds and basons and wheat and honey, etc.? Would that be a manifestation of the care and compassion of God?
J.T. Quite so. I think what we are saying is of very great practical importance as to the local position. It is God's assembly, and there should be nothing out of keeping with God. He loves His people; He nursed them forty years in the desert, we are told; He bore with their manners. There is every evidence that God cared for His people, so that there should be nothing lacking in the local company for the comfort of the saints, that they should get the full result of what there may be from God.
Ques. Is the principle seen in the end of Esther? It says of Mordecai. "seeking the welfare of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed", @Esther 10:3.
{249}
J.T. Quite so, seeking their welfare.
P.L. So you have the expression of the first-fruits of Achaia, the household of Stephanas, that "they have devoted themselves to the saints for service"; and then later, "because *they* have supplied what was lacking on your part", @1 Corinthians 16:17. Would that fit in?
J.T. Quite so; what was needed was supplied. That is what God would have us to have before us, that there should be no lack amongst us.
H.F.N. Would you say a little more in connection with the thought of the Lord being recognisable? It is the crux of the whole chapter, as you were saying.
J.T. I think it is worthy of comparison that in the early part of our scripture it says, they "recognised *them*" (verse 33), and then, "on their coming out of the ship, immediately recognising *him*, they ran through that whole country around, and began to carry about those that were ill on couches, where they heard that he was ... and as many as touched him were healed" (verses 54 - 56). You are impressed with the place He is acquiring through His attention to the servants, because that is what is in mind throughout the chapter, His attention to the servants -- other things are incidental; and through His attention He becomes recognisable in His own personal majesty and greatness.
Ques. Is that how He is recognised as the Son of God?
J.T. Yes, that is the thought, I think; He is everything now. Then another thing; before He joined them He was alone on the land and they were in the ship; that is a remarkable setting, and then He walks on the sea and would have passed them by (verse 48). I think that is a challenge; not that He intended really to pass them by but He takes that
{250}
attitude, as much as to say, 'Things are not just right'; He may go on somewhere else.
A.H. Is that seen in the statement Mark makes that "their heart was hardened"?
J.T. That is the secret of it; He knew what was going on in their hearts.
A.J.G. Have you in mind that this recognition of the Lord is the result of the way He is apprehended and cherished in the local company?
J.T. I think so. He becomes prominent in His care of, and attention to, His servants. It is in the locality as they reached the land.
Ques. May we have a word on the Lord's dismissing them here? Is the sense of support in a public way and in assembly organisation? His absence tests them, and that is why He would pass them by, for their hearts were hardened. Is there anything in that, do you think?
J.T. It says, "immediately he compelled his disciples to go on board ship, and to go on before to the other side to Bethsaida, while he sends the crowd away. And, having dismissed them, he departed into the mountain to pray". The disciples are to do something by themselves, not now sent out in power as in the early part of the chapter, but to go on before to the other side to Bethsaida. They are allowed to move by themselves under His direction to a certain place, and He dismisses the crowd, as if He would care for them to the utmost. Dismissing them is not simply letting them do as they wish; they would have a sense of His care in His dismissal of them.
Rem. His dismissal would be different from the disciples sending them away, as they proposed earlier.
J.T. I think the Lord's dismissal is a very beautiful thought; It is not that He is leaving them for good; He is away, but there would be something in His action to affect them, and the disciples are now without Him for the moment but under His direction;
{251}
and then He goes on high. It is a beautiful scene as denoting the present time, the Lord on high and we left under His orders. Now what will He do? The disciples would be expecting something after this, and what they get is that the Lord is walking on the water and would have passed them by. Surely there is rebuke in this! There is something wrong.
Ques. Is it a similar thought to the two going to Emmaus, where the Lord would have gone further?
J.T. I think the point there is that He would go further if necessary; He was not tired of the journey, He was seeking their recovery. Here the point is that He would leave them with an impression. Why should He appear to pass them by? There is something wrong; things are not right -- it is the state of their hearts. It is what is liable to happen when we are absent from the Lord. Even though under His direction, their hearts were not right, things were against them. If things are against us, well, why is it so? Why does He seek to pass us?
Ques. Is that the suggestion in the Lord's saying "it is I"?
J.T. Yes, there is very great significance in that.
{252}
THE COMMERCIAL SYSTEM, AND THE GOD OF THIS WORLD
@Ezekiel 28
It becomes very solemn to consider that the commercial system heads up in the king of Tyre, who is a type of Satan himself. It is right that the people of God, having necessarily to do directly or indirectly with commerce, should be warned as to progressing in it beyond what is necessary. If we aim at anything beyond that, we place ourselves within the range of the god of this world. In handling the creatures of God commercially for a livelihood, you can give God thanks, but going beyond that into the spirit of Tyre in competition and ambition is dangerous; it means we are brought under the influence of the god of this world ... ... If I can supply, through commerce, the means of helping the people of God, as Hiram did in David's and Solomon's day, that is a justifiable thing; but when I go beyond that, and amass the means of living in affluence and leave God out, I put myself within the range of the god of this world ... . It is a time of great cities ... . In many respects cities have acquired a greater place than ever before, because of the world of commerce. Those of us who live in these large centres do well to be warned, because opportunities are great, and the god of this world is not slow to afford them to us, you know. He took the Lord to an exceeding high mountain, and showed Him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory; these were available to him, and he would give them to the Lord, and would give a slice of them to any christian now.
{253}
BEHOLD THE BRIDEGROOM
*Address at a Marriage*
@Revelation 19:7,8; @Revelation 21:9 - 11,1,2
In reading @Matthew 25 somewhat early this morning with our dear brother -- to express fellowship with whom and our dear sister this meeting is convened -- we had the significant word before us, "Behold, the bridegroom". @Matthew 25:6. It has remained during the day in one's mind as peculiarly fitting. It was not selected for the occasion; it was our ordinary morning reading, but it seemed significant that the mind should be turned to it. However valued our brother is (and he and our sister are valued as of those in whom God has wrought), the Spirit of God would say to us throughout this day, and particularly now, "Behold, the bridegroom". @Matthew 25:6. The Holy Spirit has been saying this for years, the word being added, "go forth to meet him"; and there have been results. Indeed, according to the parable, the ten virgins trimmed their lamps and went forth, but I speak of the mind of the Spirit as entering into the present occasion. I am not diverting from our beloved brother and sister. They would, I am sure, wish to be diverted from themselves; and the only true way is to have our attention called to Christ. That is the great balancing, modifying thing in these circumstances; for every lover of His, however much he may be in prominence, wishes that he should be eclipsed by Him, in the spirit of John the baptist, who said, "He must increase, but I must decrease". @John 3:30.
These scriptures call attention to Christ, and also to the bride, in the most instructive and touching manner, but always as subservient to Him, whether it be the Lamb's wife in chapter 19: "the bride, the Lamb's wife",
{254}
in chapter 21:9; or "a bride adorned for her husband", in chapter 21:2. That is the final view of the assembly. She is thinking of him. That is the divine thought. The assembly is *for* Him. And that suggests, dear brethren, how an occasion of this kind -- and we are thankful for these occasions, and would they were more frequent according to God, for marriages "in the Lord" contribute to the testimony -- is of great interest to heaven and serves as an opportunity for the Spirit of God to bring Christ before us; and no occasion can be spiritually profitable otherwise. So the remarks I make will be to direct our minds to this great matter of marriage as a whole and what it means in the mind of God; for He is the Author of it. Hardly any event appeals more to natural feelings than a marriage, and these must always be dissipated if the occasion is to be profitable, and they are only truly dissipated by our minds being directed to Christ by the Spirit.
The Spirit has been occupied with Christ from the institution of marriage, and will be until the last marriage celebration -- that of Christ and the assembly -- will be in its bearing the final marriage. This passage in the beginning of @Revelation 21 alludes to the eternal state of things. The Spirit of God has been occupied throughout with Christ, and the more spiritual we are in having to do with these occasions, the more Christ will be in mind and the more urgent will be the Spirit in our hearts saying, "Behold, the bridegroom". @Matthew 25:6. Were we to be ushered into heaven today, would that not be so? We should not ask His name; there is only One really. In the full consummation of the divine thought, there is only one Bridegroom; and therefore in the eternal state of things, all else is subservient. And so throughout, the primary thought is, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness" @Genesis 1:26; that is, man is to be the representation of God here and for ever; so that
{255}
Christ is said to be the "image of the invisible God". @Colossians 1:15. Christ *is* the image of God -- not *made* that; He is that. But Adam was a figure of Him; and that, dear brethren, puts this occasion in its own proper place; for it relates to what we are here, our head, Adam, in innocency, being only a figure of Him that was to come; and this applies to marriage, as I have said; so that what has taken place today points to Christ. Thus, "Behold, the bridegroom", @Matthew 25:6 enters into all marriages that are according to God. "Let us make man", was a great thought. "Male and female created he them" @Genesis 1:26,27; that is, the female, the woman, is the *expansion* of the thought, in order to create an area of reciprocated affection and feelings. That is seen perfectly in Christ and the assembly, and is held by faith. It is the radiation of affections from the man to the woman and from the woman to the man; and with that, intelligence -- understanding -- for the assembly characteristically understands Christ, and that brings in headship. It brings in union and headship so that there is a proper representation of God here. The thought of love is extended enormously by two thus joined together. The Lord Jesus Christ said, "What ... God has joined together". @Matthew 19:6, @Mark 10:9. What an affecting and far-reaching thought! And it enters into every marriage "in the Lord". So there is radiation of affection and mutual feeling, and with that, the intelligence that belongs to this divinely ordered state, and that thought is eternal. It will soon be seen consummated in Christ and the assembly, and only there; so that all we have in the meantime, whether it be Jehovah's relation to Israel or whether it be the present state of things or the millennial state of things with Israel, these are all provisional, leading up to the one great thought when the assembly comes down as "a bride adorned for her husband". She is said to be the holy city, the new Jerusalem, something that had not been before -- *new* Jerusalem.
{256}
Well, in making these remarks, it is only to touch briefly on the passages read; but I would wish particularly that the brethren have clearly in their minds the great divine thought in this institution and how it all culminates. However extended it may seem to be, it all culminates in the divine thought. It is consummated in Christ and the assembly, abiding for ever. It is a primary thought and hence an eternal one. The bride is seen in the beginning of @Revelation 21 as considering for Christ, for it says, "adorned for her husband", and so in all the types -- Adam and Eve, Isaac and Rebecca, Joseph and Asnath, Moses and Zipporah, Othniel and Achsah, Boaz and Ruth, and David and Abigail. It is all the same thing; all converging on the one thing, that the man was not made for the woman but the woman for the man. She is "out of" him to bring about a state of things that accentuates the thought of love in its radiation, which could not be otherwise; and we should have part in that and grasp it, and know what union is and what the assembly's place is in relation to Christ in eternal ages.
So in @Revelation 19 it is a celebration -- "the Lord God omnipotent reigneth" @Revelation 19:6; that is, God has created a free state of things; for marriage is supposed to take place under those circumstances, not under pressure -- not in a state of war, but in a free state of things, God omnipotent clearing the way. "Let us rejoice and exult, and give him glory; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready". *His* wife, that is the object; it is the assembly in this provisional time as His confidante. She is His *wife*, and so trusted by Him; and this is important in every marriage. "And it was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure". It was *given* to her; that is, she is never seen as acting independently. It is what is suitable under those circumstances. She is given the privilege
{257}
of clothing herself in those garments, and they are said to be "the righteousnesses of the saints"; that is to say, looking back upon our history, every one of us doing his part. How suggestive this is as to our beloved brother and sister here and their household, the mutual side of things, what is clean and bright, and the explanation being righteousness -- one righteousness after another, and viewed as a garment. What a wife! her clothing composed of a number of righteousnesses one after another, and yet it is not assumed that she could have this of her own right. She is "granted" the privilege. It is the principle of subjection throughout.
In @Revelation 21:9 she is *shown*. The angels that had to do with the rival, that is, the false bride who sits a queen and is no widow -- one of those says, "I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife". And John says, "And he carried me away in the Spirit; and set me on a great and high mountain, and shewed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God". He sees the city, that is to say, the principle in the wife in administration, of being able to carry on in the absence of her husband -- a very important matter, for it is often a necessity that a wife has to administer, has to do the household ruling; and this is the principle of the city; and in the rule, there is the radiation of light. She comes down *from God*. That is another great point, that *she has to do with God*. A wife must have to do with God. It implies that she prays. How could she rule the house otherwise? And this wonderful city illumines the universe and rules over it; the principle of rule emanates from it. But then you see how applicable it is to any wife. She comes down from God out of heaven. She has to say to God. A wife can have to say to God, taking things up with God and on the elevation of heaven. How different from the ordinary custom in young
{258}
wives of following the ways and the fashions of the world in the furnishing and ordering of their houses! Heaven suggests the moral elevation that belongs to the wife in a household in which God is recognised.
And then finally she is "the holy city, new Jerusalem". A great principle has been at work, so that this wonderful city is new Jerusalem, the word indicating that there has never been a Jerusalem like this. There is only one, and she is adorned *for* her Husband. That is the great principle. It is set out in the original creation of man and woman, that the woman is *for* the man, and so the assembly is for Christ; and she is for Him in suitable attire, attire that will endure eternally. She is adorned for her *Husband, not* for public show.
That is all I had in mind, dear brethren, and especially directing one's remarks to our brother and sister; for although these are great eternal thoughts, they may be brought down. Such are the thoughts of God that they can be brought down to the smallest necessary compass. God Himself came down, God manifest in the flesh. God came in in smallness, as a Babe, so as to be with us; and so all His great thoughts can be brought down to bear, as needed, on our circumstances, so as to become formative.
{259}
READING ON @ZECHARIAH 3
@Zechariah 3
J.T. I expect you have some leading thought as to this book.
G.S. We thought that while Haggai would bring home the responsibility of the saints, Zechariah would encourage them. He would bring Christ before us, and show how things are to be met, as the four carpenters met the four great powers. Does Joshua here represent the state of the people?
J.T. Yes, he is the available man. There was not much with him, but in all our gatherings, while there may not be much, there is that which is available, which God would make the most of.
G.S. The four carpenters are not much in men's eyes, but they are the ones who meet the four great powers. We thought this might connect with the fact that the Lord is presented as the Carpenter, perhaps in derision, in all four gospels.
J.T. @Zechariah 2 brings out great prospects: Jerusalem is to be inhabited, and then the young man is to be instructed, which is noteworthy. That is what we look for. Now in chapter 3 we have an available man, Joshua the high priest -- not that anyone should take special offices today, but still there are available men, and God makes use of what there is.
Rem. We have looked upon Jerusalem in the light of the assembly representatively here on earth.
J.T. It should be inhabited. It is an encouraging thing for young men to take account of. The young man is to know these things: "Run, speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein; and I, saith Jehovah, I will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her" @Zechariah 2:4,5. That is very encouraging
{260}
for young brothers and sisters; they are to know these things. However small the gatherings may be among us, Jerusalem is going to be inhabited; and this book makes much of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and that is the thing to which every young brother and sister should aspire, to be one of the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
Ques. So that Jerusalem becomes their chief interest?
J.T. Exactly. Zechariah is full of plain, simple, prophetic admonitions, for he is dealing with the returned remnant. He is not like Isaiah who served under the kings. Haggai and Zechariah are more conversant with remnant conditions, and the grace and sovereign mercy which would recover the people, and they ministered these things to such persons. They are in the good of the things of which they speak. Their statements are plain, and easier to understand than most prophets, for they are in the midst of remnant conditions -- those of a restored remnant, not a worn-out remnant -- conditions such as we are privileged to share now. We are living in the times of a restored remnant -- not such a remnant as is spoken of in the Lord's words to Thyatira: "To you I say, the rest who are *in* Thyatira" @Revelation 2:24; they were hardly out of it; but the Philadelphian remnant were out of it in principle, and the ministry to Philadelphia is more direct and simple.
Rem. Zechariah not only prophesied, but worked with his hands in the building of the house.
E.J.McB. Are there not two great principles in his prophecy: "Return unto me, saith Jehovah of hosts, and I will return unto you" @Zechariah 1:3; then the exercise of the prophet that there should be no Canaanite in the house of God; chapter 14:21? Sometimes in the act of returning, things are brought back which are not suitable to the One to whom we
{261}
have returned. This ministry is calculated to eliminate the Canaanite element from our meetings.
J.T. Very good.
Ques. Is it a constructive ministry?
J.T. Yes, it works out positive things. Joshua is the available man in this chapter, and the most is made of him. The next chapter brings before us the Spirit; chapter 5 the leavening conditions with which we have to contend; in chapter 6 we get the governmental conditions which are favourable in the main. So we see that the ministry is very constructive, and assures the saints in a position reached through the recovery, but with a great outlook. What we ought to see in chapter 3 is the available man, who is here in Portsmouth or any other locality -- the man who is available to help things.
E.J.McB. It is a thing that is *shown* to you.
J.T. Yes; God will help anyone who may be visiting, or seeking to serve, as to what there is for God in any locality, for you want to go on with what there is. God helps us to see the available man. Here he is in a good position, standing before the Angel of the Lord, not thinking about what the brethren may think of him, nor of any great prospect personally. He is standing before the Angel, where things are searched out. That is a man on whom to keep your eye, and with whom to work. Satan says, 'God is going to make something of that man, and I am here to resist him'. In this very city Satan is standing to oppose these men who have the truth. We should be alive to both these principles, the element which is according to God, and the satanic attack. The young people have no idea of the reality of satanic opposition. We come together for our meetings; there are brothers there trying to help, and Satan is against them. We ought to pray for them. The opposition is seen and rebuked; Jehovah says to Satan, "Jehovah that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee!" God's choice comes
{262}
in. It is a very serious thing to criticise brothers who are leading in any way, for Satan is behind the attack against them. We should be prayerful and sympathetic with them.
Ques. Yet Joshua was clothed with filthy garments and standing before the Angel?
J.T. It was well that he was not seeking to hide them. They were all there; everything was open. The Angel is going to be favourable whatever the garments are.
Ques. You mean that if one seeks to be available to the Lord he would stand before the Lord just as he is, and not seek to hide his condition?
J.T. I think that is right. It is a sad state of things, but Joshua hides nothing.
E.J.McB. A man standing for God in remnant times must be characteristically in the light of the times, and prepared to bear the burden of that in his own person. Then he comes out in the light of what the Lord has accomplished. Is not the idea of the brand plucked from the burning divine working?
J.T. Yes, something has happened already. If you go back over the history of the man you see it. The position is very clear. Joshua is standing before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan is standing there in order to be his adversary.
J.F.G. He is a man marked by priestly features?
J.T. Yes, He is called the high priest here. The comforting thing to begin with is what we get in verse 2, "Jehovah said unto Satan, Jehovah rebuke thee, O Satan!" Jehovah is taking the matter in hand.
Rem. Joshua had definitely the good of the people before him, and the glory of Jehovah.
J.T. What is in my mind more is where he was standing.
Rem. You suggest that there is transparency with him?
{263}
J.T. Quite so. The politician is standing before the public; he is thinking of getting the vote; and a brother may be standing before the saints here to acquire a place of teaching, and to get their support; that is a very dangerous thing. This man is standing before the Angel of Jehovah; he is in a safe place. Whatever his garments, the Angel would be favourable to him. All is open, and the position is such that God can have a hand in it. Satan would have a hand in it, but God says, 'You shall have no hand in it'. It is not simply the Angel, but Jehovah Himself who says, "Jehovah rebuke thee, O Satan! Yea, Jehovah that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee! Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?" You are reminded of the whole book of Job. Jehovah is facing the enemy in regard of this soul as a brand already plucked out of the fire. God will do more; He will not cease doing anything that is necessary.
F.I. Why does He say, "Jehovah that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee!"?
J.T. That is His choice. God has His choice on earth today. There is something that He has chosen. The great thought of Jerusalem has taken form in the assembly as a place of light and rule. Zion stands for sovereign mercy, but Jerusalem is a place of light and rule. It is a question of administration. That is what Joshua is for, to carry on the service of God. If you are going to serve, it must be in this city; it is a question of Jerusalem.
F.I. Joshua is standing in relation to that as high priest.
J.T. Yes. Jerusalem is the great thought of light, rule and order. The world is in disorder. What a great thought it is to have a few saints in the light of Jerusalem! God has chosen that. Then we are told in verse 3 that Joshua was clothed in filthy garments and stood before the Angel. We have him standing before the Angel in verses 1 and 3, and in
{264}
verse 7 we have mentioned "these that stand by". Then in verse 8 we have others who are spoken of as sitting before Joshua: "thy fellows that sit before thee". The high priest should have those who should sit before him; he is a man to be respected. So far he is standing before the Angel. That is not the position that is in the mind of God for him. The Angel is representative, he has a charge; severity and scrutiny are called for, and things will be carried out according to his mission. Jehovah speaks Himself when it is a question of choice, but an angel demands that things should be right.
E.J.McB. Jehovah having settled the matter with Satan, the way is left open for the condition to be discovered in the soul, and to be removed according to what is suitable to Jehovah's thoughts for His people.
J.T. If God has something to say to any of us in this city, He will deal with us privately; Satan will be shut out.
E.J.McB. When Jehovah has dismissed Satan, then He takes up the question as to what Joshua is like in relation to the returned remnant.
J.T. Satan makes the most of the filthy garments; and how often saints become his instruments! How often things come up in the care-meeting which should be dealt with privately.
A.M. Is there to be correspondence with the choice?
J.T. God is going to make this man suitable to this place. He has a great thought in regard to Jerusalem, and He is going to make this man suitable. Joshua is clothed with filthy garments and standing before the Angel. He says, 'You cannot say anything too bad about me, really'. If it is true, it is true, and let it be faced, but let not Satan or any emissary of his be present. The thing is to "plentifully declare the thing as it is", @Job 26:3.
{265}
Satan will never do that; he will multiply it.
Ques. If we face it as brethren, would not the desire be to have it removed?
J.T. If love is amongst ourselves you are as desirous as I to have it removed. "Having fervent love among yourselves", @1 Peter 4:8. If it is there, there is no room for the devil. The devil only gets in through an emissary, through some injured brother, maybe.
L.D.M. @Luke 22 shows us that Satan got in there among the apostles.
J.T. Yes; the Lord says, "the hand of him that delivers me up is with me on the table" @Luke 22:21.
L.D.M. Later in the chapter we read, "I have prayed for thee" @Luke 22:32; the Lord is taking the matter in hand.
J.T. What we get in @John 13, too, is a terrible thing that Satan entered into Judas @John 13:27. A brothers meeting should never be like that. The idea is, "Jehovah rebuke thee"; Satan is put out; there is no room for him there. You have the thing faced; there it is, and there is the means for its removal. Jehovah says, 'I am going to do it'. "He spoke and said unto those that stood before him, saying, Take away the filthy garments from off him". There are others standing before the Angel besides Joshua: They are not said to have filthy garments and they are ready to serve him. It is a fine thing to be standing before the Angel, and ready to serve such. "Take away the filthy garments from off him. And unto him he said, See, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I clothe thee with festival-robes. And I said, Let them set a pure turban upon his head. And they set the pure turban upon his head, and clothed him with garments; and the Angel of Jehovah stood by" It is a fine meeting, this, where things are *done*, not left over till the
{266}
next meeting; they are all done. There are people standing by, and He says, Do this. Things are often protracted and let slide among us.
E.J.McB. The thought is that the man should not only be free from the filthy garments, but supremely happy in festival robes.
J.T. That is what the Angel had in mind. Yet conditions are such in this country that nothing is done for three or four years! Where are these men standing before the Angel? Cannot they do anything? Christianity contemplates availability of servants. Why is not the thing done? How beautiful is the thought of these men standing before the Angel! He tells them to do things. What a fine change this is! Now we have a man suitable to Jerusalem. Things will be carried on according to God. All the assembly occasions should be festive occasions. See how quickly the festivity comes in in @Luke 15; the gospel leads up to it. It suggests the thought of thee 'place' about which we have just sung in our hymn: "Thou lead'st our hearts to that blest place". (`178:1).
We are not to wait for that altogether. There is a place here which God intends to be free from satanic influence, where people are clad with festive robes, where the very entrance to that place gives joy. "They began to make merry", @Luke 15:24. This chapter is intended to make any local meeting an attractive place.
E.J.McB. The brethren are the ones who bring the turban forth; they give dignity to anyone whom God raises up in their midst.
J.T. They think of the mind of God for His people. What great thoughts He has for His people!
Rem. "The Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem" -- all springs out of that.
{267}
J.T. It is a question of the mind of God working out.
Ques. Does this give us a view of Jerusalem as the centre of God's interests on earth?
Rem. The word 'turban' may be rendered 'diadem'.
J.T. I suppose the thought in the diadem is the kind of intelligence that belongs to the people of God. The high priest had it. It was the one bit of his vesture that had on it, "Holiness to Jehovah" @Exodus 28:38, @Exodus 39:30; and that means that the mind has no place in the things of God. The leading brother does not trust his own mind. It is a question of a renewed mind, and of "Holiness to Jehovah". It is very important to have "Holiness to Jehovah" on your head. It is so easy to bring the natural mind into the assembly. Nothing is more difficult to keep out.
Ques. Why does it say, "And the Angel of Jehovah stood by" (verse 5)?
J.T. What a fine thing it was! He was seeing this going through. There is to be no discrepancy. The enemy would come in and rob us through any unjudged condition among us.
Ques. So that the "*pure* turban" would be a safeguard against uncleanness of the mind?
J.T. Quite so.
L.D.M. Does the thought of the Angel of Jehovah standing by suggest the divine standard? What is done is in keeping with the divine standard?
J.T. I think the Angel would mean that; he is under charge; as sent, he is representative.
J.H.B. The Angel does not do the thing himself; those who are ready take it up: "they set the pure turban upon his head, and clothed him with garments". Does it suggest that something having been said by the Angel of Jehovah, there is a waiting for persons qualified to take it up, and give effect to it?
J.T. Does that not work out in Bristol or here.
{268}
how you clothe the brethren with divine thoughts? If you are speaking with me, and I clothe you with holy thoughts, you are going to take that on. It is a question of how we look at one another, how we clothe the brethren.
J.H.B. There are persons sufficiently in the current of the Lord's mind to give effect to something He has said.
J.T. The Angel brings in the thoughts of heaven, what existed in heaven before. We do not know much about these great dignitaries, but doubtless the Angel would understand.
E.J.McB. Is that not a feature of the assembly, that it is a great vessel on earth answering to the mind of God? In all our care meetings ought we not to remember that we are being observed by these ministers of God's will, that they might see things moving on earth as in heaven?
J.T. As we have it in 'the Lord's prayer': "Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven". @Matthew 6:10. @Psalm 78 speaks of "the bread of the mighty" @Psalm 78:25. The Lord Jesus would embody all that here; He is the Food of the mighty.
Ques. Where do these clothes come from? Is there the suggestion of a wardrobe?
J.T. Yes; we read of a wardrobe-keeper, in the reign of Josiah; @2 Chronicles 34:22. "The father said to his bondmen, Bring out the best robe". @Luke 15:22. They knew where it was.
Ques. Are these festival robes all in view of service? For the Angel goes on to say, "If thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my charge, then thou shalt also judge my house, and shalt also keep my courts; and I will give thee a place to walk among these that stand by".
J.T. Now you have another thing. The Angel of Jehovah is protesting *unto Joshua*. He has been
{269}
wonderfully served from heaven by those standing by, but now he is put under charge.
E.J.McB. Do we need that? There is much ministry, but what is produced?
J.T. That is good. There is ministry that clothes the saints with dignity, and reminds them of their heavenly calling, but now there is the protesting. The Angel protests to this man who has been served, and served for a purpose, that is, to rule the house of God, "thou shalt also judge my house, and shalt also keep my courts; and I will give thee a place to walk among these that stand by". The Angel had been standing by, and others had been standing by. The protest is, "If thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my charge". There is to be the walk in fidelity.
Ques. Is the power of these festival robes to be seen in our movements?
J.T. Yes, it is a question of walking in Jehovah's ways -- a great thought, that in the midst of a world where bypaths abound, there is the walking in Jehovah's ways. It is a straight path, a highway. This is a question now of what the brother is, not only in the care meetings, but every day.
E.J.McB. If we moved in the direction of taking account of the brethren as pleasing to God, and promoting peace among them, surely there would be conditions which God would promote among us.
Rem. We read in Judges that from the days of Shamgar till the time of the prophetess the highways were unused.
J.T. Yes, Deborah brought in the highways which had been neglected; "until that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel", @Judges 5:7. She is the one who calls attention to the highways. That brings in the sisters; one of the most dignified titles a sister can have is "a mother in Israel". She sat under her *own* palm-tree; she had acquired victory
{270}
for herself, and where you get a sister like that you find that the brethren will not be slow to ask a question of her. They came to her to ask her what to do.
E.J.McB. What an asset to have a godly person who has really reached victory in her own soul, and is amongst the brethren to be enquired of!
J.T. This walking in Jehovah's ways is important.
J.H.B. What is the connection between Jehovah's house and the city? I believe Haggai says much about the house, and little or nothing about Jerusalem, whilst Zechariah speaks far more often of Jerusalem.
J.T. I think the city is a wider thought; it is a place of light, and rule and order. The house brings in affection more.
E.J.McB. Would the city include the great administrative thought of God?
J.T. Yes, and the house the affections that belong to it. The house is where God's affections are known. The city is a wider thought, and secures the house.
J.H.B. Would you say that the city aspect of the assembly and its functions would hardly be right unless the house is functioning?
J.T. The two run together and support one another. The city is the external support of the house. So we come together with things settled. There is nothing unsettled about the city; it is a place of light, rule and order. The house affords room for affections, where we may sit down together in a family sense. There are courts, too; the Angel speaks both of the house and of the courts: "Thou shalt also keep my courts". The brethren ought to grasp these great thoughts of the house and the courts. The saints are viewed as forming a circle of affections where God's love is free to flow out. The rule of the house is necessary to that end, and there is "the law of the house", the house being a sphere where love is, where we view each other as brethren, not only as
{271}
servants. Paul would love to sit down with the brethren, and talk to them, as he did in the epistle to the Philippians, as taking common ground with them. He would love to go over things which are current among us as brethren. Where love is, things can be unfolded and opened up.
Ques. The high priest would be able to take up his priestly service Godward?
J.T. Yes; and then he would not be like Eli who sat by the doorpost of the temple of Jehovah; there is not much priestly dignity in that. The priests had to stand and be on the alert. A true priest of God was Hannah, and she was praying to God, and Eli said that she was drunk. This scripture is to preclude anything like that; it is to help us to have a right judgment about things. Eli was not able to judge. This priest is to judge Jehovah's house, not like Eli, but like Christ judges it. We need to dwell on this thought of the courts, and the place of privilege we are given. That is a great thing. You say, 'God has given me this great privilege that I belong to the assembly, and I am privileged to walk with the people of God. I am *given* that'. The more that you get on in the things of God, the more you say, 'It is all gift'. You say, 'Who am I that I should have a place like this? It is God's gift'. What can be sweeter than the thought that God has given me a place among the brethren here, to walk with them?
E.J.McB. We may well weigh over with exercise the fact that God has given us this place in these last days.
J.T. That is the way it works out. I do not flatter myself that I am faithful, and others are not, but I see that God has *given* me that place.
J.H.B. Whilst that is so, would you not say that God gives this place when certain moral conditions exist: "*If* thou shalt walk in my ways, and *if* thou shalt keep my charge"?
{272}
God does not give the place indiscriminately.
A.M. Is it like following "righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart"? @2 Timothy 2:22.
J.T. Yes. In the prophecy of Ezekiel, in connection with the wonderful measurements in chapters 41 and 42, we get the thought of a walk even in the house itself in the upper storeys -- a beautiful thought, suggesting the highest place of privilege, that I can walk with these great personages. J.N.D. speaks in his hymns of walking in those courts with the saints.
<blockquote>'Nor what is next <br>Thy heart Can we forget; <br>Thy saints, O Lord, <br>with Thee In glory met'. (`160:8) </blockquote>
You say, 'God has given me this place', because the more you are in the sense of heavenly places, the more you feel God has given it to you.
E.J.McB. Then God has put me in this place because this is the thought that He is going to work out with regard to all men.
J.T. Quite so, Heaven is reflected in those who stand by. There are those who stand by. It is a great thing to be prepared to stand by. You may not be able to do much, but you can stand by. Then it speaks of those who are sitting: "Hear now, Joshua the high priest, thou and thy fellows that sit before thee". Certain ones are owned now as with him. They are "men of portent"; they are men to be observed as signs or types. God is setting out something in these men now: "for behold, I will bring forth my servant the Branch". Now we are going to get to Christ. God is going to bring in Somebody else: "the Branch" -- a Man who is dependent. "For behold, the stone that I have laid before Joshua -- upon one stone are seven eyes; behold, I will engrave the graving thereof, saith Jehovah of hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of this land in one day".
{273}
He is now moving on to the thought of the land, and in that day they are going to "invite every man his neighbour under the vine and under the fig-tree". This is going on to the millennial time. How God leads us forward, and covers the whole ground of the truth! How quickly God will bring about His thought -- "in one day".
Rem. All this is to be anticipated.
J.T. Yes, we always ought to have before us the great prospect of what is coming. The idea of the stone with seven eyes is brought in. The 'stone' suggests permanency. There are seven eyes, and in the next chapter there are seven lamps. The seven eyes would bring in the idea of perception. This stone is before Joshua. I think it is a question in any meeting of things being open; let the Spirit of God open up things.
E.J.McB. That is what has come to light in "the Branch".
J.T. That is the idea; Christ is brought in in this beautiful way under the figure of the Branch and the stone. The Branch suggests dependence, the stone permanency, and the seven eyes would speak of fulness of perception. All this is leading on to the cleansing of the land.
E.J.McB. There is power to meet the thing as it is, immediately.
J.T. Quite so.
{274}
LEADERSHIP
@Psalm 107:1 - 8,36; @Isaiah 63:11 - 14
J.T. It will be known to most of us that this psalm begins the last book of Psalms, looking to the recovery and the reinstatement of Israel in nearness to God, carrying on the service of praise; and we have this thought of leadership introduced at the outset as it takes form in the last days, and what the object of it is, that is, a city of habitation, and it results in those who share in the leadership establishing a city of habitation marked by prosperity. Then in the prophet we have leadership of old, leadership at the outset, which is to be compared with leadership in the last days, a gathering involved in it, and what is noticeable is the place the Holy Spirit has in the leadership in the beginning in the prophets -- because "his holy Spirit within him" applied to the leadership -- and then it says, "his glorious arm leading them by the right hand of Moses, dividing the waters before them, to make himself an everlasting name, -- who led them through the depths, like a horse in the wilderness, and they stumbled not! As cattle go down into the valley, the Spirit of Jehovah gave them rest; so didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name". I thought the comparison of these scriptures would help us as to the results of divine leadership and how we are to learn from it all as to how we are to lead in a *right way* amongst the brethren. There is leadership and leadership; but these scriptures show us what leadership in a right way is, to the end that men might go to a city of habitation, that is, a place of order, light and rule, and yet a place suitable to dwell in. That is what I was thinking of.
{275}
E.S.H. It is very much needed, I am sure, that we might be able to lead in a right way.
J.T. If we begin to call our little meetings 'cities of habitation', we may see the force of it more; if they are not that, they are not much.
H.F.N. Will you say a little more as to what is in your mind with regard to that?
J.T. Well, the psalm, of course, opens up the plight in which men find themselves through want of this very thing; one circumstance after another involving distress amongst men. God in His wisdom allows us to go to a point, and then comes in for us -- men are to praise Him for His goodness and for His wonderful works to the children of men. The psalm contemplates all that; and where the saints were -- they wandered in the wilderness, He gathered them; they found no city of habitation -- "Then they cried unto Jehovah in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distresses, and he led them forth by a right way, that they might go to a city of habitation". I think anyone can see that the conditions in verse 7, what is in the mind of God for them, must have been a very great contrast to their circumstances. It is not the deliverance out of Egypt that is in mind, it is a subsequent deliverance. Then He goes back to the deliverance out of Egypt in the prophet to show what a place the Spirit has in it. So that, whilst we accept the kind of leadership that belongs to the last days, we do not forget the great leadership at the beginning; the Holy Spirit had a great deal to do with it, it is a spiritual state of things.
H.F.N. Did Saul in @Acts 9 being led by the hand find a city of habitation?
J.T. I thought so. You would not say Damascus was that. He was to go into the city and there to be told what to do, and he found a city of habitation. He was in a certain house in a street called Straight, and there were evidently living conditions there, light
{276}
came into his soul there, he would begin to see that there was such a thing as a city of habitation. Damascus was not that, for he had to flee from it. Is that what you had in mind?
H.F.N. Yes, that is it.
A.H. Does the city of habitation involve the thought of God being there, like that of which Moses speaks in @Exodus 15 -- He brought them to the mountain of His habitation?
J.T. Well, quite so, that is in mind. I suppose Beer-sheba gives the thought of the city of God. Man's cities had a place before Beer-sheba, that is Cain's and Nimrod's, but Beer-sheba seems to convey the thought of a divine city, having the well of the oath where divine things are gathered into you. No gathering affords such conditions as we were speaking of that is marked by rivalry, where you have to button up your coat, so to speak, where you cannot sit down in quietness and restfulness and assurance. A city of habitation implies that there is security; it is a poor thing if one is not secured from attack when amongst the brethren.
H.F.N. Would you tell us how we establish a city of habitation if God leads us there?
J.T. I think it arises from our discerning the divine mind. @Acts 9 is in view, "enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do". @Acts 9:6. Well, the streets there had names and the Lord had access there, He was free to visit the brethren there, for no human conditions can interfere with the Lord's sovereign movements in that sense. So Ananias goes to Saul and he had some influence with him. Ananias had different thoughts, but he came under the Lord's thoughts and committed himself; he went to Saul and said, "Saul, brother ...". @Acts 9:17. No doubt that would be in Paul's mind in all his later services: he would say, 'Wherever I go in my service I would like to find places like this'; so he ordained elders in every
{277}
city. The apostles chose themselves elders -- they made it a point that they were suitable elders that could be trusted -- in every city.
E.S.H. Not 'an elder' but "elders".
J.T. I think the idea is they were trustworthy. The reading is "having chosen *them* elders". @Acts 14:23.
H.F.N. Does not what you refer to come out very strikingly in this psalm, "Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people, and praise him in the session of the elders"? @Psalm 107:32. Would that bear on what you are saying? Would not that spiritually elevate the thought of our care meetings?
J.T. I thought that, for that is whence the light and order of the city springs. The city takes on the thought of order, light and rule, and choosing them elders in every city would mean there were reliable persons in charge. The Lord if He came would find an entrance, and so would any brother who was in accord with the Lord's mind. John speaks of a state of things in the assembly, the object of which was to cast people out -- that was not a city of habitation.
Ques. Would Jerusalem in Solomon's day be the result of David's leadership? I was thinking of what they said of David, "thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel", @2 Samuel 5:2 and Jerusalem was a city of habitation in Solomon's day.
J.T. I was thinking of the capture of the city of David, mount Zion; then the repair of the rest of the city by Joab would all have in mind to guarantee security, a state of things where the Lord is free to come and a brother can come and feel he gets fair dealings. There is no Joab there to stab him under the fifth rib; that is not the thought of a city of habitation. If you are afraid of certain brethren in the meeting, your life and property are not guaranteed.
Ques. Is it implied in verse 4 -- "they found no city of habitation" -- that they were looking for one?
{278}
Would not all the instincts of the saints look for and value the thought of a city of habitation?
J.T. I do not know of anything to be desired more than that, there is security of life and property -- for what is a city otherwise?
Ques. Would not this be the force and end of Ezekiel's prophecy? It says, "the name of the city from that day shall be, The Lord is there", @Ezekiel 48:35.
J.T. Yes, I think that is right. He was there freely, not merely to keep the peace, but restful. The idea of Zion was that it was where God dwelt. David said, "Until I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob" @Psalm 132:5, that He might be there undisturbedly.
A.H. He had redeemed them from the hand of the oppressors, this psalm says.
J.T. That would mean, I suppose, that He had rights over them. The opening part is to show what God is to us in these last days in the way of gathering us out of the country; but that is only the beginning of things. I believe many a dear saint of God is just feeling his way who has not found this.
Ques. Would it involve true assembly conditions where the Lord has His place and the Holy Spirit, too?
J.T. I think that is in mind. One is restful and not apprehensive of being unfairly dealt with. On the other hand, if one has confidence in the brethren you can commit yourself to them, because, after all, they may have a better judgment about me than I have about myself, and it is a comfort to have that. If I am casting about to discredit the brethren because I think they are not just dealing rightly with me, you may be sure I am not right.
Ques. Do the Songs of degrees contemplate this, leading up to brethren dwelling together in unity, and then God's sanctuary?
{279}
J.T. That is right, that is the point in them, I think. The throne is there for the remnant returning; it is one level after another in elevation. "Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem". What a joy it was to them! They say, "Jerusalem, which art built as a city that is compact together" @Psalm 122:2,3 -- there is no independency, there are no loose ends, in Jerusalem. There are thrones set there, the thrones of the house of David, you will get judgment there; it is a great matter to have that confidence.
Ques. Would the early verses suggest that the city of habitation is not arrived at without deep exercise?
J.T. I think so; the deep exercise is seen in the cry -- "Then they cried ..." it says. That is where revival comes in, when we cry. It says, When they cried "he delivered them out of their distresses, and he led them forth by a right way".
Ques. You were referring to the wisdom of God -- in His wisdom does He allow things to reach an extremity that we might be rightly exercised?
J.T. I think so. I think that is when you get the real gain of a cry in relation to the discipline of God. God feels it when we are insensible and unfeeling as to His discipline.
Rem. The answer comes, "For he hath satisfied the longing soul and filled the hungry soul with good". @Psalm 107:9. Is not that the answer to the cry?
J.T. Yes. The first thing in answer to the cry is, "he led them forth by a right way". How many there are who are not sure, they want the assurance of a right way.
A.B. Have we to really know what privation means first?
J.T. I think that is right. I think God allows us to come to that point where we have need. This psalm tells us the different circumstances in which men may call, and in every case when they cry they
{280}
get deliverance. He will never fail to answer the cry of need -- we may be sure of that.
Ques. Why does it say in verse 3, "from the east and from the west, from the north and from *the sea*", not 'from the *south'*?
J.T. That is significant, for usually the sea is the symbol of the west in the Old Testament; that is, the standpoint is from the land of Canaan, but here the sea comes in as distinct from the west -- "from the north and from the sea", as if that was the south. The sea, I suppose, as in this setting, would be a hopeless situation, where you have no footing. So, however hopeless it may seem to be, you are delivered from it.
Ques. Is it a reference to the scattering among the gentiles?
J.T. It may be, but it is the feeling you have that is alluded to, I think, a feeling of no footing, no ground to stand on -- for what is there in the sea? Of course, it would be all right in a ship, for "those that go down to the sea in ships" @Psalm 107:23; there is some footing there, but there is no ship in mind here. I think it refers to a state or feeling. Many are like that, they do not know where they are; they have no footing or certainty as to anything.
H.F.N. It says they were "redeemed" (verse 2); then they are "gathered" (verse 3); and then they are "led" to a city of habitation (verse 7). Is there a moral order in that?
J.T. That seems to be so. "That they might go to a city of habitation"; in a spiritual sense that would be the saints viewed, I suppose, as according to God, regulated by His light and government, so that the saints take it on there. Spiritually it does not mean, of course, any change of territory, the change is in you, for after all, all that the Bible is dealing with is what goes on in my soul, what men
{281}
will reach in their souls; therefore "a city of habitation" is the way we are brought to look at it.
Ques. Is that all implied in "a right way"?
J.T. Yes. @Romans 7, for instance, is a question of analysis and what goes on inside and it works out in what God effects in my soul, and I begin to look at the saints differently. Many have no idea of the saints but as so many persons. It is no question of the work of God in Palestine or Africa; of course, He does work in territories, but it is a question of what He works in men's souls. So, if I come to a city of habitation, it is a question of what the saints are to me, how I look at them. Then Isaiah, I think, is really on a higher plane than @Psalm 107, for it is a question of the part the Spirit has in it.
F.I. Verse 36 of the psalm says, "he maketh the hungry to dwell", and then the other side is, "they establish a city of habitation"
J.T. That is right. "He maketh rivers into a wilderness", and then, "water-springs into dry ground" @Psalm 107:33; that all alludes to what happens in our souls. "A fruitful land into a plain of salt, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. He maketh the wilderness into a pool of water, and the dry land into water-springs; And *there* he maketh the hungry to dwell". @Psalm 107:34,35. It is a question of a moral process; it does not necessarily mean any change of territory at all outwardly. Outward territory has nothing to do with the building God is carrying on, it is in my soul. If we think of England or America, it is a question of land and rocks; but it is what is in men's souls that is in the mind of God, and I begin to look at the saints in this way, I begin to see myself a part of the thing, of the city of habitation, that I might be governed and regulated by light and rule, the order of God, that implies eldership and the like.
Rem. The expression in Isaiah seems to convey
{282}
that God wished this to be revived -- "he remembered the days of old".
J.T. Yes. What those wonderful days were to Him! They were far more wonderful to God than to Moses or anyone else. It was new experience with God, speaking reverently. Why should not God be allowed pleasure in what He is doing, and even in the reminder of what He had of old! He reminds Himself here of what He had of old, as it says, "he remembered the days of old, Moses and his people". Then the question is, "Where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherds of his flock? Where is he that put his holy Spirit within him, his glorious arm leading them by the right hand of Moses, dividing the waters before them, to make himself an everlasting name, -- who led them through the depths, like a horse in the wilderness, and they stumbled not?" Did anybody ever see that in the wilderness? I mean, Did you ever read that in Exodus? I do not think you will read it anywhere. Who is to get the credit for it? God is to get the credit for it. They go down like a flock to that beautiful valley and rest -- God does that, that is the idea -- God has pleasure in recording all that. That is the kind of thing you want in every town. The credit is to the Leader in Isaiah. It is what God did -- these led people did not stumble. If a person goes wrong; well, he is guilty, of course, but then what about the elders? Why did they not prevent it? In the early days it says God prevented that. He "put his holy Spirit within him", it is a question of leadership. If things go wrong in the meeting have not the shepherds some responsibility? The thought is they keep the people from stumbling; God does it through them.
F.I. No doubt that is where our failure is; we wait for things to develop before having sufficient interest to see what is happening.
{283}
H.F.N. Is not that perhaps one of the greatest needs, shepherd care and service amongst the people of God in our localities?
J.T. I am sure that is the point. Of course there is no diminution of the guilt of a person who causes sorrow amongst us, like Achan; but when Achan's sin occurred, there were more than Achan in the thing. What was Joshua thinking about? and the spies when they came back? They were in a wrong spirit. It is the state of the leaders. Achan was guilty, of course, but the leaders were not right.
Ques. Does the psalm in that way give us the great secret of right leadership -- God leading His people by a right way, and all the satisfaction that results from that? And then in the scripture in Isaiah it is the thought of leadership being in the people, carried on by Moses and shepherds.
.J.T. I think that is the idea, that God provided the shepherds in the early days. Deborah speaks about leaders *that led* in Israel. Now here it is, "Where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherds of his flock? Where is he that put his holy Spirit within him" -- (alluding to Moses, as the note says) -- "his glorious arm leading them by the right hand of Moses ... and they stumbled not?" It is a beautiful passage!
Rem. Moses had the shepherd spirit, the great leader of the people, he was like God in that way.
J.T. Yes. I think the saints learn from the leaders. The book of Acts is really a book of precedents; that is, it is what the leaders did. I would pay great attention to the leaders of our own days, looking back about a hundred years; I should long to know more of them, it is a great advantage to know leaders, "Remember your leaders", @Hebrews 13:7 it says. But then the great leaders are furnished in the Acts and we see what they do, and the ordinary saint takes account of what they do and follows on that line.
{284}
Rem. The leaders in the Acts acted by wisdom; the lack of direct command in the book of the Acts is striking.
J.T. It is very striking; it is not what they were told to do but what they did, and what God effected by what they did. If I heard a leader today I should be affected by it; if I heard him speak to God or if I heard him preach, I should be affected by it.
Ques. Would he be a leader who took the lead well amongst the saints, according to 2 Timothy?
J.T. He was worthy of double honour if he led well. I believe everyone who is in a prominent position amongst us ought to be gravely concerned as to what influence he is exerting. The last book of Psalms is intended to show that the end of the days means continual praise to God; that is the great end of God's ways.
H.F.N. Would you say why, in this passage, so much is made of the Holy Spirit? -- they "grieved his holy Spirit"; then, he "put his holy Spirit within him"; then "the Spirit of Jehovah gave them rest".
J.T. Well, is it not to remind us of what marked Pentecost and successive periods, that all that went on was a question of the anointing; man's will was shut out. Whatever was to be done, if it were a question of providing food for needy saints, well, it was men who were full of the Holy Spirit and faith; if it were preaching, it was by those full of the Holy Spirit; and the Holy Spirit sat upon all of them and they were all affected, and their words and conversation were in spiritual power. What a scene it must have been in Jerusalem! One often tries to picture it. And I believe that is what we get here, that God remembered that. He had part in all that and shows you He had part in it. Perhaps when you were young you were blessed and helped by the Lord, well, why should you not remember that? You love to
{285}
revert to seasons when the Lord blessed you; and why should we not allow the Lord that privilege, that He has joy in what He does? "He remembered the days of old".
H.F.N. Might we link it with the thought in Revelation in connection with the One who led them to fountains of waters of life? Is the passage indicating a return to what we read of in the opening of the Acts?
J.T. Quite so. What a thought there is in that, what richness!
-.B. Will you say a word as to grieving his Holy Spirit (verse 10)?
J.T. "But they rebelled and grieved his holy Spirit: and he turned to be their enemy; himself, he fought against them". But then, "he remembered the days of old" -- He did not forget the joy He had in leading them. The grieving of the Spirit is a sorrowful mark of our own day.
Ques. If there was more shepherd care and oversight as a model for the flock, would there be less stumbling amongst the saints?
J.T. I think that is a lesson for us as brothers. There is to be no diminution of the guilt of those who err, but let everyone take it to heart as to what kind of leading they have had, what kind of example they have had.
Ques. In Philippians reference is made to the "overseers and ministers", @Philippians 1:1. Do you think that is a tribute to them?
J.T. Well, I think that whilst the state of things at Philippi was remarkably good, yet there was perhaps disregard of the overseers and ministers, the saints had to be reminded they had a great place. After all, elders may rule well, and there may be a disobedient state amongst us.
Ques. Do you think that in @John 17, the Lord
{286}
had peculiar pleasure in saying to the Father that of those He had given Him He had not lost any?
J.T. Well, there was the leadership. If anything happens in a meeting you feel the first thing is for a brother or a sister to say, 'Well, what example have I set? Have I done all I could to prevent it?'
Ques. You alluded earlier to @Hebrews 13 -- in chapter 12 it is, "looking stedfastly on Jesus the leader" @Hebrews 12:2 -- is there any connection there? We have come "to the city of the living God" @Hebrews 12:22 in the same chapter.
J.T. Just so. The best of leaders may fail us, but "Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come" @Hebrews 13:8 -- your heart rests there.
Ques. In the chapter just referred to, the very next word is, the apostle says, "Pray for us". @Hebrews 13:18. Is there not often a lack on our part in praying for those who watch over our souls?
J.T. Yes, and in regarding the elder brethren in love for their works sake. There is a good deal of radicalism amongst the younger brethren, I believe, a want of respect for age and experience; but of old the shepherds were brought up with the flock. There is no idea of a hierarchy such as we have in christendom where the leaders never came up out of the sea; the true leaders according to God came up out of death with the rest.
H.F.N. Would that mean they did not bring a single feature of Egypt with them?
J.T. I think that is the idea -- coming out of the sea. It is a new thing altogether, this leadership according to God, for God has "brought again from among the dead our Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep, in the power of the blood of the eternal covenant". @Hebrews 13:20.
H.F.N. Is that what compelled Balaam to say twice, They are a people that have come out of Egypt?
{287}
J.T. Yes, just so, the saints take on that character.
Ques. Is that why it is said of David he was a man after God's own heart, with regard to the position from which he was taken originally?
J.T. Yes. Before he became leader of God's people he had to go down to the valley of Elah, to go down to death in figure and come out of it. "He fed them according to the integrity of his heart, and led them by the skilfulness of his hands", @Psalm 78:72. It is remarkable how these scriptures bind up the saints together, leaders and led, and nobody escapes responsibility if things go wrong. If things go well everybody gets the praise, and it is God making an everlasting name for Himself.
Ques. What would you say is the great and prominent feature to be looked for in leadership according to God?
J.T. Well, I think this psalm helps us. He led them in a right way, you are tested as to whether you know right and wrong -- that is the first thought. "He led them forth by a right way". The question is, Is a thing right? There is right and wrong as to anything that comes up, and the true leader leads in the right way. But then one great mark of leadership is in @John 11, when it was said, "Ye know nothing nor consider that it is profitable for you that one man die for the people" @John 11:50 -- that is a great principle, one man dies for the people. That is true leadership, the way the Lord has led.
-.McC. You feel the need of following a good lead, otherwise where would any of us be?
J.T. The word 'right' is a test. The true idea of leadership began in Genesis; in the garden God placed the cherubim by the tree of life that no one might partake of it in their sins. Is there no way out of it but that the creature God has made for His pleasure must be shut out forever from His presence? The
{288}
answer is that God made coats of skins; death is there and God owned it.
Rem. So, as leaders are prepared to suffer, they endear themselves to the saints.
J.T. Yes, I doubt if anyone is worthy of the name who does not know something of dying, giving way in a crisis, surrendering his own way and his own will.
-.McC. Is it leadership in suffering?
J.T. Pretty much. A man may suffer unnecessarily, of course, for his own faults, still it is the general thought, "he that has suffered in the flesh has done with sin", @1 Peter 4:1.
D.W. The Lord has been through the sea, and, as passing through it ourselves, we experience His sympathy in a wonderful way. Does not the psalm teach that?
J.T. Quite so. Then we get the green pastures -- "He maketh me to lie down in green pastures; he leadeth me beside the still waters" @Psalm 23:2 -- that is His leadership.
{289}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD
@Romans 5:1 - 11,21; @Romans 14:16 - 23; @Romans 15:1 - 7
J.T. I have in mind to speak about the kingdom of God. The Lord may help us to unfold what it is, and how it is entered into, and then how as believers we become a kingdom. It is said in @Revelation 1 that Christ has made us a kingdom. Romans generally opens up the truth of the kingdom for us, and particularly so in chapter 5, where in the last verse we get a formal statement of it: grace reigning "through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord". The formal allusion to it is found there, grace being on the throne and reigning. Thus it is active, reigning through righteousness; the result or end is eternal life; so that in its present form, the kingdom is to that end, eternal life.
I.W.L. Then is "our Lord" a feature of this kingdom?
J.T. That is the formula, a phrase much used in Romans and which conveys the thought that there are those who own Him as Lord. Some do so, but fail to honour Him in it, they fail in obedience; but 'our Lord' is an expression which implies characteristic subjection on our part to the Lord, and also that in the kingdom He is apprehended intelligently by us as administering the bounty of God. A variety of things are enumerated in this chapter all of which have moral sway; they are beneficial to the soul as it bows to their moral sway; they have influence over it.
A.B. Do you mean that "peace with God" is one of the things you have referred to?
J.T. That is one very important item, is it not? "Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ". These
{290}
things come in *through Him*, hence a great feature of the kingdom is the mediatorial character of that which comes through Him, and which carries with it a certain moral authority; just as the sun shining in the heavens has a certain moral authority, symbolising rule.
Eu.R. "Of the increase of his government ... there shall be no end", @Isaiah 9:7.
J.T. Yes, of the increase of it; that is its beneficial character; and is intended to produce an effect upon us. To use a figure, good government has influence in that way because of its goodness. We may have to submit to bad government, but a good government has influence because of its benefits. The kingdom of God is *all* good, hence the moral sway that it exercises where its benefits are appreciated in faith; it is "on the principle of faith". "The principle of" is the translation of a word that involves entering into the kingdom.
First there is peace, and then the idea of access, meaning that the believer, who tastes of the benefits of the kingdom founded on redemption, and brought in through Christ, begins to move. Hitherto he has been passive, except for the exercise of faith, but now he begins to move in his soul. The way the thing is shown to be beneficial and appropriated rightly is that we begin to move. "We have access" -- that is on our side.
J.R. What is the difference between entering into the kingdom and seeing the kingdom of God as the Lord spoke of it to Nicodemus? What would be preparatory to that?
J.T. What is preparatory is the sovereign work of God, without which a man would not move at all in the direction of the kingdom of God; he would never even think of it, although he might receive benefit from it. The light of christianity is a benefit to every one in christendom, but all do not move in
{291}
that light, so that we find men and women going in for the kingdoms of this world, taking their part in voting and the like; that is to say, they move according to the things that open up to them in those kingdoms. Time was when government belonged to a certain class; men in general had nothing to do with it save to submit and share the benefits coming to them through it; but now to a large extent they have it in their hands, and they move accordingly. Seeing and entering into the kingdom of God is entirely a matter of God's sovereign work. One must be born anew to see the kingdom of God, and be born of water and of Spirit to enter into it; @John 3:3,5. That is where @Romans 5:2 comes into it with the suggestion of access or entering. Following on that the Lord speaks of the character of the little child (@Matthew 18:2,3), to show that one born anew and in any way enlightened by the kingdom takes on that character; he is unsophisticated as regards this world, and he is at the call of Christ. Christ can call him, as He called the little child -- as if it were ready for His call, and available to Him. The Lord says, "Unless ye are converted and become as little children, ye will not at all enter into the kingdom of the heavens". @Matthew 18:3.
Ques. I was wondering whether being led by the hand in @Acts 9:8 would fit in there?
J.T. Well, Saul was there amenable spiritually to the Lord's direction, though he did not yet see anything. When his eyes were opened in the house he would understand what he did see; he saw Ananias. Will Ananias represent the kingdom? He himself had come under the influence of the kingdom, but he had been questioning whether Saul should be received at all, and so the Lord had to adjust him; when he spoke to Saul he put his hands on him and said, "Saul, brother, the Lord has sent me, Jesus that appeared to thee". @Acts 9:17. That is the idea: but was
{292}
Saul ready for it? He was, for when Ananias told him what to do he was submissive.
F.I. Is "access by faith into this favour" the practical entering into that into which we have been brought by God's sovereignty?
J.T. It shows that there is the idea of access; you are moving in the instincts of the new birth, you are not always passive. It is well to be passive for a time so that things may come to you, but the moment comes when you may move; the word 'access' implies that.
F.I. What do you understand by the thought of 'the favour'? To what does it refer?
J.T. It is not very specific, but there is enough to indicate that it is attractive. God is favourable, and the throne is favourable. As in the book of Esther the sceptre is held out, All that God is in Christ is favourable, which is an immense thing to get hold of.
Eu.R. When you speak of moving, do you mean moving towards God?
J.T. That is the general thought, but here it is access into favour. It conveys the idea of the benefits into which the soul comes. It is, of course, the favour of God. "This favour in which we stand" suggests that it is a thing already known by some, and it is mentioned here that it might be known by others.
H.E.F. Would it be set forth in Christ, for it says "by whom"?
J.T. Yes, it is a question of instrumentality. The Lord's administration to us by the Spirit conveys to us that there is such a realm as this. The effect of the gospel is that I move toward it. Later, I move toward the holiest, and ultimately Ephesians teaches me that I have access to the Father by one Spirit by Christ. Here it is very initial. There is a realm of favour, and the Lord helps me to see it, and to draw near to it.
{293}
P.J.B. Would that be an intelligent understanding of the divine thought?
J.T. Quite so; Christ helps you in that. Many things enter into this, prayer being one of them. "Behold, he prayeth" @Acts 9:11 is what the Lord said of Saul; it was a commendation. It is well for young souls to have before them the importance of drawing near to God, entering into one's closet to pray.
Ques. Was it through the Lord that Saul entered into the favour which was seen to be towards him in the Lord speaking to Ananias?
J.T. Yes, that amplifies what we have here. Had one asked Saul afterwards how he came into the kingdom of God he would have referred to the service the Lord had rendered him. He would doubtless know what had transpired between Ananias and the Lord. Whatever persons might be used, he would attribute everything to the Lord. The result was the Lord's work.
A.W. And is the access seen in "behold, he prayeth"? @Acts 9:11.
J.T. Yes, he was moving in that direction. The voice from heaven to him would induce liberty in his soul. His name was mentioned -- "Saul, Saul" @Acts 9:4 in the Hebrew language -- which would liberate his soul, and give him to understand that he was an object of interest to heaven. That is a very touching thing. The gospel comes to us just in the same way, and the effect intended is that we might turn and pray. The Lord knew that; He was watching over this soul. Not only has He established the kingdom, but He is leading souls into it; it is through Christ that we enter into the kingdom. He was doing all this for Saul that he might enter into it. Many young people get relief for the conscience, and that ends the matter; they want the world. But if the Lord speaks about you in heaven, how does He speak? If you are on such a line, He would never speak of you like
{294}
this. Of Saul He says, "behold, he prayeth". @Acts 9:11. That commends one to heaven. Then it says here, "this favour in which *we stand*". This is a challenge as to whether we are really standing consciously in favour, because the idea of the kingdom is that we have access into it.
T.E.W. 'Boasting' would give the thought of a distinct sense of activity.
J.T. "We boast in hope of the glory of God" -- it shows there is a certain sense of victory. You say, 'What a place I have come into! What things are mine!' God, Christ, the Spirit, the saints, and the other things that you find in this chapter -- all this induces such boasting; it makes the believer buoyant.
Ques. Why is God brought into the epistle to the Romans? Is He the One to whom we are responsible?
J.T. You understand that God is in every overture. "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth" @Genesis 1:1; it was an overture, a movement on His part. Then, chaotic conditions arising, the Spirit of God hovered over the face of the deep. That is God, but God in His Spirit, meaning that He is there feelingly, and near the state of things, so as to give us to understand that He is near us, feeling for us. That is the idea in Romans which unfolds "the gospel of God ... concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord", @Romans 1:1,3. It is a very touching thing that God moves towards us, and however backward we may be in our souls, He would say, 'I am there by you; I know all about it'. He hovered over the face of the deep, brooding over all that was there. He would give us to understand that He is conversant with the matter, having first-hand information as to it. The epistle to the Romans shows us God coming in, understanding perfectly how things are in our souls, and then setting up this kingdom. In the very opening of the epistle it speaks of "the gospel of God ... concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord". @Romans 1:1,3.
{295}
A.B. So that in Saul He has secured one who is in the good of the recovery. Conditions that came out in Adam are reversed, and Saul is in the joy of that recovery.
J.T. That is the thought; he is delivered out of the chaos. Is that how you preach the gospel?
A.E.M-o. I would like to.
J.T. It is a question of being delivered out of the chaos. God draws near, and then it is for you to draw near; He makes it attractive.
Rem. It is magnificent grace.
Eu.R. So that the convert should get God definitely before his soul, and begin to move on this line of access.
J.T. That is the thought. Then the boasting: "We boast in hope of the glory of God". That brings out what the conversation of christians is characteristically. If you analyse the ordinary conversation of the brethren, what do you find? Do we speak about God, or about the things of the world, or about ourselves? Here it says, "we boast in hope of the glory of God" -- not in *our* glory, but in the glory of God. God is to be glorified, and for that we are hoping. It is soon to take place publicly; that is our prospect.
Eu.R. Paul's converts were to turn from darkness to light and from Satan to God, and receive remission of sins and an inheritance.
J.T. The idea of turning is very important. The gospel has in view that we should turn. While our ordinary conversation should be marked by this boasting, the assembly is properly the sphere where this is fully effected and amplified, where we speak of and to God, and of His glory and the hope of it.
Ques. Is the true thought of conversion set forth in @1 Thessalonians 1?
J.T. You mean turning to God from idols? Just so. I have no doubt that we should have found this
{296}
whole chapter unfolded and amplified in Thessalonica if we had gone there. It is said that they were "beloved by God" @1 Thessalonians 1:4 -- a remarkable testimony to their lovableness, and to the way they had taken up the gospel.
J.R. Would the "eating and drinking" @Romans 14:17 be Judaism, and "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit" be christianity?
J.T. The expression "eating and drinking" is what the chapter is dealing with. One might eat things that would be offensive to a young christian's conscience. It alludes, I think, to what is material, and nothing else, because what the apostle is dealing with is the danger of partaking of these things if they were tainted by idolatry; it might stumble young christians. I do not think it stands in contrast to Judaism there, but it is a question of ordinary meat and drink of which anyone might partake.
Ques. Is "eating and drinking" material, and "righteousness, and peace, and joy" @Romans 14:17 more a moral thought?
J.T. Quite so; "the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking"; it is not material food. Paul speaks of certain "whose god is the belly" @Philippians 3:19, they would think only of what they ate and drank, whereas that is not the kingdom of God at all; "the kingdom of God is ... righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit". @Romans 14:17 We want to come to that. Are we that? Because we are said to be made a kingdom. If a man is stumbling the saints by anything of this kind he is certainly not a part of the kingdom.
Ques. Were you going to say something about the favour in which we stand? Would that precede boasting in hope of the glory of God?
J.T. Yes, that precedes the boasting. If we have a sense of favour we have something to boast in; but this boasting is "in hope of the glory of God". We are thinking of how God is going to shine out
{297}
by and by in His glory; what a subject of boasting that is! It is really God apprehended in the gospel.
H.E.F. Do you mean that what is now taking place in our souls is going to take place publicly -- God has already shone in one's soul?
J.T. Quite so; the gospel is the shining out of God. It is said to be "the glad tidings of the glory". @2 Corinthians 4:4, @1 Timothy 1:11. There are many forms in which it is presented to us, the idea being that God is apprehended in it. @Romans 3 alludes to the holiest in the tabernacle in the wilderness. God was there; the mercy-seat was the lid of the ark. He is called upon in the Psalms to shine forth: "Thou that sit test between the cherubim, shine forth. Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, stir up thy strength", @Psalm 80:1,2. Ephraim was in the rear of the tabernacle, on the western side; the ark was there immediately inside, and God is called upon to shine forth on the tribe there. The epistle to the Romans is all the shining forth of God.
H.E.F. Would you say that as our souls are in the shining out of God in the gospel so we would move into the kingdom?
J.T. Yes, it becomes attractive to us. If we are born again, we have characteristically divine instincts, and God is attractive to us, so that the attitude of our souls is Godward.
Eu.R. In chapter 3 it says, "All have ... come short of the glory of God", @Romans 3:23 but here we boast in hope of the glory of God. Would that be the work of God in our souls through Christ?
J.T. That is an excellent contrast. @Romans 3 shows how we came short of the glory of God, and now, according to @Romans 5, we are boasting in hope of it. We are essential to that glory, for the assembly comes down from God out of heaven *having* the glory of God. That bears on the suggestion that the saints are themselves a kingdom. @Romans 12,13,14 and 15 develop this thought of the saints being
{298}
constituted a kingdom; their influence toward one another and toward all is after that character.
A.B. Would the secret of it be "the redemption that is in Christ Jesus" @Romans 3:24, redemption being the basis of it all?
J.T. Yes, the allusion being to the type of the mercy-seat upon which the cherubim looked down. From that position it was that God spoke to Moses in the wilderness, and it became known as "the glory". Glory shone; it was God shining out. "Whom God has set forth a mercy-seat" @Romans 3:25 refers to that, and it forms the basis of that glory.
F.I. What is the difference between boasting in hope of the glory of God, and our boast being in God (verse 11)?
J.T. I think the latter is a deeper and greater thought: "not only that, but we are making our boast in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom now we have received the reconciliation". Receiving the reconciliation is a further thought, but it is included in the gospel and means that I receive the thought of being pleasing to God through redemption. God is pleased with me as having faith in Christ; He has taken me up in the sense of pleasure.
F.I. That is, not only are you in the good of being, so to speak, part of this great system connected with the kingdom, but you realise your position in relation to God personally.
J.T. Yes, to God Himself. That is a good point to bring up, because in our service Godward we rightly speak much of Christ and of what He is to God, and we offer Him to God; that is perfectly right, but God loves us to say something to Him about Himself.
F.I. Does "through whom now we have received the reconciliation" mean that we have entered into the truth that we are so pleasing to God, that we can draw near to Him?
{299}
J.T. That is right; it gives you fresh assurance in drawing near. The nearer you get to God, the more sensible you are that He loves you. Reconciliation conveys the idea that God loves us. He selected David because He loved David; the first time he is mentioned he is called "David", which means 'beloved'. God loves us; He has brought us into accord with Christ, and He loves Christ. Reconciliation is the extension of this thought as made good in the saints.
Eu.R. What about the love of God shed abroad in the heart?
J.T. That follows after the boasting, "Not only that, but we also boast in tribulations, knowing that tribulation works endurance; and endurance, experience; and experience, hope"; and so on. Other things are now brought in. You might say, 'It is all very well to boast in *hope* of the glory, but I am full of tribulations; they are rolled in on me'. Each one of us experiences that as a present thing. How do you look at them? What is in view is moral superiority in all our circumstances here. That makes for being a kingdom, because if I am above my circumstances, I can help and influence others; but if I am weighed down by circumstances, I cannot help anyone; I am likely to discourage others. If a person is able to boast in tribulations it is a great moral victory. To say that I am pleased when I am experiencing tribulation is one of the things of which we know least. It is a question of moral victory, a change has come into my mind through my knowledge of God. I understand that everything that comes to me from God is for my good, though it may be grievous at the time. Paul tells us that he besought the Lord three times to take away the thorn in his flesh; but the answer came, "My grace is sufficient for thee", @2 Corinthians 12:9. Paul says, 'I bow to it; I do not ask any more for the thorn to be taken away' --
{300}
"Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities ... for when I am weak, then am I strong". @2 Corinthians 12:10. The thorn was a tribulation, but it made him more powerful than he was before.
P.J.B. Would knowing the end in tribulation and pressure help us to boast?
J.T. Yes, that is the idea, as it says here, "knowing that tribulation works endurance", etc. How do I know that? Because I have come through it; it is a knowledge gained by experience. Paul says to the Philippians, "I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content", @Philippians 4:11. That is like knowing that tribulation works patience.
H.D'A.C. Do you know that it is true unless you have been in the tribulation?
J.T. I think not; that is what Paul was thinking. It is experimental. The opening verses give us the positive side, the favour and the hope of the glory coming in by and by. In verse 3 the apostle begins to speak of these adverse things. The point is to bring in moral victory, to show that the believer is superior to his circumstances.
Ques. Would this tribulation be in connection with the testimony, or with the circumstances in which we find ourselves?
J.T. Anything and everything that arises in the government of God. The government began with driving out Adam and Eve from the garden, setting the cherubim with the flaming sword to guard the way of the tree of life. Anything that arises after that in His government, whatever it be, finds the believer superior. That I am superior to my circumstances is a great moral victory.
F.I. Does that depend on what follows: "because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts"? Are these things -- tribulation, and so on -- boasted in as a result of what has been wrought in our souls in relation to the love of God?
{301}
J.T. Quite so. The person who is speaking knows: "knowing that tribulation works endurance; and endurance, experience; and experience, hope; and hope does not make ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us". The word 'knowing' is an important one to bear in mind. It is a question here of what you have learnt.
F.I. Is there not a difference between learning God in our circumstances, and being able to enter into circumstances as having already learnt God? Is not the latter the great thought -- then you can boast in God in relation to it?
J.T. Quite so. This is where I am afraid we all go astray, because the adverse things are often regarded as being against us, whereas the believer learns that God is for him, and that nothing can be really against him. Caleb and Joshua said of the big men in Canaan: "they shall be our food" @Numbers 14:9; that is, the difficulties will be food for you; they will bring strength of soul to enable you to overcome them. In the conflict that you are going through you find that God is with you.
Rem. Such would be in the good of the kingdom.
J.T. Quite so; we are now becoming useful as taking on kingdom character. God has made us a kingdom that we might influence others. We influence people either for good or bad. If we are unable to go through tribulation in the way here described, we might discourage.
Rem. In that way we more than conquer, through Him that loves us.
J.T. That is right; so in @Romans 8 it says, "we *do* know that all things work together for good to those who love God". @Romans 8:28. They may seem to work for bad, but no, they work together for good. All these things become workers, effective servants, from this point of view.
{302}
W.L.C. I should like to know how, in relation to our circumstances, you link up the two thoughts of all things working together for good to them that love God, and the love of God shed abroad in our hearts.
J.T. I think chapter 8 gives us the full development of the thought; you are on higher ground there: "all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are called according to purpose". @Romans 8:28. *You* are on the line of the knowledge of God, as loving Him, and you are on the line of His purpose. We ought to notice that: we love God now. Chapter 8 shows that what we have been considering in chapter 5 is effective; the love of God shed abroad in our hearts is now turned round, and acts in us towards God. The purpose of God being introduced in chapter 8 places all on a higher line.
Eu.R. Would you say a little more as to our being made a kingdom?
J.T. I want to come to that in chapters 13 to 15; but first let us note the last verse of chapter 5, where grace reigns, i.e., the kingdom of God to, or in view of, eternal life, a realm lying outside and beyond all such things as tribulations. The apostle runs on from verse 12 to verse 20, where he says, "law came in, in order that the offence might abound; but where sin abounded grace has overabounded, in order that, even as sin has reigned in the power of death, so also grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord". @Romans 5:20,21 is a verse to be noted. We may wonder why God allowed so much in the history of Israel from Sinai to the cross. A harrowing history it was! What an exposure of man in circumstances designed by God for that very purpose! Nowhere is man so morally exposed as in the history of Israel, in which are detailed so minutely the circumstances and the exposures of the flesh. God has taken such pains to
{303}
bring out what sin is for christians to see it. Sin has abounded in Israel. The law brought out, as nothing else could, the abounding of sin, and the cross is the culmination of it. The perfect presentation of God's love in Christ has only made manifest murderous hatred on man's part. But there where sin abounded, grace has overabounded. The abounding of sin is to bring out what grace is; in spite of all that man is, grace is on the throne; grace is reigning, not simply as an abstract principle, but as an active principle. It reigns efficiently and absolutely "through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord".
H.E.F. Do I understand that if we do not come into the good of the kingdom, we are not likely to enter into eternal life?
J.T. That is true; that is the setting of this last verse.
F.I. Do you speak of the joy of eternal life as a present joy?
J.T. Quite so: grace reigns "through righteousness to (or unto) eternal life"; it leads up to that.
H.E.F. Where do we see the sphere of the enjoyment of eternal life today?
J.T. In the assembly; it is more or less present in our meetings as being the atmosphere among the saints whenever they are found together in a holy subject way.
Ques. Do you confine it to the assembly?
J.T. In the main; it is a spiritual sphere. Not simply am I made to live, but I am made to live in a sphere and order outside of things here.
F.I. It is a sphere where the life that has been received can be enjoyed in a scene of death.
J.T. That is right. The next chapter tells us where it is. Chapter 5:21 presents the thought of eternal life as being brought to us: grace reigns "through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord"; it is made effective *through* Christ;
{304}
whereas in chapter 6 the preposition is changed: "eternal life *in* Christ Jesus our Lord" @Romans 6:23. That is where we apprehend it. It involves a certain sphere where the saints are together by the Spirit. We know it; the atmosphere where we are found in this place is quite different from the atmosphere in the street; it is even different from that which is in our houses, because we are here in relation to Christ; we are here as "in Christ". All that is unsuited to the thought of life is shut out, more especially when we are in the assembly and Christ is before us.
H.E.F. I was wondering whether you would get a little taste of it on an occasion like this.
J.T. That is one idea at least of these meetings -- the atmosphere we come into and the enjoyment that we find is of an entirely spiritual kind. We are here together, not socially, but spiritually.
Ques. Is it the result of being of the kingdom?
J.T. The kingdom includes these meetings because of the great moral influence that they exert. The influence that we exert over one another is due to God having made us a kingdom. What would the young people do if they had not these things? The influence that others exert over them is very important.
Eu.R. Making us a kingdom is essential if we are to enjoy eternal life. The last verse of chapter 5 is clearly the kingdom.
J.T. It shows the end that the kingdom has in view. But in chapter 6 we read of "the act of favour of God, eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord". @Romans 6:23. It is given to us "in Christ", showing it is a fixed position. All that is "in Christ" is available in the realm of the Spirit. It is more here the status of eternal life, enjoyed as "the act of favour of God", and on the line of purpose.
C.E.W.B. Would you say a bedridden saint would be able to enjoy it in spirit, though not able to be present at the meetings?
{305}
J.T. Quite so, but there are measures in things. God sets out His things in Christ. Things that are in Christ positionally are in the assembly relatively, because the assembly is His body, and the things that are in Him all become effective practically in the assembly.
J.R. So we must be established in the epistle to the Romans to understand the assembly.
J.T. Romans is fundamental; that is the reason why I thought we might have it today so as to see what the kingdom means, and the end in view, namely, eternal life; and that we might also see how we are constituted a kingdom, which is perhaps seldom thought of amongst us. The apostle John says that Christ "has washed us from our sins in his blood, and *made us a kingdom"*, @Revelation 1:5,6. We ought to understand this. How do we influence other people?
Ques. When the Lord Jesus was here, was the kingdom seen in Him, and is it now to be seen in the saints?
J.T. Quite so. He could say, "the kingdom of God is in the midst of you" @Luke 17:21; wherever He moved about, there it was, and there its power and influence were exerted. It is now extended to the saints.
W.R.P. Having "made us a kingdom" @Revelation 1:6 would bring in the thought of unity.
J.T. I think it does; it is a collective idea. It is a very practical matter, that we have that sort of thing here in this city; not only persons having individual influence, but there is a power in the saints for good, and that power and the benefits of it carry moral weight and authority. These things are brought in by the presence of the saints. You bring the persons in. If a man is stumbling another saint, he is not acting in kingdom power, he is against the kingdom; but if I am thinking in love, I say, 'That is the brother for whom Christ died: I must do everything
{306}
for him because he is weak'. That is how kingdom power is exercised. Chapter 15 begins: "But *we* ought, we that are strong, to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves. Let each one of us please his neighbour with a view to what is good, to edification. For the Christ also did not please himself; but according as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproach thee have fallen upon me. For as many things as have been written before have been written for our instruction, that through endurance and through encouragement of the scriptures we might have hope. Now the God of endurance and of encouragement give to you to be like-minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus; that ye may with one accord, with one mouth, glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ". That conveys what is meant by the statement that we are made a kingdom. It is the very opposite of oppressing or disregarding a weak brother. The whole of chapter 14 deals with caring for the weak brother. Chapter 13 relates to the kingdom that we come into, not to any external kingdom centred in London or any other capital. We pray for those in authority, but only that we might not be hindered by the external kingdom from working out our own kingdom. We pray "for kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty", @1 Timothy 2:2. Thus the whole world benefits by the kingdom of God. Everyone should understand that he is set here to be a benefit, not only to the brethren, but to all.
Rem. In that way the gospel would be presented to men as we are in the good of the kingdom.
J.T. Quite so; there is a testimony. There is a power here that can help souls.
R.M.B. Is that why David would not have Shimei's head taken off though he was cursing him?
{307}
J.T. David was in the power of the kingdom, and the result proved that he was right.
Ques. Would you say that the fact that this kingdom is in existence prevents Satan from taking control of the world altogether?
J.T. I think it does; there is "he who restrains" and "that which restrains", @2 Thessalonians 2:6,7. I have no doubt the kingdom of God is included in "that which restrains".
Eu.R. Does it all result in praise to God?
J.T. That is what we get here.
Ques. You said just now it was in a meeting like this that we had the enjoyment of eternal life. Is it only in a meeting like this?
J.T. It was pointed out that eternal life can be enjoyed in a meeting like this. Its position is in Christ, but it works out amongst the saints. The atmosphere for it is here, because the saints are together in subjection in a holy way; they are not here with fleshly feelings; that may enter into our social affairs, but in a meeting like this we are together in a holy attitude that affords conditions suited for the atmosphere of eternal life. We are here to help one another; we are here together with Christ before us. We might sit together and say nothing, yet we could enjoy the place, the atmosphere, the feelings of affection that are the result of the presence here of the Holy Spirit. As the hymn says, "By the Spirit all pervading". (`14:5).
{308}
SPIRITUAL KNOWLEDGE -- HOW IMPARTED
@John 1:38,39; @Acts 19:9,10; @Acts 18:11; @Acts 11:26
These scriptures taken together, or even severally, convey the suggestion of which I have in mind to speak, namely, the impartation of spiritual knowledge. I read from John with the object of setting out the general bearing of the subject in these days of ours, for we have often remarked to one another, and no doubt all recognise it, that John's writings have the last days in mind, and it is noticeable that teaching has a distinguished place with him, especially in his gospel. It will be remembered that even "the teacher of Israel" @John 3:10 addressed the Lord as "Rabbi", and added, "we know that thou art come a teacher from God" @John 3:2. That is a word that enters into the present time, and, indeed, has marked divine activities for a hundred years or more, but particularly for the last hundred years -- the idea of teaching from God. The idea of teaching acquired a place in the early history of the assembly. Spiritually it had a great place in the apostles with the Lord, but it acquired a place later as arising from the felt need of the religious leaders to keep abreast of the teaching of the world, so that philosophy and vain deceit were allowed a place. John would shut them out, and Paul would shut them out, as we learn in his letter to Colosse; but they found an entrance, and have retained a hold on the leaders of christendom ever since, and never more than at the present time. So that the thought of "a teacher from God" as you can see, has great significance in John's gospel, especially as spoken of by the one whom the Lord speaks to as "*the* teacher of Israel". @John 3:10.
These disciples of whom we have often spoken to one another -- the Lord's first disciples -- addressed
{309}
Him as "Teacher" or "Rabbi", and the Spirit of God is careful to tell us in a very formal way that the word signifies "Teacher", being thus interpreted so that there should be no mistake. Hence the Lord acquired amongst men the title spiritually -- as, indeed, is general with divine titles -- as the outcome of human experience. Divine titles are without exception set in that way; they arise from human experience -- human experience, of course, in which God has part; for any other experience is of no value, nor does God respect it. Experience with God has always an outcome which God respects, and from the very earliest days, according to the Scriptures, this feature appears; as, for instance, the name 'Jehovah' when first mentioned by Eve arises from her experience; she says, "I have acquired a man with Jehovah" @Genesis 4:1, as if she experienced His help. So in John's gospel the principle of naming what we experience spiritually is in evidence; in fact, if one experiences a thing rightly, if one has to do with a thing intelligently, one ought to be able to name the thing. It is when one names it that one shows one has profited by it. The hearts of these two disciples were touched by the beautiful words of John the baptist as he looked on Jesus as He walked. It is a beautiful illustration of the influence that we may exert, as we have spoken of today. John influenced his own disciples, not only by his words, but by the tone of them. He was affected himself, and his disciples left him and followed Jesus. Jesus saw them following, and He says, "*What"*, not 'whom', but "What seek ye?" And they said, "Teacher, where abidest thou?" The meaning of the word *they* used is then explained to us carefully, meaning that in their souls they wanted to be taught; although touched in their affections, they needed teaching, and they felt it, and they said, 'Lord, where do You dwell, or abide?' That is the first thing they enquire.
{310}
I mention all this, dear brethren, that we may understand that divine education involves not only from whom, but *where* we learn. Even although it may be the very best teaching, it may be affected adversely by the whereabouts, by the surroundings; so that the enquiry of these disciples is instinctively right, and it should be reflected in every young disciple today, everyone whose heart is drawn to Jesus: "where abidest thou?" The Lord says, "Come and see". That is another mark of John which is to be observed, that he expects us to move. Stationary christians are discredited in his eyes, for armchair christianity is abhorrent to John, and indeed, to the Scriptures. He contemplates that if you are affected you will move. Hence the Lord says, "Come and see" -- one of the finest words you get. Elsewhere we are told that certain who were affected by the testimony of Christ came to Jesus, but they found a man, the man out of whom the demons had gone, sitting, clothed, and in his right mind. He was at the feet of Jesus. He is an example, and example is a great matter. These who came to Jesus found the man, and his attitude and clothing are spoken of. The obvious suggestion is that you would sit down by him, sitting, clothed, at the feet of Jesus. That is the place to learn, and you learn in company with others. But here the Lord says, "Come and see"; He invited them, and they came: "They went therefore, and saw where he abode; and they abode with him that day. It was about the tenth hour". John gives us these details. No doubt the idea of instruction is there; that is what is in their minds, and the Lord will never disappoint anything which is in our minds if it is according to Him; He will always gratify it. That was in their minds, and we may well infer, dear brethren, that there was something in the way of teaching; but the point that I would make is the surroundings, where it was, where He abode. He
{311}
could easily have told them the street and the number of the street, as we are told elsewhere, but it is no question of the number; it is "Come and see"; it is a spiritual thought.
In pursuing a little further what comes out through John in regard of this matter, I would call attention of the sisters to this question of teaching; and, without being critical, I would say here, dear brethren, that our sisters would do well to notice what John records about this subject in his gospel; because many are apt to leave the teaching, say, to brothers, taking in a little, perhaps, here and there; but to sit down and learn divine things systematically is not very common with our sisters; perhaps not with any of us, but certainly not with our sisters. They are not allowed to speak in the assembly or teach, but that is no reason why they should not sit down and learn systematically. That is what Mary of Bethany did; she learnt systematically, even in the presence of opposition and severe criticism; she sat at the feet of Jesus and listened to His word. It is not a matter of asking the Lord some particular question: sisters are very apt to do that; they want a particular question settled; but the point with Mary of Bethany was that she listened to what the Lord was saying; whatever it was that He was saying was of moment to her.
John does not record that, but he records another incident which is very creditable to her as an example. Her sister Martha who complained so bitterly about her, according to Luke's gospel, was intelligent as to the fact of the Lord's coming to Bethany; she says to Mary, "The teacher is come and calls thee", @John 11:28. How becoming that the Teacher should call for one who had been accustomed to sit down and take in and appropriate what He said. "The teacher is come", says Martha, "and calls thee". Martha had heard the most wonderful things from His lips
{312}
just then, and she broke off the conversation by a wonderful confession, "Yea, Lord; I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, who should come into the world" @John 11:27 -- a fine confession -- and then she went off in haste to Mary secretly, and says, "The teacher is come" -- what a wonderful fact it was -- "and calls thee". Is there a christian on earth whom He does not call? I do not think so. He is knocking at the doors of christians in the world in order that He might come in and sup with them, and they with Him. "The teacher is come and calls thee": @John 11:28 there is not one here to whom that does not apply. The Lord has an interest in every one of us in regard to this matter.
So with another Mary, Mary of Magdala, out of whom seven demons had gone, she also, according to @John 20, calls the Lord in Hebrew (as is probably the original rendering), "Rabboni", @John 20:16 as if she would appropriate it to herself, and there again we are told what the word means, although without the same formality or stress as in @John 1; it is simply said here that it means "Teacher". The Lord is risen from the dead, and is speaking to her, and she says, "Rabboni".
You see that what I am speaking of at the moment, I am saying to the sisters. These are remarkable examples of christians in the early days who learned systematically, and expressed their appreciation of what they learned by the titles they gave the Lord -- though Mary of Magdala changes the word somewhat, she does so, not by accident, but with some purpose -- but it is left in a general way as meaning, "Teacher". The Lord would speak to our beloved sisters here and everywhere as to this great matter, that we might become instructed in the whole system of truth, the truth of the gospel, and of the assembly, too, the truth of the heavenly calling. We must not be content with anything less than the whole range of truth.
{313}
Now I want to go to the book of Acts because it deals with the early days. John deals with the last days, and he has a beautiful way of presenting things informally and affectingly with the intent that we should get these things into our souls; without our knowing it, they are there; but in Acts we get the beginning, and, of course, the word always remains in its freshness, however late in the dispensation. John indeed tells us that Jesus went back to the Jordan after the Jews had surrounded Him and their efforts to take Him were prevented, He went back to the place where John baptised at the first, meaning that He went back to first principles, not to begin over again on another line; and "many believed on him there" @John 10:42, showing that He had material to go on with. "Many believed on him *there*"; that is the best place in which to believe on Him, where He began, where the heavens opened on Him, and the Holy Spirit was seen coming down, and the Father's voice was heard saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased". @Matthew 3:17. That is the place to which the Lord went, and "many believed on him there". John asserts that; the book of Acts has that also in mind, so that the writer begins by speaking of "all things which Jesus began both to do and to teach" @Acts 1:1; what He did comes first, and then the teaching, the idea being that you have the things presented concretely in some person or persons, and then you have the teaching. The teaching is to open up what the things mean. Abstract christianity does not pay any attention to what is done, but only to what is in the creed, but you want what is done first. If the creed-maker is able to do the thing, then let him teach. True christianity is in the doing, and the teaching opens up to you what is meant, what things are.
So in Ephesus, where, under God, the apostle's greatest success was, he entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews three months: but they
{314}
were hardened and disbelieved and opposed. I want you to take notice of this, because it is one of the things which is important for us at the present time: that is, Paul separated from the synagogue; he separated himself, but he also separated the disciples. All teaching today should be marked by that: we are to be separated from the synagogue, both the teacher and the disciples; his effort should be to detach them from the synagogue. You say, 'The synagogue? There are not many in this country!' I am not speaking of the literal synagogues, but of Judaism, of Judaistic teaching and influence. Let us not be deceived, beloved brethren; there is a great deal of Judaism amongst us, and it is impairing the teaching, it is beclouding it; that is, right things, things which are right in themselves, are taken up and applied wrongly, they are applied unspiritually, they are applied severely, too severely; we stand for a right principle, and ignore the state of those to whom we would apply it. So that Judaism becomes the most specious kind of opposition. The teaching is not opposed openly, but it is vitiated and thus damaged by Judaism. That comes out in @Acts 19; the apostle not only separates himself, but the disciples. Every teacher, if with God, would seek to separate the disciples from the synagogue. The next thing is that he met daily in the school of one Tyrannus. We have often alluded to this man, the school-master. It was the school of one Tyrannus; it was *that* school. It is as if the apostle says, 'I abominate Judaism, and I leave it, and I want you to leave it'. The disciples were separated by him; no doubt they were willing to be separated, but it was his action, and it was also his action to lead them into the school of this one Tyrannus, and there to teach them for two years.
The suggestion in all this is that the reception of spiritual ministry or teaching is not optional with any
{315}
of us. The Lord highly resents optionalism in this matter; it is very prevalent, as if I can lay a thing aside or overlook it or ignore it with impunity; but you cannot do that. You will come to grief in this school if you do. Tyrannus will not tolerate that. The idea is that there is rigour in the teaching; the whole course must be gone through if you enter into it, because if careless, or negligent, or indifferent, your example will affect others, and this is abominable to the teacher. So Paul stayed there two whole years, and we are told that he reasoned -- he reasoned the truth into their souls. It was so urgent that they should be clear of Judaism and of Jewish influences. But it is also urgent that any careless or wilful christian should be likewise subdued, and that he should see that he is dealing with eternal things, and the things of God. There is no option as to it; it is imperative for us to learn these things. There is not one of us (I would include myself) who is not liable to fail as to these matters. One is conscious of being so careless as to let the most precious thing pass without looking into it and appropriating it, and enriching oneself by it. That is why I read @Acts 19. Paul continued at Ephesus two years. Elsewhere we are told that he stayed in the place three years. The result was that not only in Ephesus, but all in Asia heard "the word of the Lord", @Acts 19:20 not 'the word of God'. The position is a military one in @Acts 19. It is a question of "the Lord", not exactly as we have it in Romans, but rather in a military sense, as "the captain of Jehovah's army" @Joshua 5:15; because Ephesus is the great battleground for the truth. Paul says, "I have fought with beasts in Ephesus", @1 Corinthians 15:32. That was not said of any other place. Satan marshalled his forces to oppose him in that place. It was "the word of the Lord", and all in Asia heard it. What a fine testimony sounded out: "the word of the Lord". It is
{316}
very like the trumpets of Jericho sounded by the priests; they brought down the wall. The wall fell as Israel shouted, meaning that Israel is brought into the testimony. The beautiful, clear sounding-out of the testimony from the rams horns brought Israel into it, as at the command of Joshua they shouted that shout of victory, and the walls fell flat without Israel having to strike a blow. Ephesus means this. Other things, of course, enter into it, but it is a question of the Lord, of the authority and military power and skill that He has. In @Acts 18 it is not 'the word of the Lord' but "the word of God". Chapter 18 deals with the wilderness; it is a tabernacle chapter and deals more with the local assembly. It is, as I might say to be simple, the brethren here in Cardiff. It is no question of heavenly places, but of the order of God in the wilderness conditions into which God can come, and where He may be found by any exercised person. How important a matter this is! So it is "the word of God"; and I want to show, dear brethren, that this is what is taught us in a general way. You will observe that according to this chapter the apostle also left the synagogue, but he secured the ruler; he robbed the place; he broke it up in that way. It is a question of the power of the testimony. He went into a house instead of the synagogue -- a beautiful thought, for *there* he could be found. Indeed, at the end of this book Paul is found in his own hired house, meaning that he had full right there; he paid his rent. That is, in a general way, how we are down here. How could we be in this world save as God opens up ways and means so that we can be here as righteous persons? You cannot have God with you unless you are righteous, unless you pay your rent and your debts. He remained in his own hired house, and then he received all who came to him. What education was to be found there! The most profound,
{317}
the most spiritual, the most exalted of his teaching issued forth from that hired house, and anyone going there found an entrance. There was no idea of it being shut up, as the Vatican is shut up today, the occupant of which is only great as he keeps out of sight. Paul was ready to receive anybody. What did they see there? The reflection of Christ in that suffering martyr for the truth, in one who was ready to unfold the deepest things of Christ to any who came. It says he received *all* who came to him. That is the position in these last days. Here in Corinth Paul entered into the house of one called Justus; so he was in a favourable position, and the scripture says he continued there for eighteen months, six months less than is mentioned in regard to his stay at Ephesus. I mention these months and years because of their importance in this matter. Our christian education is not a daily matter; it is a long matter; it is a university course, beloved, if you will pardon my using that common word; and it is not optional. It says he was eighteen months there, just as it says the Lord had told him that He had much people in that place. He discerned what was in the Lord's mind. It was not simply that He wanted a lot of people; He does want numbers, of course -- the counsels of God require numbers -- but that is not the point. It is not a question of one or two hundred brethren together, but that they should be formed, organised and built up as by an architect. That is the idea. Paul says, "as a wise architect, I have laid the foundation", @1 Corinthians 3:10. He discerned the Lord's mind. The Lord told him that He had much people in that city, and that no one should set upon him to hurt him. He was to go on, and he did so; he gathered up the Lord's thought, and he stayed there for eighteen months, as much as to say, 'I will not leave this place till I have them all, and till I have them all formed and regulated by the thoughts
{318}
of God set out in the tabernacle'. What are these thoughts? They are set out in "the word of God". "The word of God" conveys the mind of God. It was a question of the mind of God at this particular time in regard to this particular people in Corinth. How dreadfully degraded they were! It was a most wicked city. Paul had already secured some, Crispus and others, but there were still others to be secured, and the apostle settled down to get all these people and form them into an assembly, and this he did with marvellous skill and patience. They were formed into an assembly, addressed by him at the beginning of his first epistle. Does he address them as individuals? No, he does not address them as an assembly of believers in Christ but as "the assembly of God which is in Corinth". @1 Corinthians 1:2, @2 Corinthians 1:1. That is what is taught. He remained there eighteen months, and *taught* the word of God. Has not that a great application at the present time? Thank God for the number 'in fellowship', as we say, but what about teaching the word of God as that which opens up the mind of God at the present time, showing what is the assembly in Cardiff or Newport or anywhere else, so that the thoughts of God can take form in these places? I do not limit it to that, of course. "The word of the Lord" is more a heavenly thought in @Acts 19: "the word of God" is the mind of God taking form in the presence of evil, so that God may be here, having a place in which to dwell; how great a thought that is, dear brethren, that we may have tabernacle conditions in these last days! How can that be without the word, and without being taught? Paul continued there eighteen months teaching among them the word of God. What wonderful Bible readings and addresses they must have had! But he made no outward show at all; he says, "my word and my preaching, not in persuasive words of wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power", @1 Corinthians 2:4; "that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us", @2 Corinthians 4:7.
{319}
That is what he had in mind; so he deliberately determines what to bring before them; he says, "I determined not to know anything among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified", @1 Corinthians 2:2. One is reminded sometimes of the places in Ezekiel's pattern of the temple, the places for preparing food. A very good suggestion for those of us Who serve, or attempt to serve, the Lord and the saints is to find out the place for the preparation of food, So that the right thing is measured and presented; so that we take account of the kind of need there is, and of the capacity of those served, that "the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us". @2 Corinthians 4:7. They were formed into an assembly. Paul says, "Ye are ... God's building" -- not mine, but God's; @1 Corinthians 3:9. He was the architect, but they were God's building. Let every saint understand he is part of God's building. Surely no one would want to be out of it. How can one be in it? By being *taught* the word of God. It is forced through to the mind. It is a mental thing, spiritually so. The mind receives it as it is forced into it, so to speak, by power.
My closing thought is in @Acts 11. It is Paul's introduction to us as a teacher, as one who would teach with another brother. That is another important thing for all Who serve, to be able to teach and serve with another, it may be to take the second place. The apostle John is an example of that for all of us; he is a brother Who can take a second place. That is the ordering of God; it is always "Peter and John" when they are mentioned together. Peter was usually the speaker, but John was there. You may be sure he was not silent, but they are beautiful as seen together. We read, "Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion" @Psalm 48:2, but never was anything seen in creatures so beautiful as
{320}
in Peter and John when they went up to the temple to pray at the ninth hour. It was a beauty far exceeding any of the beauties that shone in that temple. The Beautiful gate was there, of course, but where was beauty such as that seen in Peter and John, two men actuated by love for Christ, and for souls, too, under the authority and guidance of heaven. So they say, "Look on us", @Acts 3:4 two brothers moving together thus, the one taking the second place.
Paul is introduced in that way to us in this chapter as sought out by another brother, Barnabas, who had already met him, and had measured his capacity. Evidently Barnabas was a brother who could think of others, and not of himself only, and of their measure of potentiality in ministry; and so he went and sought out Saul. There is a work going on; nondescript brothers who had been scattered and were preaching went to Antioch, and got great results. Then Barnabas was sent from Jerusalem to them, to go as far as Antioch to see what was going on there; and he came and saw, and knew what was needed, and he said, 'Saul is the man', a beautiful example of unselfish and unjealous ministry. He might say, 'A fine opportunity for me!' But no! he says, 'Saul is the man for this'. He evidently discerned the grace of God in that young brother. The eyes of heaven are looking around today for young brothers with potentiality for ministry, not pushing ones, but persons who have to be called out, sought out; and you may be sure, someone will find you, some eye will see you. Heaven has already seen you, and from the very beginning has called you. When the hour is come for you, you will be promoted. Heaven has a wonderful way of doing it.
Barnabas sought out Saul, and found him, and he brought him to Antioch. You would have liked to hear them talk together as they went that long way to Antioch. Having arrived there, they
{321}
taught for a whole year a large number of people "in the assembly" -- that is how it should read, meaning that now you have arrived at that great initial thought of ministry, of teaching. The Spirit of God presents at once the leading features, that is, not only the teachers, but the place. It is not now a dwelling-house, or an unnamed place as in @John 1; the thing named here is called "the assembly", one of the most dignified words used in the New Testament. The teaching went on there month after month for a whole year; the whole cycle, winter, summer, fall and spring are all gone through. These two brothers lived the whole year round with these dear saints in Antioch, and taught them in the assembly -- a very remarkable word; for Paul says later that he taught from house to house at Ephesus; @Acts 20:20. Here it is a question of setting out the principle, that it is in the assembly that the teaching goes on. Now, dear brethren, not many of us understand this. The Lord has had this up constantly among us, that we might understand the assembly, and as regards this matter, of which I am now speaking, that we might understand it as the place of education, the place at least where Christ teaches us, for He is the Teacher through whomsoever He may use. He is the Teacher, and His place of teaching is in the assembly. Hence the importance of knowing the assembly, of understanding the import of it, and of frequenting it, so as not to be absent when anything is occurrent. It is a time of teaching. Every meeting will unfold something, some thought from the Lord that is required for us in our education.
That is all I had to say, dear brethren, and I hope all will understand, and see that it has a great bearing at the present time, specially for young christians, not only as to who teaches them, but as to where they are taught, and as to diligence on their part so as to get every bit of instruction that is available.
{322}
SOWING
@Genesis 23:17 - 20
The gospel presents great generalities, that is to say, great truths that are applicable to all, but it also presents specialities. And so you find with Abraham the purchase of a field, a field that I believe will yield a greater crop of fruit than any field, that is the field that Abraham bought of Ephron the Hittite with current money of the merchant. It was a definite transaction on both sides. It had reference, beloved brethren, to the burying place of the lovers of Christ, of the dead in Christ. You will observe in reading the well-known chapter which treats of the subject of the first burial recorded in Scripture, that much more is made of the field and the cave than is made even of the dead saint, that is Sarah. Not that she is not spoken of as she should be, for Scripture is not only verbally accurate but spiritually accurate, and so we find the years of the life of that dear saint of God, that sister, who is classified among the holy women of old -- a model sister. The Spirit of God dwells upon the years, not simply of Sarah, but "the years of the *life* of Sarah", @Genesis 23:1. She is the seed, but what is in the mind of God is the life of that dear saint, the years of the life mentioned twice, as you will observe, in that verse -- "The life of Sarah was a hundred and twenty-seven years: these were the years of the life of Sarah". @Genesis 23:1. She is the first to be sown in this field; she is one of the dead in Christ. It is well for us, dear brethren, to face this matter of dying in Christ. Blessed are they, it says later, "who die in the Lord from henceforth" @Revelation 14:13 under certain circumstances. It is blessed to live in Christ -- "the years of the life of Sarah" -- it is blessed to die in Christ -- "to depart, and to be with Christ" @Philippians 1:23 indeed.
{323}
Sarah is the first, as I said, to be buried, to be sown in that field. Jacob refers to it, and refers to others who joined her, the great family of the dead in Christ who shall rise first. What a crop will appear! I am using the agricultural term because Scripture does. Scripture makes the clearest possible statement as to the dead in Christ, that the dead saint is "sown in corruption" @1 Corinthians 15:42 -- a very sorrowful consideration, and yet it has to be faced -- "Sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruptibility". "Sown in dishonour" -- a word we had better note, too; whatever our ancestors, whatever our distinctions in this world, king or beggar -- "sown in dishonour" but "raised in glory". @1 Corinthians 15:43. What a crop, beloved, incorruptible persons standing up in that field, as it were, honourable, glorious persons come up out of that sowing standing there side by side. "Sown in *weakness*", @1 Corinthians 15:43 we are told, for it is really a question not of breathing out but breathing in -- "Sown in weakness, it is raised in power". Think of these things put together. "Sown", again it says, "a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body". @1 Corinthians 15:44. Put these four things together, dear brethren, and you will become encouraged to face death if it be the will of God that we should die. And it is the will of God -- that is the thought of the death of the saint in Scripture; Moses, who represents the ministry, standing out pre-eminently as dying by the will of God. He went up to die at the direction of God. So that these four things put together in our souls as a matter of faith enable us to face death, to face it victoriously, because of our knowledge of our faith of the operations of God that raised Christ, for Christ is the first-fruits -- again an agricultural term, as I may say -- "Then those that are the Christ's at his coming". @1 Corinthians 15:23. What a glorious prospect enters into that field. The Spirit of God stresses that the money was weighed out by Abraham, "four hundred shekels of silver, current with the merchants" @Genesis 23:16
{324}
-- there is no question about it. It is a question of what the Lord Jesus has secured now, a right of way for the burial of His people where they are watched over, where He can find them, where He will know where to go to get them. He will stand and call them out and they will come out, they will come out in incorruption, in glory, in power, and as spiritual. What an army, what a family, all in accord and correspondence with Christ the first-fruits -- "those that are the Christ's at his coming". @1 Corinthians 15:23. And indeed we are told, so as to make it more glorious -- "they lived and reigned with the Christ a thousand years". @Revelation 20:4 "Blessed and holy he who has part in the first resurrection". @Revelation 20:6. I am speaking of this because it is so necessary that we should face this matter as real christians, real believers, real men and women of faith as believing in the resurrection, believing in Christ risen -- Christ the first-fruits "then those that are the Christ's at his coming". @1 Corinthians 15:23. Therefore, as I said, what a field!
{325}
WASHED ROBES
@Acts 15:14; @Revelation 7:4,9 - 17
These scriptures speak for themselves, and they speak plainly, particularly in regard to what I have in mind, that the gospel is a *call*, not only that God should have men's ears, but that they, as hearing His call, should *move*. The gospel proposal is not to set men, women and children up in relation to their former circumstances. The call is that you might move out of these circumstances in your heart and mind and your outlook; for any truth He intends not only to relieve us, but to set us up in circumstances in which He Himself is pre-eminent.
The gospel has been reduced in quality and in object, whereas the Lord would retain it as He presented it; and among other things He intended it to be a call out of whatever men may be found in. The call is *out of;* for instance, James says, "Simon has related how God first visited to take out ... a people for his name", @Acts 15:14. Much was before this remarkable assembly at Jerusalem; it was called on account of certain evil teaching having been introduced among the gentile converts by certain men who went down from Jerusalem to Antioch. It was a very important occasion, the only occasion in fact of its kind ever owned by God. It was what is popularly called a church council; there have been many since -- history records them -- but in no case has there been any indication that any of them was authorised of God, this being the only one that bears the stamp of divine approval. It was the first and the last, a council called to decide on matters of doctrine, and a decision was reached that was satisfactory and effective. No other decision has ever been reached in a church council that has either been satisfactory
{326}
or effective spiritually. This council was; and in proceeding, James stands up and addresses it, elaborating and enlarging on what Peter had said, and among these things was this remarkable statement -- that God had visited the nations to call out of them a people for His name.
You can see how very different this is from what has now come about among the nations. What has come about is that nations have been christianised, not converted. I can scarcely use the word 'christianised' for anything genuine. What has happened is not genuine. Nations to the extent of 500,000,000 of inhabitants have been christianised. One of the largest of them has recently withdrawn, at least officially -- that is Russia -- from christendom, showing that it was whitewash, and so it is with all the nations. They have been christianised, but they have continued on as they were before, with very little difference in conduct or in outlook; there is no thought whatever of a people taken *out* of them. But that is the divine thought; what James had in mind, and Peter too. When Peter was sent for to come to Caesarea by Cornelius as under divine direction, he went; first he hesitated, but God prepared him so that he went, as I might say, with spiritual alacrity, and he had a remarkable reception, and preached a remarkable sermon, but he did not finish it. God was listening to that sermon perhaps as to no other -- it was the message that was calculated to appeal to the gentiles, and the appeal was effective; so effective that God gave the Holy Spirit to the audience, no confession being called for. If I were to speak to some young people here after this preaching, I would talk about confession; I would urge upon anyone exercised about his soul to believe in his heart that God raised Christ for our justification, and to confess with the mouth the Lord Jesus, for confession is necessary; but Peter's address was so
{327}
received -- whether Peter saw it himself or not -- God saw it, as it is in every case, and so gave those who heard the Holy Spirit. If it were a question of any of you who has not confessed Christ merely going to heaven, merely being the companion of Jesus in paradise, there would be no need of confession. Faith in Him is sufficient, belief in the heart in Christ risen brings righteousness; you are accounted righteous on that principle, and qualified to be with Christ. Of course, one should confess, but the point is that belief in the heart in Christ risen constitutes one righteous.
These listeners, Cornelius and his company, to the apostle Peter's address, made no confession as far as the record goes, until they got the Spirit. That is to say, God dealt with them according to what was in their *hearts*, and why not? God knows the heart as well as the mouth; His eye penetrates the heart as He hears the articulations of the mouth; and He deals with a person according to that, and so these listeners to the address of Peter received the Spirit as they sat there and listened. It was while Peter was preaching they got the Spirit. They were all those that God had in His mind, a people called out. Not that Cornelius was asked to give up his office as a Roman soldier, not that the pious soldier mentioned was asked to resign his place in the Roman army -- they were secured for God; having in their hearts believed the testimony, they were secured in that sense for God as they were. They might retain their offices, they may continue in their vocations, but their outlook was changed, their hearts were given to Christ, God has secured them through the gospel. They belonged to the called-out ones, and as having the Spirit they were included in the assembly. Indeed, the word 'assembly' implies that it is composed of called-out ones. If there is anyone interested in what I am saying, it is a call for you. You may
{328}
continue in your vocation and be more righteous than ever you have been; your heart is changed, your outlook is changed, you are bought with a price, you belong to God, you are taken out from the nation, from the city and the association in which you have been; and that was what Peter had intimated in the council, and what James confirmed, that the gospel is a call, and a call to those who hear to move out.
Persons known as Freemasons listen to the gospel, or Foresters, or those of other unhallowed associations, and the idea is that if God's voice is heard in their souls they are to move, they are not to stay in these associations. God is not saying that He will not bless you if you stay there, although He is conveying to you that if you remain there you are not where salvation is; you may get light there, forgiveness there, but you are not getting on, nor will you ever become of any value in the assembly or in the testimony. He has called you out, "a people for his name". He says, I am going to relieve you of every conscience trouble, every heart trouble that you have got -- the Lord would undertake for you that way -- but He says, I *want* you. God wants you, and has visited the nations to take out of them a people for His name. Think of the grace of God coming Himself to the many countries of the world for this purpose! It is urgent with Him, it is necessary to Him, and hence the gospel call. As I said before, the word 'assembly' ('church' in the Authorised Version) implies a people called out, a coming-away from the associations in which you have been. God wants you, and He is urging that He should have you now; for a great purpose eternally -- but immediately -- for His name.
Well, I illustrate all this from these verses in Revelation. I have read them because of this identical expression, "out of". First of all, in verse 4, John says, "I heard the number of the sealed ... 144,000".
{329}
Now you may say, that is not a great number; nor is it, but the chapter does give a great number, indeed, it speaks in such a way as to satisfy every one who has any idea of numbers. What the number is that God will have is such as to exceed the mind to compass -- the number of the redeemed; so that this 144,000 is not a great number in that sense, but it is a very great number morally, it is the number that *God wishes*. You may enquire, Is it a question with Him how many? It is a great question with Him, and it is a solemn thing for you if *you* are not included in His number. The idea of number is a very important matter with Him. How could He make a universe except on the principle of measure? He is "the God of measure", @2 Corinthians 10:13 and so all must be measured on that principle with Him, even to a hairbreadth; there must be no discrepancy or loose ends in God's measures or weights, and so here He has 144,000. This is, I might say, an arbitrary number. No intelligent christian would assume that this is the actual number of those who will be saved out of the tribes of Israel; it is a *symbolical* number, a number that conveys the idea of manipulation, that is, it is *usable*, a number that can be easily divided and sub-divided, so that God can carry out His thoughts. In this sense divisibility implies that *love* exists in the persons numbered -- that they are entirely at God's disposal. Thus 144,000 is God's number, and it is taken out of the tribes of Israel, 12,000 out of each tribe -- *taken out of*.
We must not assume that all Israel, in the sense of each person, shall be saved. The *nation*, as such, shall be saved indeed; it is specifically stated that all Israel in this sense shall be saved. The Jews are going back to Palestine today in considerable numbers, but yet they are going back in unbelief, but no one would say that all these are going to be saved. They are going back to the open field, as it were, not
{330}
within the limits of the city of refuge, see @Numbers 35:9 - 28. I am not saying that the movement is not answering to the divine mind, but prophecy says they will go back in unbelief. There will be a terrible tribulation, as the Lord Himself announced (@Matthew 24), but some will be saved and that is what this passage means. God will have His Israel, He will have His number. And in regard to those redeemed generally, on the principle of sovereign selection, God is going to have His number, and this is a very solemn fact for anyone who is not yet saved -- whether you may be omitted, or whether you may find place in that number. You might say -- Well, if it is in the counsels of God I have got to have a place, why should I be anxious? I cannot tell you that, nor can anybody but God Himself inform you as to this. It is for *you to be sure* that you are one of that number. The gospel is for you tonight, and your responsibility is to accept it. As you do, you prove that you are of the elect. The gospel is that the elect may "obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus", @2 Timothy 2:10. That is one side of the position; the other is that God "will have all men to be saved", @1 Timothy 2:4. Thus the gospel is preached to all, and if you refuse it you are refusing the salvation that God offers you.
And so I come down to verse 9 of our chapter. It says no one can number this vast multitude. God alone knows. And it does not say that they are sealed, so many out of each country; they come out of every country, and kindred, this vast multitude, and there is not a word of any sovereign selection. In the early part of the chapter we have selection, but the latter part gives you human responsibility. This is seen in what these people do; they "have washed their robes, and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb" (verse 14). *They did that;* it was as they believed the gospel. They are not spoken of as concerned as to whether they were among the
{331}
elect; they knew they had filthy garments, as it is said in the Old Testament, "all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags" @Isaiah 64:6; they came to that knowledge and *they availed themselves of what was available* -- the blood of Christ; that is the wonderful provision. The blood of Christ is still available. Christendom will be left in the darkness of unbelief, and God will send a delusion, indeed it has begun now, and it is, therefore, an exercise for everyone to face -- have you washed your robes in the blood of Jesus? You see, this great multitude did it. The elder does not say they were evangelised, he does not say they were sealed sovereignly, he says they washed their robes; they availed themselves of the blood of the Lamb, and washed their robes in it. That is the position here tonight; God presents the blood of Christ for you, and if your robes are not washed white, you should do it tonight through faith in His blood. This is what you see in this vast number of people. John says "after these things I saw, and lo, a great crowd, which no one could number, out of every nation and tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palm branches in their hands". They have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. That is what they did. There is not a word here in this respect as to what God did. The earlier part of the chapter is what God did. The servants of God are sealed with the seal of the living God, but there is not a hint of that here, it is a question of what they did, and that is the example for every sinner here. Hence the question -- What are you going to do with the provision that the gospel proposes for your soul? The number of those who washed their robes is immense; the elder says no man could number them. God knows -- infinitely so. He is the author of mathematics, and here is a number that no ordinary mathematician can figure.
{332}
But how glorious is this immense number of people! One by one, they all have washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb. I am not saying there must not have been preaching. I am not saying there was not teaching or evangelists; no, I know there must have been a work of God. I am speaking of this number, one by one, washing their robes in that blood of Jesus: why not you, here tonight, if you have not done so? Just do what they did, they washed their robes and made them white, they did it well. One loves to think of the thoroughness of what you get in Scripture; here they made them *white* in the blood of the Lamb.
And then they stand before God -- and I say more: they did not stay where they were when the light reached them; they are "out of". You see, it is out of nations and tribes and peoples and tongues. Every one of these has come out of his nation, his tribe and his kindred, and they are all together, and they are before the throne of the Lamb, clothed with white robes and palms in their hands; they are before God.
Now that confirms what I said at the beginning; it is a question of moving out, and you are now before the throne. The throne is a great idea in this book; it is a question of God taking up the administration of the world and these people are all standing there before it: as if to say, "we are for the throne, we are not now advocating the rights of our respective nations, we are thinking of God, we are thinking of His throne, we are thinking of the Lamb". That is the position, that is exactly what most of us here tonight have before us. We are before God as having come *out*. This immense number of people are occupied with God as the passage goes on to say, "they cry with a loud voice saying, Salvation to our God who sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb". How befitting! How victorious! They have palms in
{333}
their hands, a symbol of victory. They are saying, "Salvation to our God who sits upon the throne ..." they are meaning that God should be victorious in His great conflict against evil, and that is what every true christian is saying now, everyone who is in the fellowship of God's Son. And then an the angels come into this -- I want the young people to see the magnitude of what I am presenting -- it says, "all the angels". Who can count them? No one. We read of myriads, the Lord will come presently with the holy myriads. We read of "ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands" @Revelation 5:11. "And all the angels stood around the throne, and the elders, and the four living creatures, and fell before the throne upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and strength, to our God, to the ages of ages", @Revelation 7:11,12. Let us take this into our minds, dear brethren, at this meeting here tonight: where souls come into blessing -- as accepting the provision that God has made, the cleansing virtue of the blood of Christ -- the angels come into it, they celebrate with us, they think such results of the death of Christ very wonderful. They celebrated as the foundation of the earth was laid, but this is greater. You get more of the angels in this book than in any other, they are so sympathetic with God in what He is doing, and as to ourselves "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?" @Hebrews 1:14. Every one of us here as a christian is an heir to salvation, and these angels are attendant upon us. That is the position, and it is very wonderful; it should appeal to every young person here who has not washed his robes in the blood of Jesus -- do it now! "Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be saved". @Acts 16:31.
Answering John as to this white-robed multitude
{334}
the elder says, "These are they who come out of the great tribulation". Some of you may be holding back because you are afraid of what will happen to you at the office, workshop, or school; I know of young people who held back till they left high school and college, and there may be some who have this in mind here tonight, but you are missing it; tribulation goes with faith in Christ, it is one of the workers that God provides for the believer -- "tribulation works endurance", @Romans 5:3 and you need it. The apostle Paul says to a remarkable set of young christians, "through many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God", @Acts 14:22 and the elder says these people have come out of great tribulation. A believer is at school and the other students may deride and sneer at you; heaven is looking on to see how you stand it. I know well enough how keen the suffering is, and so in the office and in other places, but heaven is watching you -- are you going to bear it victoriously? Can you stand a sneer? If a christian does, he is stronger after it than before. Going through such exercises makes you stronger than you were before. You are qualifying as a "good soldier of Jesus Christ". @2 Timothy 2:3. These things are allowed by God, but they are *limited*. The Lord says to Smyrna, "ye shall have tribulation ten days". @Revelation 2:10. Not eleven -- they will come to an end.
Then you get most cheering things said about these washed ones. How honoured and privileged they are! "Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple, and he that sits upon the throne shall spread his tabernacle over them. They shall not hunger any more, neither shall they thirst any more, nor shall the sun at all fall on them, nor any burning heat; because the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall shepherd them, and shall lead them to fountains of waters of life, and God shall wipe away every tear from their eyes". Are these not wonderful things divinely permitted to
{335}
be proposed to believers? -- they are. God is appealing to some here as to what He has got for you, and He presents to you this vast throng out of all nations seen as appropriating what He provides and sharing together all these blessings -- why not you? Even if they are outwardly very few -- why not you? Peter who would make much of a "few" (@1 Peter 3), would, as it were, magnify the value of a few when they are in the right against the multitude, as at the Deluge. There were but a few saved then, but how privileged!
That is all I had to present, and I ask the Lord to bless it.
{336}
"WATCHMAN, WHAT OF THE NIGHT?"
@Isaiah 21:11; @Isaiah 62:6
These verses in chapter 21 will be familiar with many, as they are much used in the gospel testimony, and rightly so, and I have read them particularly to call attention to the obvious spiritual meaning of Dumah, connected as it is with Edom, that is Esau. It describes a state of soul in that nation -- Esau being the twin brother to Jacob, and of whom it was said that the elder should serve the younger, and who in time became in character an antagonistic enemy of God's people, although related to them after the flesh.
Now the state of silence prevails, hence the burden of Dumah, which means silence; not silence in regard to ordinary affairs and the usual conversations current in the world today, where they will talk about the weather, the nations, wars, and all such current topics, but silence in regard to God -- silence in regard to eternal matters, as is seen in thousands and millions of people today throughout christendom.
The word, as I said, describes a state. It is the burden of Dumah. Is it perhaps the burden of some parent here, whose boy has no interest in the things of God, whose girl would rather go to the theatre than hear the word of God? The burden of such hearts is great. It is a question of indifference to God -- they will talk of anything else.
It is a remarkable thing that the papers are full of trifles, filling page after page, so proving that the editors and proprietors of papers are feeding a certain state of soul. Correspondingly magazines and current published books, in great volumes, are of a most trifling character. This current trifling state of soul is in men, women and children. They have no
{337}
interest in the things of God, no interest in the welfare of souls, the eternal welfare of souls. They will talk of football, tennis, horse or boat-racing and all these matters that are in themselves really nothing, they occupy the general mind at the present time. The soil is most sterile, yet God is not giving up.
Is there anyone here who would call out of Seir, who would inquire as to the night? Not the latest game or the newspaper, but "Watchman, what of the night?" The voice is serious, it inquires what of the night, and the watchman is awake -- not taken up with the trifles that are current at the present time, he is the watchman, the representative of God, the watcher of souls, and here he hears the inquiry from Dumah. Someone is awakened, someone is affected by something serious, maybe the loss of his wife, taken from his side suddenly, or perhaps sudden incurable illness of self, loss of position -- any such things God uses to pierce the soul hitherto so adamant to the overtures of God.
The soul wails, but he calls to the watchman, he knows whom to ask. Many go to the wrong man. There was Naaman, that man of great distinction in his country, but was a leper -- that loathsome disease. He heard the watchman, heard of the prophet in Samaria through the little domestic maid in his house, and instead of going to the prophet, goes to the wrong man; he went to the king of Israel, to the wrong man.
The devil diverts many with patent medicines, making no headway, like the woman that suffered of many physicians and only grew worse. This cry is directed to the right person, this wail from Dumah. He is the watchman of God, connected with Jesus in heaven as the great Watchman, and another Watchman, the Spirit of God on earth. All the servants of God are ready to hear and to help. So the watchman says. "The morning cometh, and also the night". @Isaiah 21:12.
{338}
He did not send back the message, 'Why do you ask of the night?' Young people look for the night; from the morning they look forward to some place of amusement for the night, the devil always being busy providing something for the evening, and the inquiry is, "What of the night?"
This cry from Dumah is not about that. There is a solemn sense of judgment pending, he has the sense that something will happen, is awakened to the seriousness of no response to God, something pending, something that has to be met, and nothing to meet it with but a load of sins upon his shoulders, a misspent life, and something to answer to God for his history of lawlessness, worldliness, and disobedience. How are you going to meet it?
The watchman said, "The morning cometh". We say the morning has come. The instructed christian knows the morning has come for the soul that cries to God, for Christ has been dead, and has been raised again for our justification. Therefore being justified by faith we have peace with God, and have access to the favour wherein we christians stand. There is no night for us in this sense. We are standing in divine favour through His blood.
The Philippian jailor addresses a question to the watchmen of God, those sufferers in gaol with their feet in the stocks, and inquires of them how to be saved. The answer was unequivocal, far beyond the expectations of the jailor. "Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house". @Acts 16:31 What an answer to the night that was indeed in his soul. Silence to God marked him, that cruel Roman jailor, who mitigated in no way the suffering of those prisoners. Now the light of God comes in, and he is now inquiring. His soul was in darkness, but at last he knows he is lost.
Is there anyone here who has never accepted the
{339}
fact that he is lost? You will all remember in @Luke 15 how it is said about those things lost, the lost sheep, the lost money, the lost son, all are lost and all found. Now maybe someone here has never accepted himself as being lost. *We* do not know, but God does. In @2 Corinthians 4:3 it says, "But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: in whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not". @2 Corinthians 4:3. If Satan has succeeded in blinding the eyes of a soul till he dies, he will be lost for ever.
In @Luke 15 we have not only the lost sheep, lost money, lost son, but all found, all being found and saved. That is what this meeting is for. If there is anyone here who accepts this in their own soul, and is honest about it, there is hope for you. The next question will be, What can I do to be saved? You want to be saved. The apostle Paul says that the gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes, and most here belong to this class. To us the cross is no reproach, we love it, it is the power and wisdom to us. As soon as you accept a lost condition, the next question is how to be saved. You will not be among the Dumahites now -- eternal matters will come topmost in your soul. How am I going to get right with God? You have to do with God, as you have to meet Him at the judgment-seat, and how will things go with you if you refuse the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is coming with His holy myriads to execute vengeance on those who obey not the gospel? This is no time for silence in these matters -- there is no time to spare. There is a time to be silent, and a time to speak, and if you are in the lost state it is the time to inquire.
It is the business of the Lord's people to answer all questions asked. The Philippian jailor asked and was answered, and moved at once in the light of the answer. Others called had equally decisive answers, and put matters off, as did Felix, "Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee". @Acts 24:25.
{340}
The Spirit of God is serving here as you sit on the seats there. God will not always strive with you, but is doing so now.
The world at present is in reconciliation. Perhaps you have never heard that word before -- the world is in reconciliation. The world murdered Christ, and persecuted His people, but God is now looking favourably upon them, not imputing trespasses, but is proposing forgiveness, is offering the worldling forgiveness.
The Lord Jesus said to the apostles before He went to heaven that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in His name among all nations beginning at Jerusalem. For nineteen centuries this wonderful testimony has been going out in spite of the guilt of the world. God is not holding trespasses against men, is not willing that anyone should perish, but waits in patience for all to come to repentance and be saved. The word here is "if ye will inquire, inquire; return, come". @Isaiah 21:12. That is the attitude of God. If a soul is really convicted -- aroused to the seriousness of the position, we would say, "return, come"; the word 'come' is very striking.
There are volumes in the gospel, and it is the question of believing it, of you looking into it. It is the power of God. Give it scope -- apply it to yourself -- it opens out to us and illuminates the soul. You need salvation every day.
Some souls are satisfied for years with a verse of Scripture, or with something such-and-such a preacher said; well, thank God for that much, but that is a very poor state of soul. We should prove salvation every moment, and prove the gospel for ourselves. You will see treasures you could never exhaust: the glad tidings of the unsearchable riches of Christ!
{341}
Oh! the folly of hanging to one text of Scripture, and depriving yourself of such riches. Return, inquire, and as you inquire the truth of the gospel opens up, and you will see it is infinite and unsearchable. Why be a pauper spiritually?
I am not trying to unchristianise you at all, but if you believe in the gospel, it is infinite. See what is put in your hand! See how victorious and rich God would make you! Salvation is not only from the wrath to come, but also from this present evil world. Do not look at your salvation as merely historic, that is a very poor way of viewing it.
We shall now go on to the passage in @Isaiah 62. Is there any exercised person here tonight, especially a person who realises the seriousness of the night? If so, many are here ready to speak to you, and the Lord is waiting to unfold the gospel to you. In @Luke 15 the shepherd comes to the sheep, and the woman sweeps the house to find the money, but the father waits for the returning son. The returning son is the culmination of the chapter. There is the seeking, and the sweeping, but there is movement on the part of the lost one to God. The son returns. The sheep did not move -- it was God; and the money was found, but the prodigal moved to the father. There was intelligence in him, he weighed up the actual facts of the case -- "I will arise and go to my father", @Luke 15:18 which means a sinner going to God, steady logical movements based on facts. He knows that in the father's house there is bread to spare -- "and I perish with hunger!" @Luke 15:17. But he has to go to the father, not his father's house come to him. He says, "I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son". @Luke 15:18,19. Note, he sinned against heaven, but also sinned before his father's eyes. He makes a distinction between God and heaven. He was awakened to a sense of responsibility
{342}
May God grant that someone will move that way tonight.
God is looking out for the returning ones -- His eyes pierce the distance and that is going on tonight. He is looking for a movement in your heart. Not because I say it, but the word of God comes to you. The sheep does not move, it is so foolish, or the money, but the man has intelligence, and says, "I will arise".
He moves, has intelligence. The sheep has none, the money none, but the man has a spirit in relation to God. As soon as you move, God runs to meet you. He is here tonight to do it.
I have the children of the saints in mind. Perhaps some are like Dumah, no interest in the things of God, no interest in the morning reading. Presently one says, 'Father, I am not happy'. Thousands of cases are like that. "Watchman, what of the night? ... inquire; return, come". As I said, the gospel is for all -- I am speaking to saints as well as the unsaved. The apostle Paul would have liked to hear Peter preach the gospel, and Peter would have liked to hear him speaking of the infinite and unsearchable riches of the gospel of Christ.
Well now, @Isaiah 62 says, the watchmen are on the walls. Indeed, it is not the 'watchman', but "watchmen". Thank God for these watchmen. They are here tonight to watch for anyone who wants to be saved. They hold not their peace. God has made a great provision in these watchmen. He has set them on the walls. Jerusalem today is the assembly, and the watchmen on the walls never hold their peace. They are not in Dumah, but are concerned about young people, and the salvation of souls, and the word of God. They never hold their peace day or night; they keep not silent. Prayer meetings are of supreme importance -- not merely formal ones, but when we come with burdened hearts, not depressed hearts, but hearts burdened with certain things, and
{343}
so it is, "ye that put Jehovah in remembrance ... give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth". @Isaiah 62:7.
The soil was never more barren than today, but the word is, "Give him no rest ... till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth", so there should be more results for God.
Well, that is what I had to present tonight: inquire, return, come. Give God no rest till something is accomplished for Him.
{344}
YOUTH AMONG THE PEOPLE OF GOD
@1 Timothy 4:12; @Genesis 37:3,4; @Exodus 33:11; @1 Samuel 3:19 - 21; @1 Kings 3:3 - 12
I have in mind, as perhaps you will divine, to speak about the youth amongst the people of God. I am actuated in the thought by the circumstances in this district, in this town, and in view of the trend of the work of God at the present time generally. God would have the youth kept in view, that they may not lack anything in coming into the position in the testimony occupied by their elders; indeed, that they may not fail to gain what is to be gained from their elders and at the same time be in direct touch with God, so that they may take on their own distinctive testimony; for something distinctive attaches to the testimony in each generation. Hence the principle of Scripture, applying to old and young, "they shall be all taught of God", @John 6:45. So that we carry forward the distinctive features of the current and passing generation -- losing nothing -- that all may be cumulative; for all is pure gold, whether old or new. They may have what is distinctive to themselves, as I said, and that could only be as they are taught of God; which means they have it through direct relations with God. As the Lord says, "enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly", @Matthew 6:6. That reward will take the form of something distinctive, some glory that you gather up there to be enhanced later in public testimony. The Lord would impress that on His disciples. He, as become Man, is the great public Teacher, as He says, "one is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren", @Matthew 23:8. But whilst that is so, and remains so,
{345}
He would impress on His disciples to have recourse to God; He is God, Jesus is God -- God manifest in the flesh. But still God maintains His own distinctive place on high, speaking to Jesus on earth from heaven and the Holy Spirit is maintaining His distinctiveness, coming down on Jesus in the form of a dove, so that God is to be apprehended whilst Jesus is here publicly and undertaking everything for God, representing God to man and representing man before God. Yet God retains His own invisibility and believers are to understand that God is invisible, that no one has seen Him or can see Him, and yet He is accessible. The Lord would impress this on His disciples that their relations should be maintained with God, whilst maintaining their relations with Him as representative of God in this world. Hence He had enjoined that they should enter into their closets and shut the door and pray to the Father in secret. He had already taught them how to pray. He did not say that that should be the *only* prayer. They should in secret with God learn to open their hearts to Him. He reads our hearts and the Spirit makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered -- so that we know that He hears us, we know that we have the petitions we desire. Now all this is most important for youth, so that there may be spiritual contact with God and formation according to God who is invisible, and who is said to be a Spirit. God is a Spirit; @John 4:24. It is thus that we take on -- as the coming generation, as the generation which is to occupy the ground -- our own distinctiveness, whilst carrying on all that has preceded us; nothing is to be lost that marks what God graciously furnished to other generations.
Now, the apostle speaking to Timothy has all this in mind. He says, "Let no man despise thy youth" @1 Timothy 4:12, and in looking at this scripture and reading it I have in mind to show you how youth in
{346}
the Old Testament appears first in the patriarchal setting, that is in the book of Genesis where God is typified as the Father. Then in Joshua in Exodus youth is seen in relation to mediatorship -- the great system that God has inaugurated here to set forth the excellence of His glory and the maintenance of His testimony publicly; and then in Samuel how youth is seen in relation to the prophetic ministry, carrying on indeed the system inaugurated for the house of God as it was in Shiloh; it is a question of the prophetic ministry. Then finally in Solomon youth in relation to royalty.
You will see what a wide ground is covered in these four examples of youth in the Old Testament, and I hope to show that each applies at the present time -- that is, the patriarchal setting, the ministerial setting, the prophetic setting, and the royal setting. If there are spiritual young people here they will be touched by the thought that they have to do with all this. It tends to lift you out of the littleness of things in this world into the vastness of divine things. You are in mind for all this. The first word is, "Let no man despise thy youth", @1 Timothy 4:12. That does not mean that a young man or woman is independent and haughty if an older brother or sister admonishes him or her, it means that youth in itself should not be despised. For the scripture points out that youth in itself can be used in circumstances where old age could not be used. So that youth in itself must not be despised. If there be a tendency to despise the person because he is young, it is for him to put on the garb of dignity. It is for him to preclude all thought of despisal by putting on dignity, for the means of dignity are available for him; but the apostle goes on to say; "But be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity", @1 Timothy 4:12. Anyone who despises a person, however young, with those beautiful traits,
{347}
with that heavenly combination, only exposes himself. He is proving himself to be unable to value what is dignified. These holy traits, whether in youth or old age, are not to be despised. And if they are to be seen in youth in this way, then they are immense in their effect. No spiritual person will despise them. They would rather admire them. They would rather regard them as ornamental; David was beautifully ornamental as he appeared. His first appearance in Scripture is marked by these beautiful traits of spiritual ornamentation. He had been neglected, as many a youth has been who should not be neglected. There are those who neglect youth. They are so engrossed with their own little bit of capital, to which they are almost entirely limited, so that they must make everything of that and despise others. That is weakness. That is shame. David had been neglected, but the time came when the representative of God says, "we will not sit down till he come hither", @1 Samuel 16:11. That is, God will point out that this young brother is going to have part in this matter. To keep him out would be contrary to the mind of God. So peremptory was Jehovah that He said to Samuel, 'You go to the house of Jesse and I will provide for you and I will indicate who is to be king'. He could have told him to ask for David. He could have told him to ask for the youngest. God was to be present when Samuel was to be in the house of Jesse. God was to do the matter so that no youth need fear. In due course God will be there and if the flesh says 'Eliab is the man' -- and so on, God says, 'He is not the man. It is so-and-so'. God will see to that. So that young people, young men and women, as setting themselves to be in the testimony and putting on those dignified traits, may be sure that God Himself will see to this matter. As the Lord Himself said, He will "reward thee openly", @Matthew 6:4,6,18 if you have recourse in your closet in
{348}
secret with the Father; and the Lord is now rewarding David openly. The very day is on the calendar when you are to be rewarded. I have seen young men brought forward and promoted in the presence of their elders. Who can gainsay it if God does it? He says, "The Spirit of the Lord came upon David" @1 Samuel 16:13, and it is then you get his name. Not that he was called David, but he *was* David, meaning that he was a beloved person. He was spiritually attractive. That is what his name means. It is just that it was David. And so here one is to be an example to the believers. David stood out in his day before all believers, whether in prowess, or in beauty, or in playing, or in skill, or in personal appearance, he was the example to all believers. I do not believe Saul ever saw such a young man as David; in spite of the fact that he was a supercilious kind of man himself, yet he was pleased with David. Who can gainsay it that David is taken on in this way? Anyone who does simply exposes himself to spiritual ridicule.
Coming back to my scriptures, Joseph is the first distinguished young man that I wished to speak of. One says in @Genesis 4 that he slew a young man. He acknowledges it. It is a terrible thing to slay a young man in a spiritual sense. Joseph appears in the midst of the great patriarchal system -- Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. He appears in this chapter when he is seventeen years of age -- a young man. What comes out is that he is loved of his father. I have been speaking of the Father. If I enter into my closet and pray to my Father in secret, He will become well known by me, and if I am well known by the Father in heaven, I shall soon become well known to all in heaven. The Father in heaven will not fail to make me known and I shall be known here on earth. It is a question of the Father in this section of the book of Genesis. Of course it is typical, but Abraham,
{349}
Isaac and Jacob represent the idea of the Father, and how the family is formed under the influence and attention of the Father. Hence the importance of getting to know the Father. Indeed, the little ones in John's epistle are said to know the Father. The elder ones are said to have known Him that is from the beginning; @1 John 2:13. But the little ones are supposed to know the Father. That is the secret of the working out of christianity -- that we become acquainted with the Father and that is by getting into the closet and shutting the door and speaking to the Father in secret. Some of us often trouble ourselves much about the holiest, but that is how we get into the holiest. Enter into your closet and shut the door and speak to your Father which is in secret. Well, the Father is the Father, and will soon begin to love you. He loves all christians, but we must not deny that He values what is lovable, and that is how you come under His notice. Day after day, night after night, you enter your closet and speak to your Father in secret and your Father soon comes to know you. And so it is here. It is said that Israel -- great spiritual thought -- loved Joseph more than all his sons. Now you can see, young people, how this works out as you enter your closet and speak to your Father in secret; how He will reward you openly! At one time the great servant Moses said to Jehovah, 'I cannot speak'. God says, 'Your brother can speak. I know he can speak'. Undoubtedly the allusion is to this very thing -- that Aaron was a man who spoke to God. He was called the Levite; @Exodus 4:14. He spoke to God.
And the Father loves you, what can be more blessed than the thought that the Father loves you. It is said, "The Father loveth the Son", @John 3:35. That is Jesus. That is distinctive. That is, He has His own distinction. In all things He is distinguished above us. "The Father loveth the Son and hath given all things into his hand".
{350}
How beautiful a thought that is. It works out in any little bit of administrative responsibility. This is handed over to the young people present. It is a question of the Father's love. It is not simply a question of ability, but it is a question of the Father loving you, and what can be more precious than the thought of the Father loving you. "The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand". @John 3:35. He will give us something, and it is because He loves us. I do not deny that remarkable ability goes with it, as in the case of Joseph. But his father loved him. He will have him above all his sons. Joseph represents the spiritual side of the family. He represents Christ as in the saints. And I would again urge the young people to get to your Father and into the consciousness that your Father knows you and loves you, and in that measure He will give you something to do. He will give something into your hands.
Israel made Joseph a vest of many colours. That is what I might call potentiality in a young person's service. There is a suggestion of the opening out of a beautiful flower of glory; for that is what is in the mind of God in regard to every one of us. He is the Giver. In every person, in every young man, there can be an opening up of the variety of glory. We are thus able to conceive what Israel had in mind. When the heavens were opened to Jesus and the voice came, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight" @Matthew 3:17, it was the suggestion of glory. What an opening up of glory represented in that Person! God intends to work out effulgence, that is the coat of many colours. He is the God of glory, and what is in mind is that everything should be 'fulness', the development of glory. We are vessels of mercy fitted for glory and in us is the opening up of glory. Of course, much could be said about Joseph, but I only wanted to stress that one point:
{351}
how a young christian begins here in view of the testimony here and eternally.
In Joshua it is a question of the great mediatorial system of things which God has set up here. This thought includes the books of Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. You can see how Joshua is just another phase of this great subject; how the youth are to be developed in the knowledge of the Father, as loved of the Father; how they are to occupy themselves with regard to the great system that God has inaugurated mediatorially. It is well that that word 'mediatorship' should be noticed, that it is not a question now of any symbol of the Father, but of God known in a certain distance, in a certain majesty, in a certain dignity and His people kept in a reverential position in relation to Him. It is another side of the position. Christ is the great Mediator, and in connection with Moses we have this young man, who is called his minister. I see that "there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus" @1 Timothy 2:5 and I am His minister: I am to serve, whatever the service may be. You are to serve in relation to Him and that delivers you from all else. Your great business is in connection with this great system that God has set up in which He dwells, in which the testimony is set. It is your place, you are to be there. Your safety lies in it. He "departed not out of the tabernacle". He is called a young man; it is mentioned in this way to show how youth can come into this great thought, this great mediatorial system in which God resides, in which His glory dwells and in which His people serve Him. The youth has to be there. It is no question yet of being distinguished by gift of any kind, but by being inside in relation to this system. Other things can be said about this young man, and lots have to be said about most of us. I am not excluding myself. How young men, dear brethren,
{352}
are carried along by gift of men in power, and apt to think unduly of them. Joshua had great opportunities. What an opportunity he had of apprehending God in His majesty on Sinai and at Horeb. But he was exposed to what men are exposed to -- thinking unduly of those who lead.
God says, I am going to have seventy other men, and when two of them prophesied in the camp Joshua says, "My lord Moses, forbid them!" @Numbers 11:28. Let no young man here forbid prophesying. He would have forbidden it, not because it was not of God, but because he thought it would detract from his favourite leader. The point is to be the minister of Christ as the Mediator. You understand when I speak of Moses as Joshua's personal preference, I speak of him as typifying any brother of distinction who is to be respected. But let each young man understand that he is minister of Christ and has his place in a lowly humble place inside. It is a safe place inside. You are in the very centre of things. The tabernacle is the very centre of things. The more you are in it the more you will be set for it, and informed as to what God is doing everywhere. You will miss nothing if you are there. Joshua was there. He was in the very centre of things in the tabernacle.
Then I pass on to Samuel. It is a four-sided picture of the whole testimony viewed in youth and energy. You see in Revelation the four living creatures are simply a four-sided view of what God has here upon earth viewed as in life. You are told how the word of God abides in you. What I am speaking of is a four-sided view of this great matter, so that Samuel as carrying on Joshua's position is also in the system, but greatly reduced; for the priesthood had greatly degenerated under Eli and instead of being inside in a dignified way as we referred to in Joshua, Samuel and Eli go to sleep. They slept there. It is a poor state of things to sleep in the house of God. God spoke to
{353}
this young man as he slept, and it says, "Samuel did not yet know the Lord" @1 Samuel 3:7 -- meaning that one may be outwardly set in that position and yet not having known the Lord. And so God says, Your parents have been faithful and they have kept you, and now I want to speak to you. And He spoke to him, He called him, "Samuel, Samuel!" @1 Samuel 3:10. What accents those words afforded in that degenerate house; but they were divine words. As in the garden Jehovah spoke when He was walking, now He is speaking directly to one in Shiloh in the house of God. It is a call, God respecting the devotedness and faithfulness of the parents. He is speaking to some one in person and He calls them by name, and He does not hesitate as having spoken before. It is said that "The word of the Lord was precious in those days", @1 Samuel 3:1. But now He is speaking to him directly and immediately tells him about Eli. The young man is to be told by God about the misdeeds of the elder brother. There can be no doubt about it if you are told what the misdeeds are, but be sure the information comes from the Lord and it is not mixed with prejudice. Be sure that you sift it, and see that it is divine information. Jehovah has to tell this young man of the misdeeds of an old brother. "And Samuel grew". He is still seen as growing in the end of this chapter. It is said that "Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him". This is the kind of young man that can be trusted. Young men taking on the affairs of old men are on very dangerous ground. This is the point here. It is the question of the misdeeds of the older brother. But the young man has heard Jehovah and he is very seemly and does not rush and charge him with his misdeeds. The old brother asked him about it. He tells him humbly. He tells him what Jehovah had said and the old brother takes it well. It was a divine sentence upon him, and now it says, "Samuel grew". He is not overbalanced by the burden put
{354}
upon him. He is not making much of the information. He is not hindered, he is growing. What a fine thought for young people! And then we are told that "The Lord was with him". What will people say now? And moreover it is said that "The Lord was with him, and did let none of his words fall to the ground". You were able to speak well at the last ministry meeting. These ministry meetings are most important. Sometimes they are called prophetic meetings -- meetings in which God's mind comes to us; for we have to value the word, and if we have anything to say it is a question of the mind of God. That is what is to be done. The point is that the Lord was with Samuel and none of his words are allowed to fall to the ground. That address was short, but it entered into the hearts of the saints, and applied to the moment. They are a lodging place for such. The word is, that not a grain falls into honest and good hearts without there being something for God. And so it was that "All Israel from Dan even to Beer-sheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the Lord. And the Lord appeared again in Shiloh: for the Lord revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the Lord", @1 Samuel 3:20,21.
This is what we can expect, for christianity is a living state of things, so that here we have Jehovah appearing again to Samuel by the word. It is an inward state of things. It alludes to prophetic ministry, how God comes in and gives you something that you know is directly from Himself and so you give it out to the saints.
The final thought is Solomon. That is the royal setting of youth. I just commend the simple prayer of Solomon. First indeed it says that he loved Jehovah. This is not said of any others that I have spoken of, but how comely it is that in this fourth exemplification of this subject you have one who
{355}
loved the Lord -- and that speaks volumes. You see that establishes confidence. There is no better commendation that you can get than that such an one loves the Lord, and then we can add that one is proved in this way by the fact that he keeps the commandments. The Lord Himself says, "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me", @John 14:21. That is Solomon and Jehovah says, "Ask". I have been speaking about prayer, and it says, "The Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream by night: and God said, Ask what I shall give thee". Solomon speaks rather at length, beautifully, as you will observe, and he says, "And thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou hast chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude. Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a people?" @1 Kings 3:8,9.
Now I just commend that to all here. That is wisdom, as James says, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not", @James 1:5. Was there ever a day when wisdom was so necessary? Difficult matters come up amongst us. They are left unsettled for months and years. Why should that be? This chapter precludes any such things. Difficulties are presented when the two women brought their children. Solomon decided the matter at once. He did not let it drag along, because he prayed for wisdom and God gave it to him. The apostle says, "that there is not a wise man among you, no, not one ..." @1 Corinthians 6:5, otherwise you would not be going to court. That is the point here, that we are in the midst of so great a people, and we would not hesitate to apply it today -- all this beautiful prayer of Solomon -- because they are so great a people, and we are called to judge amongst us. The epistle to the Corinthians puts the responsibility
{356}
on every saint in the assembly to judge. How can you judge a matter, whether good or bad, unless you have wisdom and discernment? Solomon prayed for it, and as soon as he got it, it is administered and all Israel admired and feared the man who had the wisdom. What can give a man a place amongst us more than a word of wisdom? "If anyone of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God". @James 1:5.
I commend this point -- the simple thought of asking what is needed and how God comments on it and gives it to us. "God gave Solomon wisdom and very great understanding and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the seashore", @1 Kings 4:29. We are told that the wisest of men were not equal to it, and it is all simply because he asked of God.
{357}
THE HEART OF MAN AND THE HEART OF GOD
@Genesis 8:20 - 22; @Psalm 10:6 - 13; @Romans 10:6 - 13
My subject in seeking to present the gospel tonight is hearts: what people say in their hearts first, and then what God says in His heart. The phrase "heart of God" is not so frequent in the Scriptures literally as might be imagined, although the Scriptures are full of the thought of the love of God; but the heart of God is stressed somewhat in the early chapters of the Bible -- a very interesting matter -- and set down alongside the human heart, the heart of man. Both are spoken of in the same passages. I wish to speak of God's heart particularly, but in order to arouse interest and conscience to work, I would allude to the word in Romans, which enjoins what is not to be said. What is *not* to be said. Quoting from the book of Deuteronomy the apostle conveniently cites "the righteousness which is of faith" and regards it as the speaker. The Spirit of God uses such methods regarding impersonal dealings to speak. He says, 'The Scriptures preach the gospel'. In the very early days before there was anything said about the evangelist, it is said, "And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham", @Galatians 3:8. It is an important word in regard to the Bible, and a word which encourages the circulation of the Bible; for the Scriptures preach the gospel according to that passage; and so the apostle Paul in writing to the Romans, cites a section of the book of Deuteronomy as saying to the people what they should *not* say in their hearts. He goes on to say a good deal about the heart afterwards, but the righteousness which is of faith begins by preaching certain things as said in
{358}
the heart -- that they are *not* to be said. There are those here now listening, maybe resolving, or saying something to themselves in their hearts, and this scripture comes to me conveniently to warn as to what should *not* be said at this time. This is a meeting for the preaching of the gospel and the thoughts of hearts should be in accord with the meeting, so that the righteousness which is of faith would rebuke many things that are *not* to be said in our hearts.
Some young man says in his heart, 'I have come here just to please someone else'. Somebody else says, 'I will be glad when the meeting is over, for I have not the slightest intention of being impressed with anything that is said'. That is the language -- saying in your heart -- that is prohibited. Many are the sayings like it. "The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked" -- or incurable; @Jeremiah 17:9. If you give rein it will say all sorts of things -- things that are utterly irrelevant, utterly wrong, utterly wicked, and destructive to the soul.
So that the righteousness which is of faith prohibits, at the very outset, all such talkings in the heart. God is here challenging our hearts. He says that He has a right to speak to us. He is our Creator. He commands all men as a Creator. He has a right to do it. He "now commandeth all men every where to repent", @Acts 17:30. This is His prerogative and He uses it, not in an arbitrary or hard way, but in love. For what can be more kindly, if you see a person going down over a waterfall in a little boat, than to shout most imperatively, most urgently, to him. That is what God is doing. He has the right to do that. He has a creational right to do it, and He has the moral right. It is the right of love that He exercises. So, as I said, it is the righteousness of faith speaking, and we are enjoined as to what we are not to say in our hearts in this verse in @Romans 10.
{359}
That is one of the things I have mentioned, and there are many like them.
Another may say, 'Well, I have been invited to come to this meeting, and I have come. I am not sorry I have come, I am not against the gospel. I am interested, but I am determined in my mind that I am not going to believe yet'. That is prohibited by the righteousness which is of faith.
Another says, 'I have in mind to be a christian. My parents are christians, and so are my brothers and sisters, but to confess the Lord is more than I could undertake until I get out of school. After I am out of high school I will venture to put my trust in Christ, and confess Him'. That is prohibited, too -- determination only to believe in the distance. It is suitable *now*, because God is commanding you now to repent, saying you are saved by the righteousness of faith. Many other things, as I said, are apt to be said in the hearts of persons sitting in this audience. The righteousness which is of faith simply and authoritatively forbids you saying these things. I shall come back to this passage. I only refer to this as a sort of warning so as to bring conscience into action; for nothing can be done tonight unless conscience is at work. The righteousness of faith addresses conscience. Man has a conscience and that means that God can use it to convict, and so the righteousness which is of faith authoritatively speaks and forbids anything being said in the heart that will militate against what is presented tonight in the way of the gospel.
Now, as I said, God in this remarkable passage is presented as saying things in *His* heart. He had taken notice earlier of the conduct of men. He had allowed them to live on after Adam's fall. Adam had been driven out of the garden. He had allowed men to live on and many of them lived long lives, and evil fermented and increased, and all flesh corrupted its way on the earth, and it says, "It grieved him at his heart", @Genesis 6:6.
{360}
And the Spirit of God says at the same time, "that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually", @Genesis 6:5. That was the history of every day. If there had been newspapers we should have had the usual items of news. Generally these items refer to man's evil heart. What seems to have most relish with people is that very thing -- the corruption that flows out from a man. The Lord says, "There is nothing from without a man, that entering into him can defile him: but the things which come out of him, those are they that defile the man", @Mark 7:15. And what defiles in these times of the newspapers is what comes out of man, and there can be no doubt that there was much of that kind although there were no newspapers. But men had tongues, and women had tongues, and men and women talk, and they love to talk of the evil. We may be sure that the conversations were generally of evil. The Spirit of God takes notice of all these things and says, "That every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually". @Genesis 6:5.
It was only evil every day, and God felt it. We must not picture God as anyone very different from ourselves. Of course "God is a spirit" @John 4:24, "dwelling in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see", @1 Timothy 6:16. But yet He is in some sense like us -- sin apart, of course. But He is in some sense like us even in His abstract Being. The apostle Paul says, "we are the offspring of God" @Acts 17:29, and he builds up on that an important point which should preclude men from being idolatrous. If we are His offspring we ought to have some little conception of God. The early chapters of Genesis say and prove that, for they speak of God as if He were something like ourselves, that is in the heart. Moreover, "he repented". @Genesis 6:6. It brings God down very near to man, that He takes cognisance in that way, and feels as a
{361}
righteous person ought to feel. Indeed He would enlist all righteous persons to feel with Him. He has one man there -- He had Enoch walking with Him for three hundred years. Was it nothing to God that He had such a man, such a companion as Enoch amidst all universal wickedness? Enoch sympathises with God, and then presently Noah comes on the scene, and he too is a righteous man. He would feel the terrible corruption that was current. He felt it in a measure as God felt it. Noah walked with God. He was righteous in his generation. His name signifies that God, in some measure, had comfort in him. His name signifies rest, but God attaches great value to those who are righteous, and who think with Him. He draws us with Him into the current of His thoughts. He gathered Enoch into this current. He was so pleased with Enoch that He said, "I want you for ever" and He translated him. He was pleased with Noah, too. He did not translate him, but He employed him to do great exploits. He employed Noah and gave him a big order, and that order meant salvation. He was a righteous man, and we are told that in Noah's day, according to Peter, the Lord Jesus went in Spirit and preached to the spirits who were disobedient in Noah's time. They were not in prison then, but they were in prison in Peter's time. And he says the Lord Jesus went and preached to them (see @1 Peter 3:19). He preached to them so that they should not be in prison. He had a medium. God had called Noah to His side in those days. He was called a "preacher of righteousness", @2 Peter 2:5. Enoch was not called that. Enoch pleased God, and God liked him, and He took him. Noah was also pleasing, but he was trustworthy; God says, 'I can leave you here, and give you a big order'. He was to build the ark. That is to say there was Christ in the mind of God on man's side. That is the idea. Noah built the ark, and we are told that he was "a preacher of righteousness".
{362}
The effect of his preaching was this. Peter says Jesus went to preach to those disobedient people in the days of Noah. I do not suppose that there was any meeting like this in those days, but I have no doubt about it that there was preaching, and preaching by the best of preachers, by Christ and the Spirit. "By which also he went and preached", @1 Peter 3:19 we are told. That is how the matter stood. Before that God's heart was grieved, grieved every day, and when we come to this passage that I have read, we are told that this man Noah was a type of Jesus, having come through the flood. What wonderful experiences he had had! One loves to ponder on it. He prepared an ark for the saving of his house. What sights he would have seen in those dreary days of the flood if he looked out from that window and saw the unsaved perishing in the deluge! They had seen him build, they had heard him preach, but they were careless and neglected the gospel. They were disobedient and were lost. Is there anyone here careless as to what I am saying? Disobedience is at the bottom of it. The Lord Jesus is coming with His mighty angels to take vengeance on those who know not God and who do not obey the gospel (see @2 Thessalonians 1:7,8). God forbid that there be anyone here disobedient to the gospel. The antediluvians were disobedient, yet the preaching went on for years by the best of preachers -- Christ in the Spirit through Noah -- and what scenes could be beheld as the windows of heaven were opened, as the fountains of the great deep were broken up and the earth became covered with water and the highest mountain over-topped with the flood.
The population of the antediluvian world must have been large. Think of the millions of people who came under the judgment of God at that time. It is not a question of a myth. There is nothing more established for faith than the deluge. "Them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ", @2 Thessalonians 1:8.
{363}
God forbid that anyone here should be careless to the gospel. It is disobedience. It is callous. Paul says, "I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision", @Acts 26:19. Most of us here can say the same. We have not been disobedient. We have received the Holy Spirit who is given to those who obey Christ.
Do not be disobedient to the divine call! Jesus is here tonight, as He was when Noah preached. It says, He "preached peace to you which were afar off", @Ephesians 2:17. And so He is tonight preaching through me here to you. Will you be disobedient? The preaching goes on in spite of your disobedience, but the time will come when the preaching will cease. There will be no more preaching -- no more salvation for you. Man's days shall be one hundred and twenty years. God lengthened out the period of grace and the preaching went on through all those years. Peter tells us that Christ went in the power of the Spirit in which He was raised from among the dead. He went and preached to those who were disobedient. Noah witnessed all that and those terrible indescribable scenes that were there seen of those myriads of the lost. Let the word 'lost' sink into your heart if you are rebellious. What a terrible word! The apostle Paul says, "if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost", @2 Corinthians 4:3 and he explains that "The god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them", @2 Corinthians 4:4. Satan is doing that. He did it in those antediluvian days. He blinded the eyes of the lost, so that they should not believe the faithful testimony of the preacher of righteousness, and hence their part in the overwhelming judgment that overtakes them. Having all that experience, Noah comes out on a renewed earth. He took of every clean fowl.
{364}
and every clean beast and built an altar and offered to God. That is to say, we have Christ now typically coming forward on man's side. Earlier God had undertaken the matter when Adam sinned. He made clothes for Adam. It is not God doing something, it is man doing something, and that is one side of the gospel. The Saviour is on our side. The Lord Jesus has taken His place in the likeness of men. "There is ... one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus", @1 Timothy 2:5. How well the power of the Spirit of God operating in christians enables us to glory in the thought that the Saviour of mankind is Himself a Man. And so it is that Noah acts for himself. God will not do this for him, Noah acted for himself; as Jesus coming into this world, He considered for this world. "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life", @John 10:17. He lays down His life for the sheep, and He draws out the affections of His Father. It is Christ as a Man on our side. So Noah acts for himself, and he takes of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and builds an altar and offers to Jehovah a sacrifice -- a burnt-offering. And we are told, "Jehovah smelled the sweet odour", @Genesis 8:21. Let any convicted sinner here (if there is one, and I hope there is), convicted by what I am saying, know that you have got to do with God. The Lord Jesus has stepped in and taken all your guilt, and taken your place before God, and has drawn out the love of God for Himself. "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life". @John 10:17. But He has appeased God. He has satisfied God in regard to us. The Man is on our side. Enoch did not do this; Adam did not do this; no man undertook all this earlier. Noah is the first to undertake this. He is a beautiful type of Christ as acting before God on behalf of men. Now he appeased, he satisfied God as it were. In this offering he typified Christ Himself. "For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time" @1 Timothy 2:5,6
{365}
-- a testimony to be rendered in its own time. It has been rendered here tonight -- the effect of that wonderful sacrifice of Jesus on our side. It is said that "God ... raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory; that your faith and hope might be in God", @1 Peter 1:21. God is so pleased with Him, that He raised Him from the dead. Paul says He raised Him by His own glory. He also says He raised Him by His power. The glory of God the Father was brought into action so as to raise Jesus. How pleased He was with Him! What does His glory mean but His love? The infinite satisfaction that Jesus gave and drew out for God, as He lay in death, He "was raised again for our justification", @Romans 4:25. You see what I have in mind, what God said in His heart. He says, "I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth", @Genesis 8:21. 'But I am not going to be hampered by that; I have another Man'. Noah was typical of Christ and he pleased God. There was an odour that went up from that man in his offerings, and God says this in His heart -- would that we could take that in.
What a good time God had at that period! What a season of enjoyment He had anticipating all that Jesus would be to Him. What enjoyment He had! He says, 'I will not be affected any more by what is going on in man's heart, I will go on with my own heart'. God has great thoughts for Himself and He is going on with what is in His own heart. He had smelled a sweet odour and He had enjoyed the thing. Let us not deny God enjoying it. There is constant history in heaven if I am enjoying it. Occasions of divine enjoyment are rising constantly on earth and God sees everyone enjoying them. If there is a soul who repents here tonight, that gives enjoyment in
{366}
heaven. I have not said that history is made in heaven. As soon as you repent you begin to make history for yourself, for the history of God is made on earth. He has fresh enjoyment when one sinner has repented. But in those early days we see how He was going on with Himself. He did not wish Noah to know. He said the whole thing to Himself. You must understand that God in the absolute is enough in Himself, but also in the relative as comes out here, He is enough in Himself. But then He takes man on, and this beautiful odour He smelt. He is going on with Himself and His own heart, and He says, "While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease", @Genesis 8:22. It is in type what is called the reconciliation of the world. That is what is in mind here -- that God has taken the world on, in another way. He had not smelt an odour before. The reconciliation of the world -- that is Noah. But oh! how infinitely more the pleasure Jesus has occasioned to God in holy sacrifice for sin that God "should be just, and justify him that is of the faith of Jesus", @Romans 3:26. It is the question of belief. He says, "While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease". God said that hundreds of years ago, and it is running on to this very night. Down here in these southern latitudes you see it. "While the *earth* remaineth". When God scattered the races He scattered them over the face of the whole earth. Let us not think that these southern islands were not known to Him. This wonderful edict of God was made in His own heart with Himself, with His own hands, seedtime and harvest. Every gospel meeting is both. Seedtime is that someone perhaps for the first time received the gospel. Harvest is someone who has received it before, makes a confession now. That is
{367}
the idea. Then there is cold and heat, for after a confession, of course, we may be sure that the cold will come. It is the cold that becomes the confirmation of the testimony, you see. As seed begins to germinate the cold blast comes. One could illustrate, but there is no need. We all understand these cold blasts of circumstances, but they are only intended to strengthen our belief. It is like the frost that comes down in the winter weeks. The snow as it falls on the winter wheat is intended to give it a better crop. So it is that God has in His mind as the seed of the gospel is received into the heart. The cold will make the better crop. As he goes through it with God, presently the sun shines with power in early spring, and the fruit comes abundantly. And the believers say, 'That cold is winter, and the heat is summer'. But the summer comes first in the second mention. Summer and winter -- that is the result is in summer. And then, day and night, meaning that the christian has experiences every day. It is a succession of days and nights. God has delight in every day and every night of, the true christian. He has enjoyment constantly, so while the earth remains He says in His heart that this is what is to be current. 'I like that very much', if you will understand my saying so -- God conversing with Himself in His own heart. What a subject! Indeed it is put into effect. It holds solidly. Down here in these southern latitudes, God has seedtime and harvest. Maybe someone will come forward and make a confession of Christ now, possibly the result of the message received years ago. Many a winter has passed over you. You have not had much of a time. Many receive the gospel lightly and shallowly, and the winters come and they have a poor time of it. You would never think that they had any light, but in the time of summer when the Spirit of God is hovering about in warmth, many a one is seen confessing Christ in a gospel meeting --
{368}
there is no better place. You are surrounded by an evangelistic spirit. It is summertime, if you will understand. It is a time of opportunity. May I not call you to confession? God is calling you to confession. Christ is calling you. That brings me to @Romans 10 where the righteousness of faith is speaking. It tells you what *not* to say, "Who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down from above:) or, Who shall descend into the deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead.)" It is infidelity to question that Christ is in heaven. The righteousness of faith forbids you questioning that. You will never be saved if you keep on questioning. You must believe. "What saith it? The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which we preach; that if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved". *Thou*, speaking to some person. Myriads of persons have been individualised in this way by evangelistical appeals. And the summertime came -- they confessed the Lord then -- that is the fruit. That is the Lord Jesus. They confessed Him with their mouth, they believed in their heart that God raised Him from the dead, and they were saved. "Thou *shalt* be saved". The meaning is that you shall be saved. You are in the way of it. That is the way of salvation. It is a question of the heart. Now, so as to equalise my admonition, I call attention to these things in @Psalm 10. First of all he says, "He hath said in his heart, I shall not be moved". That is the first thing he says as regards his heart. Some of you are just hardening your hearts to what I am saying, putting them away from you, and thinking that things will be all right. "I shall not be moved". That is what the wicked man says. He says this in his heart. But what folly to say that I What can he do in the
{369}
swelling of the Jordan? see @Jeremiah 12:5. What can he do when death comes to him? Shall he not be moved? He *shall*. What can he do, for it is folly to harden your heart, and say, "I shall not be moved: for I shall never be in adversity"? What a foolish thing to say. That is what the wicked man says. Anyone saying that is a wicked person. You are in company with the wicked man in this Psalm. Consequently he says, "He hath said in his heart, God hath forgotten". There never was a lie greater than that, that "God hath forgotten". God requires what is past. The believer can speak about forgetting, because God has spoken about forgetfulness With regard to men, but never in regard to the wicked man. God has spoken about forgetting the former ways of the believer -- "Their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more", @Hebrews 8:12. That is what God says to the believer. The wicked man says God has forgotten, as if He is a man like himself. God requires what is past. There is not a sin forgotten for the wicked person -- every bit will stand up against him at the great white throne. The dead will be judged according to what is in the books. God keeps books. He keeps them so that He forgets nothing.
And then thirdly, in verse 13, he says, "Thou wilt not require it". It is another lie. Man is deceiving himself and being deceived. They "shall be punished with everlasting destruction", @2 Thessalonians 1:9.
May God help us now if there are any under exercise, to say in your heart what the righteousness of faith would indicate. That is, believe that God raised Christ, and confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord. That is the way to salvation. That is the sure way of salvation, and it is a question of the heart. May God help any with any little conviction. It is a heart matter, and the matter will thus be settled. It is a question of the heart. There is a beautiful word in @Romans 10:11, if there is any exercise,
{370}
"For the scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed", and again, verse 13, "Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved". He "is rich unto all that call upon him".
I do urge you to call in truth of heart upon Him. He is rich towards you. We have proved it.
{371}
THE TRUE GOD
@1 Thessalonians 1:9,10; @John 17:2,3; @1 John 5:20
My burden as to this meeting is to speak a little about God, particularly in the view presented in this scripture; viz., the true God, having in mind that a knowledge of God under this heading is calculated to deliver us from the untruth that is current religiously and indeed from all untruths, for it is peculiarly the word of light. It would be remembered that Matthew deals very severely with untruth. The religious leaders of that time bribed the soldiers who watched the tomb of Jesus to say that the disciples stole Him away and the Spirit of God adds that that was currently believed up to the time of writing. That lie and others like it have been multiplied in two main forms -- Rome and modernism. Barefaced untruthfulness marks both these against the testimony. The true God is presented to us, so that if we are dominated by falsehood, we may be delivered from it and kept from it. That would work out in sedulous attention to the truth. If we admit a lie in any way, it will grow. John makes much of the truth in that sense. He speaks of many things that are true and demonstrates their truth. I do not enumerate them now, because my subject is the true God, which phrase he uses twice at least.
I have selected Thessalonians where Paul uses the same word. He says these young christians had turned to God -- it does not say the true God, nor does @John 17 say that they may know the only true God, but "thee" -- then he adds, "the only true God". So God is the great thought, modified according to the need of the testimony as presented. God is the great thought and that is what I have in mind,
{372}
because I am impressed continually and increasingly that God is too little known amongst the saints; the term is known, but what it is in a moral sense and how the intent is that God, being a Spirit, should be known to us and known as near to us, for it is said even creationally, "in him we live, and move, and have our being". @Acts 17:28. That applies to all men but John says, "he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him". @1 John 4:15. I hope to speak about dwelling in God; that only includes christians, those who dwell in love dwell in God, and God in them. How great the nearness that is implied, and one's own heart is challenged as to what he knows of love and then what is meant by dwelling in it. The Thessalonians are peculiarly spoken of as lovable christians, they are said to be "beloved by God". @1 Thessalonians 1:4. It may apply to all christians in an abstract way but it is not spoken of here in an abstract way, but in a concrete way, meaning they are lovable christians, beloved of God. Hardly an epistle ranks with this one in this connection in the endearing terms that are used, endearing terms in God, as to these christians. Unless God reaches lovability in us He has not reached much; if we are confined to abstract thoughts, we have not very much from His point of view. Even in the physical creation He had it that things should be lovable. We are far too wanting in our understanding of the character of what the creation is to Him. After the creation of the earth, chaotic conditions ensued. He had in mind for the creation to be lovable, suited for man's abode, and that He should come in Himself and find nothing incongruous. He walked in the garden, that meaning the most lovable part of it, and His voice was heard. Can we doubt God would speak of the beauty of creation? No one who knows the character of God can doubt that and God speaks to Himself, says things in His heart, as we know, He had in mind that creation as it came
{373}
from His hand should be lovable. Everything was made upright, and we are told the Spirit garnished it; just as you decorate the inside of a building, the Spirit of God garnished the heavens. So in Thessalonians, God is brought in as having reached something lovable. He reached a company of saints that He calls "the assembly of Thessalonians in God the Father". @1 Thessalonians 1:1 That is how it opens. God has reached that which was a great thing. The address is intended to convey that something pleasing to Him had been reached. So much so, He uses the preposition 'in' God the Father -- which is very unusual. The preposition implies action with the position in view, not a static thing, but an active thing. God intends things to be alive and their position "in God the Father" @1 Thessalonians 1:1 would mean they were in His heart, they have that peculiar place as being lovable. Every time God looked at Thessalonica He saw what was pleasing, that was their fixed place -- in God the Father. What a time God had after Paul visited Philippi and established an assembly there. All these are operations which answer to the heart of God and He fixes the status of the work. That is, He looks at any one of us as the fruit of His own work and fixes your status as regards Himself. He is not hiding His face from us as He is today from Israel but looking delightfully at you, and it conveys here that the work at Thessalonica was pleasing to Him. "In God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ" @1 Thessalonians 1:1 -- the latter would mean they were under the Lord's protection. That was the position at Thessalonica and it ought to be the position in Wellington, something fixed in that way to which God gives a status according to His own appreciation of what is fixed. It is protected by the kingdom in the Lord Jesus Christ. The work at Thessalonica deserves consideration. It is given only a brief account in Acts but enough is said to indicate the result here. Paul's sufferings at
{374}
Philippi fitted him for further service, "All things work together for good to them that love God". @Romans 8:28. That is how the work of God is carried on. The suffering that happened to Paul was for God -- his influence was wider than any man's on earth. Between his first and second letters to Corinth he was down to the gates of death, despaired of living, but God who raiseth the dead delivered him and He will deliver. He says, 'All this happened for you' (the Corinthians) for he had to write another letter, and to write another letter he must be fitted for it as John in Revelation; before he wrote the Lord put His hand on him as the living One. John was to write in a living way and that marked Paul in his second letter. The experience at Philippi undoubtedly bore fruit at Thessalonica. He was there only three sabbaths, it says; it does not appear that he laboured during the week. On three sabbath days he entered the synagogue and so laid out the truth that a great number believed; a remarkable expression, opening and laying down that Christ must suffer. One can picture the great servant making the most of his time there. It challenges us as to what we are making of our time, but here it is three sabbath days. As far as the record goes, the work only took place on the sabbath. I suppose the week days would preclude much, being working days. He worked hard and he opened and laid down -- he opened up things that Christ must suffer in that He died.
He is a teacher, so that he is forcing the truth upon them, on the Jews in the synagogue, and he no doubt opened and referred to @Isaiah 53. He opened that up with perhaps more intelligence than Philip to the eunuch. The eunuch was an honest man and said that he did not understand it. Perhaps we are not honest enough to say we do not understand. The apostle undertook to show -- he opened and laid down. You must accept what he brought from the
{375}
Scriptures -- he would not do that to the gentiles -- but good Jews must accept it, persons who acknowledge the Scriptures, so he opened up Isaiah that Christ must suffer and rise again the third day -- the prophet taught that word. That is the way God is brought in, so it illustrates how God is brought to us, how the gospel is the gospel of God, as Romans says. In whatever form it is presented it is the gospel of God and it is intended to lay a foundation as to God in a man's soul. As soon as that is there you have a solid moral basis on which God can build. Corinthians is the assembly of God, the gospel of God is first, and then the result, the assembly of God. It belongs to God, and in the same way the apostle says, "of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us", etc. @1 Corinthians 1:30.
That is how the truth is presented in those three days. The Son of God is God -- God drawn near to us in a Man so He could have a place in our hearts. That is what was presented at Thessalonica, and the result was a beautiful set of saints. One would love to have been there and belonged to them -- a beautiful crop from the seed-sowing of those three days; God would supply seed to the sower. Was it not delightful to Him to sow seed? It was a quick harvest. The seed-time was the three sabbath days -- what a Sower and what a crop! The crop was a delightful crop of christians in that town. It was an important town and God looked down from heaven to see what was there as everyone would who sows. The crop was a beautiful lot of christians! The apostle loves to dwell on it, he says, "Remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our Father". @1 Thessalonians 1:3. God was looking down for that. What delight that was for God -- the fruit of His own sowing through His great servant. The apostle says, "Knowing, brethren beloved your election of God". @1 Thessalonians 1:4. You have
{376}
received the gospel and are beautiful spiritually and can be called the elect of God. It is somewhat incongruous to call worldly people the elect of God. People arrogate to themselves that beautiful expression. It does not fit. It is people built up spiritually who are showing themselves to be that. "Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God. For our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance". @1 Thessalonians 1:4,5. Let us, dear brethren, measure ourselves up in this way as to what effect God has had upon us as presented in the gospel. These beautiful traits draw out the delight of God and it says 'You are in Him' -- the assembly of Thessalonians, you christians at Thessalonica. It is a local, not a general thought, a beautiful growth there.
There is much more in the chapter to show that what I am saying is true. Then at the end, how they turned to God from idols, they did that, it was their part -- to serve the living and true God. God has now got not only a beautiful crop but a company of priests. The knowledge of God in our hearts renders this side, that we want to speak to God, to serve God. If I love Him, I want to serve Him, so it was said of Israel, "Let my son go, that he may serve me". @Exodus 4:23. The gospel has had an effect in their souls so that they have come out of Egypt to God, not yet the true God, but the great thought of God in the gospel; then showing their intelligence and moral uprightness, to serve the living and true God -- meaning that they had been Jews, going on with a dead religion; now we want a living state of things -- He is living and true -- we must regulate our worship and service by the truth. And what a word that is for all the 'isms' of christendom, in which, alas, many of our brethren are at the present time! If the thought of the true God comes into the soul, you must regulate everything by that thought. "We are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh" @Philippians 3:3.
{377}
-- true worshippers. The word 'true' is attached to worshippers, as the Lord Himself says, "the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship him". @John 4:23. God is not seeking worship but He is seeking persons who will worship Him. Not the worship, the persons are the objects of His affection.
The Thessalonians were waiting for His Son from heaven. They were brought into that hope that belongs to christians, the hope of God's Son from heaven. Our attitude is waiting, not merely holding the doctrine of the Lord's coming which is the common thought, without a bit of heart in it, but the word here is "to wait for his Son". The idea of waiting begins with Jacob very largely, at least it is attributed to him in this way, "I have waited", Jacob says. He says it in the midst of apostasy, "I have waited for thy salvation". @Genesis 49:18. The true christian who loves Jesus is waiting not simply holding the doctrine but waiting. It is real in his heart, so that the thought of the Son brings in what the Lord says in @John 17, "Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent". The two thoughts go together -- "the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent". @John 17:3. Here we are on the most sacred ground touching this chapter. I touch it, not to develop the whole light of the chapter, but here the point is the true God and the sent One, Jesus Christ. A knowledge of the Father who is described as the true God, not the knowledge of the true God but "that they might know thee, the only true God". The person to be known is the Father as John presents Him. It is to bring out what the relation is into which God has come in the economy, not simply as in @Genesis 1, the Creator, but the relation into which He has come, the relation of Father. To know Thee, the Lord says. What I
{378}
am saying now is of the greatest importance to understand John's gospel and understand christianity. It is not yet our relation with Him. The point here is, He has come into this relation with Someone, with Jesus Christ; the only-begotten Son in the bosom of the Father, He has declared Him. He is known in that relation. It is God come into that economy, and the Lord says in Matthew, "thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret". @Matthew 6:6. That is, you get into direct immediate relations with God, who is a Spirit, but known as Father. Matthew says, "your Father", but John never does until we come to chapter 20, always "the" or "my". John is emphasising the dispensation and all the dispensation is governed by that, the dispensation of grace stretching on to the millennium. This chapter includes the millennium. "Thou hast given him authority over all flesh". A remarkable expression, not over all nations here, nor all men, but all flesh. Of course it is all men, it is meant to be that, but it is flesh. He has absolute authority over all flesh. We are told He died and rose again that He might rule over the dead and the living. Here it is not to rule, but having that authority He has the right of way with every one of us, in order to give us eternal life -- what a marvellous thought that everyone should have eternal life! "All that thou hast given to him". He is in the place of authority and it is that He might give to all that the Father gave Him, eternal life. He has right of way anywhere and makes His own selection to pick out those whom the Father gave Him, to give them eternal life. Thank God we can speak something about this, it is not at a distance from us. God has greatly helped dear brethren in times gone by and this great thought of eternal life has perhaps lapsed a little and it may be the thing now to revive it, that we may come into it. The Lord has supreme
{379}
authority over all flesh and is giving eternal life to those whom the Father gave to Him. He has the right to make His selection. The knowledge of God establishes that great truth in the believer, that God has sovereign rights. "Who art *thou* that answerest again?" @Romans 9:20 the apostle says. The potter has power over the clay. We must acknowledge this to God, it requires that we acknowledge it and He gives certain to Jesus -- the Lord Jesus Christ is in charge of everything -- He gives these to Jesus and He gives them eternal life. Then He says -- it is the only definition we have of this great blessing from the Lord's own lips -- "this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent".
I apprehend it is God as having entered into the economy as God the Father -- so all is of grace, grace reigning through righteousness to eternal life; here it is knowledge, that we "might know thee". How much place has God in our knowledge? In @Romans 1 they did not like to retain God in their knowledge. Now Jesus would bring us back to the knowledge of God the Father in this wonderful relation, speaking of Christ and eternal life, if characterised by that knowledge. Then Jesus as the Sent One; understand that the sending is not properly from heaven -- it is not one divine Person sending Another, as such, but the sending is of Jesus as Man, as become Man He is available to be sent. Chapter 20 says, "as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you" @John 20:21; so the Sent One in John is a characteristic word and implies an order of man entirely subject to God and these two thoughts are put together: the true God, and in Jesus as the Sent One you have a true Man -- those two thoughts together give you the idea of eternal life.
It is not far away, it is to be worked out. You must labour with divine things. Is it not worth while? Christianity is everything and why not devote
{380}
ourselves? To "know thee", with the added thought "the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent", to study that Man. Here is a living Man, the testimony is He lives, as in Hebrews, the Man who has come out of death. Is it not worth while to study the life of that Man as brought within our range?
The passage in John's epistle confirms all this. The epistle works it out. When we come to this last verse but one, the summing up is, "we know", -- christians know this, it is a characteristic word -- "that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding". The Son of God is here, everything is in His hand, all flesh under Him, the Father loves Him. A wonderful day it is, if we would only awake to know it. We know He has come in this relation as Son in manhood so as to be near to us and understandable to us and give us understanding. Scripture speaks of senseless men, those who have no understanding. The Son of God has given us an understanding that we may know Him that is true. The 'Him' is God; it is Christ, too, that is John's wonderful way of bringing the two great thoughts together: that is, the Deity brought down unto all men in Christ. He "that is true" is God, but then it is in Christ. "The true God" is the true God but in Christ. What a great fact that is, the thought of the true God is brought down in a Man, known and loved, who went about and ate and slept -- wonderful fact! -- and it requires us to apply ourselves to it, and see how it works out.
John wants people who are christians, not theorists, and he sees it like this -- he is so impressed in his mind that he has Christ and God in the one pronoun, and it is only those who pay attention to things that get into this and see the true God in Jesus, the two ideas in one Person; that God is in Christ, brought down to us, then what man is in Christ in eternal life. The epistle is to bring that out, "That ... which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word of life; (for the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and shew unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us.)" @1 John 1:1,2.
{381}
So he finishes in this wonderful verse, "This is the true God, and eternal life". It is in Jesus. It is not that God is someone else; when Scripture says the true God, it is God. God has brought the thing near to us but the facts are there that the true God is there to be worshipped and the true Man, too; eternal life is there, the Man out of death.
{382}
MARRIAGE
@Revelation 19:7 - 9; @1 Corinthians 7:32 - 34
Following on what has been voiced in prayer, I feel free to read these scriptures as they convey what should occupy us, as I believe, on this occasion; firstly that, as has been remarked in prayer, the marriage of the Lamb should come into our minds. It is the one marriage indeed that Scripture presents to us, as I may say, bearing a public character, carrying with it the idea of celebration.
The idea of marriage, of course, is from the very outset of the human race, but little is made of the celebration of marriages in the Scriptures. When we come to the New Testament we have the parable of a king making a marriage for his son, alluding to this very thing. The wife is not in evidence, the bride is not in evidence, in @Matthew 22, but it is a parable presenting a great affair, to which certain were invited, and it confirms what has been remarked, that the marriage of the Lamb, that is, Christ's marriage to the assembly, is the great thought that is in mind, and all other unions or marriages, as we speak, are in view of Christ's marriage. It is the one kind of marital union that abides, all others are temporary and provisional; the institution being of God, of course, but as belonging to what Scripture calls the first order, it comes to an end.
"He taketh away the first, that he may establish the second" @Hebrews 10:9 -- that passage applies to many things -- it applies to marriage. The "second" is a great spiritual and abiding thought, and, as I said, it is what should arise in our minds particularly just now, especially in the minds of our dear brother and sister, as lifting them out of the first, as I may say, so as to establish the second in their minds. For unless the
{383}
second is established in their minds, they will not grace the first. The first continues on outwardly, but it has become degraded among men; christianity and the teaching of our Lord have lifted it up to its proper setting. It is to be retained in that setting amongst those who love Him and keep His commandments; and indeed the retaining of it according to His thought is a part of the testimony at the present time, for the idea has become degraded among the heathen, especially in the east -- it has a greater place in the west. No doubt God intended governmentally to preserve it in the western countries (of which these dominions are an outgrowth) in view of the testimony. Indeed the idea of marriage was to prepare material for the assembly, for that is what God had in mind from the very beginning, but degradation has come into the western countries dreadfully and it is a feature of the testimony that the institution of marriage should be preserved, even as the Lord lifted it up in His teaching to its own setting. He said in relation to divorce, "From the beginning it was not so". @Matthew 19:8. The Lord lifts the institution of marriage into its own divine setting, and it is only in spiritual hands that it can be carried through and maintained there. Hence the importance of the matter before us, and we have this idea presented in @Revelation 19, that is what has been in the mind of God for all time which came in with Adam and Eve. God had it in mind; it was to take on spiritual character; marriage was to take on a spiritual character, and unless we understand that we are not equal to the relation as it is now. Indeed, unless we are married to Christ, we are not equal to marriage, we shall not be able to maintain it in its integrity, in its lustre. So the wife is to be a sister. Paul speaks about leading about a sister as wife, that means a sister in the Lord, and that marriage is to be in the Lord, not simply that the persons are to be christians, but there is to be active
{384}
authority and subjection in it. In this way the institution is part of the testimony at the present time, and is only maintained amongst spiritual people. So this remarkable passage, the marriage of the Lamb, presents a great thought and has in mind all the marriages from the union of Adam and Eve to the end. Sex, as we speak of it and as created of God, will not continue into eternity, save as in the spiritual sense of Christ and the assembly. In the eternal state the idea shall cease, showing that God instituted this relationship in the human family to carry out His thought in relation to the spiritual realm, to establish the second in the minds of the saints. That is what He had in mind.
So that the idea of husband and wife is to continue, according to Revelation, but only in a spiritual sense, and it is the apprehension of that that enables us to take up the material thing as it is known now and maintain it in its integrity and lustre as a divine institution. What has to be noted, if we are to learn from this passage anticipatively, is that His wife, that is the Lamb's wife, is a sufferer; that is in mind -- Christ is the suffering one there. It is not the Lamb's *bride*, it is the Lamb's *wife*, showing that the relation of wife already exists between Christ and the assembly -- only the public celebrations are still future, but it reflects always on every marriage celebrated amongst those that are spiritual. What is to be noticed also is that "His wife hath made herself ready;" and what her attire is, is a matter of what is granted to her, not what she will, and in principle it is what she has got. "And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints". But she is not wearing these habiliments simply because they are hers, but because it is granted to her, showing that the idea of subjection and obedience is proper to the wife and continues on in eternity, for indeed we
{385}
are told in Ephesians the assembly is subjected to Christ; not simply subject, it is the mind of God for her. The first thing is to get the mind of God, and then the attitude of mind and conduct that flows out from that. It is the mind of God for the assembly. That is the great thought -- subjected to Christ; it does not say Christ is subjected: the Son is subject, that is the attitude of His mind -- He takes that attitude, it is not forced upon Him; but the assembly is subjected to Christ according to the mind of God, that is what God begins with and what faith begins with, and the attitude of mind and the conduct that follows are to be regarded in that same light.
John speaks of the city -- the Lamb's wife -- and says, it is "pure gold", @Revelation 21:18 that is, it is wholly according to God's thought, and what flows out from that pure gold, as representing the saints, is not simply what I may yield abstractly, but what flows out from my mind as I accept God's thoughts and His working according to it. So that it is what is granted to her to be arrayed in what had been wrought out as accepting the position of suffering and subjection.
As to the verses in Corinthians, Paul would call our attention to the fact that marriage really takes a secondary place. The virgins are spiritual persons, such persons as are capable of rendering undivided attention to the things of Christ, and marriage tends to detract from that. That is a very humbling consideration for married people, for it places them in a somewhat inferior position to those not married. This may not have been noticed. There may be assumption of superior advantage in union, whereas spiritually there is no advantage, but rather disadvantage. I am not saying the discipline may not yield spiritually, but we have to speak of these things as they are. Marriage is not productive of spirituality, it is the opposite of that; and Paul says, "The unmarried cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and spirit; but she that has married cares for the things of the world, how she shall please her husband".
{386}
Here it is not the natural persons, it is spiritual persons, and the more spiritual we are the less we shall think of marriage as productive of spirituality. It may yield discipline, it does, but spirituality is one thing and discipline is another. So that the unmarried has the advantage, if spirituality be there. The marital relation does not add to it, but rather detracts from it. The more we understand that, the more we set our faces against the distracting element. It belongs to the "first" and it is against spirituality. It will have to be watched or it will interfere with spirituality. If it be watched and understood and accepted, then the discipline that goes with it helps us, but in itself discipline is not spirituality. It is not that I want to discourage our dear young brother and sister, but it is well for them to understand these things -- the relative value of the married state as compared with the unmarried state. Spiritually the unmarried has the advantage, and to see these things everything has to be understood in the abstract; if we see their abstract relation and value, then we learn how to behave and how to regard things, and we are not deceived.
So the verses, you will observe, say, "But I would have you without carefulness. He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord". That does not mean obviously that every unmarried brother and sister is caring for the things of the Lord *because* they are unmarried. We have to look at it in its spiritual setting. There is Paul; he is an unmarried man. His idea is that he has got the advantage spiritually. And then it goes on to say, "He that is married careth for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife". A wife may say, 'My husband is not governed by pleasing me',
{387}
but that is mere detail; the apostle is dealing with abstract thoughts; he is dealing with the disturbing factor, and showing that that is the course of things naturally -- the man is worldly so as to please his wife. That has to be watched. It is well to see these things; and if we see this, we will be on our guard. "There is difference also between a wife and a virgin. The unmarried woman careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and spirit: but she that is married careth for the things of the world, how she may please her husband". These are facts the apostle presents to us and we must accept them as facts. You may say, 'My experience does not bear them out', but you may be sure that what the apostle says is absolutely true, and to accept it saves us from the things he sets out as being a disadvantage spiritually. We should not be occupied with the things of the world to please our husbands or wives, but should be as those who are not married; that is to say, that the Lord is to have first place with us and that we are living in the realm of the spiritual. Thus we overcome the difficulty, and, though this is just a type of it, all is tending to one great thing -- when God will take away the first and establish the second.
{388}
READING ON @LUKE 4
@Luke 4.
Rem. I suppose there is some connection between the tracing of the genealogy of the Lord to Adam and the temptation. We see Him coming out in perfection as Man.
J.T. The temptation brought out His perfection, you mean. The character of the vessel is set before us in the earlier chapters, before His anointing, showing that a heavenly Man was there before the coming of the Spirit. It was not formative work in Christ, the vessel was divine in itself. Whereas, I suppose, in us the work is all by the Spirit. In order to be formed for God, or for service, all takes place after we get the Spirit; but the earlier chapters show that perfection was there in Christ before the anointing. But on entering His path in respect to service it is all by the Spirit, that is, He carried out the divine will in the same power that is given to believers.
Rem. He carried it out in the same way, as an obedient Man, not by miraculous power.
Ques. Would you not say the first verse gives the thought? He "returned from Jordan, and was led by the Spirit".
J.T. What was your thought in that?
Rem. Baptism, accepting death and the ability to withstand the temptation.
J.T. As has been said, things are not carried out in a miraculous way. He is in the position of obedience, and He does not act in virtue of what He was in His own divine Person, so the path He marks out in this gospel is open to believers. It is the path of a man taking the ground of obedience, led by the Spirit.
Rem. So in the end of the gospel the disciples are
{389}
exhorted, "Tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high". @Luke 24:49.
J.T. So there was to be a continuation of this heavenly Personage in them, for it is the same power.
Rem. I suppose the thought comes out here that it is connected with one's pathway, whether we move in obedience, dependent on God in respect of the need of temporal things; but that brings in the question, what kind of food a man feeds upon. I suppose it is a man that daily feeds upon manna.
J.T. That raises a very important consideration, as to what food is for us in this position.
Rem. I suppose we get the thought, "My meat is to do the will of him that sent me". @John 4:34.
J.T. That was an entirely new kind of meat for man.
Ques. Are believers tempted on the principles of these temptations here with which the Lord was tempted?
J.T. There would be no doubt about that, each believer is tempted just in this way.
Rem. Adam was tempted on the same principles, exactly. Those principles are "the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life". @1 John 2:16.
Rem. I suppose the forty days represent the forty years of the children of Israel travelling through the wilderness.
J.T. Yes, only as you have undoubtedly noticed, the people were in the wilderness, as has often been pointed out, with God. Whereas here the Lord is in the wilderness with the devil.
Rem. And the wild beasts.
Rem. He is in it as a Man.
J.T. The circumstances are calculated to test Him in every way. He has nothing to aid Him from without. He has to act entirely according as to what He is Himself, a perfect Man led by the Spirit. Of
{390}
course, no ordinary man could ever stand in those circumstances.
Ques. You would hardly say the believer goes from Jordan into the wilderness, would you?
J.T. Not Jordan viewed in the typical way in which the Old Testament presents it. Here it is rather the Red Sea baptism -- it is a question of baptism. In the Old Testament Jordan was more than that; the Red Sea was that. Jordan was rather the application of it in the soul in the outward figure. No doubt both appear in the Lord's case. But in the Old Testament the people pass into the wilderness through the Red Sea.
Rem. The Lord was led in the power of the Spirit into the wilderness and He came back in the power of the Spirit. There was no effect upon Him, was there? Nothing had any effect.
J.T. I think the point in that connection would be that the Lord took up the place of man in obedience, and in the wilderness He acted entirely by the Spirit, so it sets forth a Man in dependence on God, not acting as a divine Person, as John presents Him, but as a Man in dependence and by the Spirit, so the path is opened up to us.
Rem. Do you not think we get in all that has gone before in the history of man the same point of attack and the same overthrow? We get it in respect of Adam, with man after the flood, and with Israel in the wilderness, the same order of temptations. And then it comes to Christ who overcomes the one who had the power of evil and overthrows him.
J.T. In looking at it in that way you see a wonderful testimony as to what Man in Christ really is, what this order of Man really is, without any outward support, everything around Him against Him, and yet He returns in complete triumph as Man.
Ques. What is the significance of the temptations coming in before His path of service?
{391}
J.T. To demonstrate publicly what the Man was. The previous chapters show what He was before He was anointed with the Spirit, a Man out of heaven, in His birth He was that; but here it is Man in responsibility, and He describes our path therefore; it is not Christ acting as a divine Person, but acting by the Spirit in man's place, so it is perfection in a Man, having the Holy Spirit, that we get here.
Rem. "A strong man armed keepeth his palace", but here we have "a stronger than he". @Luke 11:21,22.
J.T. Yes, "a stronger than he".
Rem. He defeats the strong man in the wilderness, and spoils his goods when He went into the synagogue and cast out the unclean devil.
J.T. Having bound Satan the Lord is now free to spoil his goods. So the whole gospel in a sense sets forth the Lord spoiling the goods of the enemy.
Rem. That would lend great beauty to His service on behalf of men.
Rem. He comes out in contrast to the four thousand years that had gone before. There had never been one who could stand for God, and Satan had been able to hold man in opposition against God; but here is One who for the first time could say, "I delight to do thy will" and takes that place in obedience, and full of the Holy Spirit, and here is complete overthrow of the power of evil.
J.T. Instead of it being irksome to the Lord it was His food.
Rem. You said that the path was opened to the believer now. Well, that, of course, involves resurrection, for the believer could not have any power apart from that.
J.T. Quite so. It involves resurrection, the ascension and the Spirit. He was acting by the Spirit. It says He "was led by the Spirit into the wilderness". We are endued with the same power.
{392}
Rem. The believer has the advantage that the strong man has been bound and his power spoiled.
J.T. You could go further. The strong man has been annulled.
Rem. So the believer would not have to meet exactly what the Lord did.
J.T. It would be impossible for any finite person to face it. Still, the path is set before us, the path of dependence and obedience and the power of the Spirit.
Rem. When you speak of the strong man being annulled, yet there is a warfare for the believer, there is fighting.
J.T. Yes, but he is under the command of a Captain. We are under the Lord's command. "For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers", etc. @Ephesians 6:12 -- but we are not alone. The position, I think, is unique, but still a pattern position.
Ques. Is not that proved by the quotations of the Lord? I think each one is from the book of Deuteronomy, and is not that a book particularly for guidance in the wilderness journey?
J.T. It is rather a book of preparation for the land. It is written after the wilderness journey is over, on the plains of Moab, that is, it is in that respect a review of the wilderness; but it recalls the law which had been given to them for the wilderness, so in that sense it is a wilderness book; but the teaching of the book is rather to prepare them for the land, because the wilderness journey was over; but I think it only enhances the position here because the Lord quotes from it. Rather than the precepts given for the wilderness, Deuteronomy is really on a higher plane than the previous books for it is a book written for the people after they had the Spirit, not before -- that is after the brazen serpent and the springing well, therefore it is on a higher plane. It
{393}
contemplates life in the christian, so it enhances the position of the Lord.
Rem. The brazen serpent, the springing well, evil in high places with Balaam -- all that had been gone through. What we come to in Deuteronomy is "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might". @Matthew 22:37, @Mark 12:30, @Luke 10:27. It is the spirit of the law and, as you say, it is very significant that it is from Deuteronomy all the quotations are made, except by Satan.
J.T. He cites from @Psalm 91.
Rem. I have a slight difficulty regarding the strong man having been bound. I suppose the reason you say he is bound is because he does not tempt the Lord again.
J.T. Yes. He is unable to attack Him on that line again.
Ques. If he is bound here, how is it that he succeeds afterwards in putting the Lord out of the world? I thought he was bound at the cross.
J.T. I think he is not annulled here, he is simply bound. The Lord was able to limit the enemy so he should not interfere with Him in His service. It says "he departed from him for a season". The enemy was limited, but as the divine way ran its course he is permitted to attack the Lord again in Gethsemane, but with another weapon entirely. It is not a question of attacking the Lord with something outside, but bringing to bear upon Him the power of death.
Rem. His kingdom was invaded by the Lord, He undid the works of the devil, He entered his domain and cast out devils, etc. He had no power to interfere with Him, but when the appointed time came he came back to the point at Gethsemane.
J.T. It is beautiful that the Lord alludes to the food, He delighted to do the will of God. It was more a food of choice than a provided food. God had
{394}
provided food for man in every position in which man was found. This is a unique kind of food which the Lord seems to take up by way of choice.
Rem. I rather thought that what we get here is primarily for God, that is for the pleasure and satisfaction of the heart of God, that He should for the first time have a dependent and obedient Man here who delighted to do His will. He found His food in delighting to do His will, so it introduced a new order of things here upon earth which had never been here before. Here was one perfectly competent to withstand all the power of Satan on the ground of obedience and delighting in the will of God.
Ques. Do you think our side comes in in the epistle of James when he writes, "Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you"? @James 4:7. We are apt to put it the other way round.
J.T. I suppose the enemy has no way he can attack us if we are dependent, if we submit ourselves to God. We expose ourselves when we do our own will.
Rem. So, as you have said, the Spirit in the believer is really a continuation of the power with which Satan was confronted here in Christ.
J.T. The early believers were marked by dependence. What could the enemy do against us if we are obedient and dependent?
Rem. If one is led by the Spirit, one desires the things of God and will not be tempted.
J.T. Think of the moral elevation that is set forth here. The Lord deliberately chooses this food, it was not irksome to Him, it was delightful.
Rem. "For I do always those things that please him". @John 8:29.
J.T. In the wilderness God provided a most extraordinary kind of food for the people.
{395}
Rem. You refer to the manna.
J.T. It is most remarkable that God should open up heaven to man in order to provide food. It says, "Man did eat angels food", @Psalm 48:25 and "God ... had given them of the corn of heaven". @Psalm 78:24. That is, it is a food wholly unknown in the world. In truth, it was a food that only heavenly beings knew about. The Lord said, "Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven". @Matthew 6:10. It is the kind of food that is known there. The Lord introduced that kind of an appetite upon earth. As we feed upon the heavenly manna it produces obedience. If you eat the food of angels you become like them in that respect; they are marked by doing the will of God. No matter what they are sent to do, they do it. So the Lord says, "Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven". @Matthew 6:10. It seems to me that this kind of appetite (I speak reverently) which you see in Christ is an appetite which originated in heaven and it is going to obtain on earth, but it obtains on earth by our feeding upon it. God opened up heaven to the people in the wilderness. The gospels present us with the food of angels -- this gospel particularly because it opens with angels and they are occupied with the food, they are occupied with the Lord as become Man. The delight you see in the second chapter shows how interested they were in Christ, they are feeding on Christ.
*Remark as to the bread of life*.
J.T. It is the bread of life come down from heaven in order that men should have life. It is a question of appropriating Christ.
*Remark as to @John 6*.
J.T. I think @John 6 is universal; it is food for the life of the world and in a sense it corresponds with the manna. It corresponds in this sense that it is universal. In the wilderness the food was spread around, they could gather it up anywhere.
{396}
Ques. Have we been given an appetite for this food, or does it have to be cultivated?
J.T. With us it has to be cultivated, but with the Lord it originated with Him.
Rem. We could never have the desire apart from the Spirit. The children of Israel did not like the food, they said, 'What is this?' but angels would not have questioned it.
Ques. Was the manna and the corn the same?
J.T. It is the same thing, only in a different character. In each case it is what is in heaven. The manna is simply Christ as you see Him in the gospels, Christ moving about here doing God's will.
Rem. The appetite for manna all comes from feeding upon manna. We could not know what manna is until we feed upon it, and as we feed upon Christ -- the obedient, dependent and lowly Man, who perfectly delighted in the will of God, which is all set forth in the gospels -- our minds are formed in the Spirit's power and we get a taste and appreciation of what suits God, and we feed upon the bread of God.
J.T. It is not in the assembly that we have this food. There is food which is peculiarly in the assembly, but the manna is found in every circumstance of life.
*Remark as to Christ in resurrection*.
J.T. Both corn and manna have reference really to the position which we occupy as risen with Christ, but when you think of manna it is not Christ in resurrection, it is Christ here as a Man in the flesh and it is given to us as being in the same position. The Lord has been a Man in our position and He has filled every position which you could fill, in a way.
Rem. The old corn of the land is what Christ is in His own sphere..
Rem. So to get very far into the eating of manna one has to be greatly taken up with Christ as He is presented in the gospels. And if we go back to the
{397}
type we find the manna was needful for the welfare of everyone in the camp; it was that with which they began the day, the foundation of their vitality and their walk. If other things came in first -- "when the sun waxed hot, it melted" @Exodus 16:21 -- the manna was gone.
*(A number of various remarks followed -- not by J.T.)*
Ques. After the springing well there is no murmuring. What does that mean?
Rem. I suppose it is a question of walking in the Spirit.
J.T. The wilderness journey had done its work. There they had walked with God and God had walked with them, so they were enabled to judge and own what was in their hearts -- they had spoken against Moses and against God. When it is all out, when the circumstances of the wilderness have done their work, when everything has been exposed and judged -- for it is God walking with you that enables you to judge yourself -- then you see in the death of Christ God has judged it for you, so you now recognise the Holy Spirit and disregard the flesh; therefore there is no more murmuring, for murmuring comes from the flesh.
Ques. Would that correspond with @Romans 7?
J.T. Then you get the position of the Holy Spirit as indwelling the believer and He is everything to the believer, and the exhortations which are based upon that are in chapter 12 -- "... to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service". @Romans 12:1. So you are not complaining any more, indeed, the will of God is your food.
While the old corn of the land is distinct, yet the Spirit of God uses the word 'corn' in regard to the manna. It is called in @Psalm 78:24 "corn of heaven". The corn of heaven was rained from heaven, so evidently it alludes to Christ, only in another position.
{398}
Rem. In connection with what the Lord quotes here, in Deuteronomy it reads, "And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that he might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord doth man live". @Deuteronomy 8:3. The Lord does not quote the first part of this verse.
J.T. Does that not confirm what we were saying? The whole wilderness journey up to the brazen serpent was for that end, that the people should learn what they were in themselves so they would abandon themselves. When you find out that your heart is really opposed to God, you feel what more can you expect from it, you condemn it and abandon yourself, and now your food is changed.
Rem. It was in keeping here that the Lord should not quote anything about humbling, for there was nothing in Him to humble. They were brought to that point.
J.T. We see the suitability of the Lord quoting from Deuteronomy. He did not have to begin in @Exodus 15. He begins where they left off. But before we can arrive at this verse we have to go first through the forty years in the wilderness, so to say.
Rem. We find at twelve years of age the same character marks Him.
J.T. In the Psalms He says, "I was cast upon thee from the womb". @Psalm 22:10. From His birth He was cast upon God..
Ques. Would the forty years in the wilderness be the same as the principle of @Romans 7?
J.T. It is analogous to it. It is the period in which you learn what the flesh is. Only @Romans 7 deals simply with the law, what the law has done, not the wilderness journey. It is the same effect produced; but there is one beautiful thought in
{399}
regard to the journey in the wilderness -- God was with them and in virtue of that they were able to judge the flesh and abandon it.
Ques. What do you make of the second temptation?
J.T. Would it not be the world and its glory?
Ques. Were the fifth and ninth verses actual?
J.T. We cannot say much about a thing like that; it states it here as an actual fact, as a thing that happened actually.. "The devil, leading him up into a high mountain, shewed him all the kingdoms of the habitable world in a moment of time". Literally you could not see all the kingdoms of the world from any high mountain; undoubtedly it has a spiritual nature.
Rem. It is wonderful how all this answers to what was put before Adam.
J.T. The devil is here as one who had gained control in the world and so assumes to have the right to present the kingdoms of the world to the Lord.
Rem. He claims a right to give it to whomsoever he would.
Rem. I suppose man had given Satan the things of the world.
J.T. I suppose he had acquired it, the Lord does not dispute his right. While he had acquired it through subtlety still He does not dispute the fact. It had not as yet come out that Satan controlled the kingdoms of the world; it remained for the death of Christ to bring that out fully.
Rem. It will be still more evident in antichrist.
Ques. How would you say Satan had acquired this right?
J.T. Through the lusts of men who held the power outwardly. We know if it were a question of right that the things belong to God; but God had not built up the kingdoms of this world.
Rem. It is very important for us to understand that, for we are in touch with this very thing every day.
{400}
J.T. God had given dominion to Israel, to David and Solomon, and to Nebuchadnezzar, so the right of the disposal of the created world remains with God, but the kingdoms of this world and the glory of them were built up by men and I do not suppose God would lay any claim to them. It was not that God had given them deliberately into Satan's hands; but Satan had wielded his power and influenced them.
Ques. Is it a moral or a literal kingdom?
J.T. I think what Satan is presenting to the Lord is the kingdoms of this world literally and the glories which attached to them -- that which would be enticing to a man of this world, an Alexander or a Napoleon. It is exactly what they were after. It is a new kind of Man here, and His delight was in another direction, His glory was not in that. It was Satan, as it were, playing his best card. There was something great on hand and he would sacrifice everything to bring to pass his object.
Rem. To no other one would he have done that.
J.T. This is only set forth here to show the perfection of Christ as Man, that with all the wonderful temptation that Satan had in his power there was a Man who deliberately refused it.
Rem. It is a sorrowful fact that what the Lord refused is what the apostate church in each instance has fallen under.
J.T. The Lord would not deviate one iota from man's true position. He says, "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve". We are apt to think that the position of man in dependence on God is irksome, but it is full of pleasure when you really understand it.
Rem. "The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord". @Revelation 11:15.
J.T. The Lord would not touch the kingdoms of this world. That translation is not correct (A.V. @Revelation 11:15.)
{401}
God has a world. Satan is dealing with man's world and he controls; but God has a world.
Ques. Why would you say the Lord refused them at this time?
J.T. I do not think He would take them under any consideration; but in Satan's eye they were of great value, whereas the Lord's point is, be they what they may -- He does not dispute their value, but He says, 'I can only worship the Lord My God'. That is man's place.
Rem. He brings in a new order. It is in a sphere where the old order is, but what He brings in is new. When before Pilate He says, "My kingdom is not of this world". @John 18:36.
J.T. It does not amount to much, the world, but that is not the point; had it been infinitely valuable the Lord would not accept it because He was in man's place, and in man's place He would keep. He was Heir to everything that belonged to God, but the kingdoms of this world do not belong to God as they stand, they are built up by man.
Rem. The real title is vested in Him, He is the Heir; but He comes meek and lowly, and that sort of a king would never take up the kingdoms of this world. He could not hold them in that character.
Rem. So all this order of things came under the judgment of God. There is no question of setting them up. "Now is the judgment of this world". @John 12:31.
Ques. What would you say about the first temptation?
J.T. I think the first is simply our circumstances, our temporal needs; the second, the attractions of the world; the third, the attraction there is for us -- for nature -- in the assembly. We would naturally alter our circumstances if we could, but the dependent man would say, 'God has made them'. The Lord here had the power to change, but He refused to
{402}
choose. The wilderness is an absolute necessity if we are to prove what is in our hearts. There can be no doubt the endeavour to alter our circumstances takes the most of our time.
Rem. We would like to reach the purposes of God apart from going through the wilderness.
J.T. God arranges our circumstances. They are divinely arranged and therefore the great loss here spiritually if we leave them.
Rem. Paul went up and up and up from being a great man among the Pharisees until he landed in a prison, and then he said, "I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content". @Philippians 4:11.
J.T. When you come to the second temptation it is a question of the world in some form. You may have enough and to spare in regard to your daily needs; therefore you are ready for the world, and if that fails Satan has something in the church for you.
Rem. Every principle of evil, every temptation that has ever come before man is summed up in John's epistle, "The lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life". @1 John 2:16. Evil has never been in any form but that it comes under these heads.
